                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SPATIAL CORRELATION, TRADE, AND INEQUALITY:
                      EVIDENCE FROM THE GLOBAL CLIMATE

                                      Jonathan I. Dingel
                                        Kyle C. Meng
                                     Solomon M. Hsiang

                                     Working Paper 25447
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25447


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 2019, Revised July 2019




Dingel and Meng contributed equally to this work. We thank Rodrigo Adão, Treb Allen, Costas
Arkolakis, Mark Cane, Chris Costello, Arnaud Costinot, Tatyana Deryugina, Pedro DiNezio,
Dave Donaldson, Robert Feenstra, Kinda Hachem, Christian Hansen, Matthew Kahn, Yuhei
Miyauchi, Brent Neiman, Ben Olken, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Veronica Rappaport, and Michael
Waugh for valuable discussions and suggestions. Thanks to seminar participants at numerous
institutions and conferences for helpful comments. Kevin Dano provided excellent research
assistance. This work was completed in part with resources provided by the University of
Chicago Research Computing Center. Dingel thanks the James S. Kemper Foundation Faculty
Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support. A
previous version of this paper circulated as “The Spatial Structure of Productivity, Trade, and
Inequality: Evidence from the Global Climate.” The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jonathan I. Dingel, Kyle C. Meng, and Solomon M. Hsiang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Spatial Correlation, Trade, and Inequality: Evidence from the Global Climate
Jonathan I. Dingel, Kyle C. Meng, and Solomon M. Hsiang
NBER Working Paper No. 25447
January 2019, Revised July 2019
JEL No. F11,F14,F18,O13,Q17,Q54,Q56

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper shows that greater global spatial correlation of productivities can increase cross-
country welfare dispersion by increasing the correlation between a country's productivity and its
gains from trade. We causally validate this prediction using a global climatic phenomenon as a
natural experiment. We find that gains from trade in cereals over the last half-century were larger
for more productive countries and smaller for less productive countries when cereal productivity
was more spatially correlated. Incorporating this role for spatial interdependence into a projection
of climate-change impacts raises projected international inequality, with higher welfare losses
across most of Africa.

Jonathan I. Dingel                               Solomon M. Hsiang
Booth School of Business                         Goldman School of Public Policy
University of Chicago                            University of California, Berkeley
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                       2607 Hearst Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                                Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER                                         and NBER
jdingel@chicagobooth.edu                         shsiang@berkeley.edu

Kyle C. Meng
Bren School of Environmental
Science and Management
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
4416 Bren Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
kmeng@bren.ucsb.edu
1    Introduction
A striking feature of global economic activity is the extent to which it is spatially correlated. This
spatial structure is evident in Figure 1: low-income countries tend to be near other low-income
countries and high-income countries are similarly clustered near one another. This pattern reflects
the fact that many determinants of income are spatially correlated. As shown in Table F.1, neigh-
boring locations often have similar demographics, political institutions, and natural endowments, a
pattern dubbed the “first law of geography” (Tobler, 1970). What are the economic consequences
of such spatial correlation? That is, what would happen if countries’ productivities had the same
mean and variance but were reshuffled to be less spatially correlated?

                        Figure 1: The spatial correlation of economic activity




Notes: Log GDP per capita in 2013. Source: Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015).


    In this paper, we show that greater spatial correlation of productivities increases welfare inequal-
ity by altering the pattern of international trade. In theory, the spatial structure of productivity
shapes countries’ gains from trade because they trade more with their neighbors than distant coun-
tries. We empirically validate this prediction, finding that an observable sufficient statistic for
the gains from trade responds to exogenous variation in the spatial correlation of productivities
induced by a global climatic phenomenon over the last half-century. To demonstrate how this
result can inform empirical research, we show that incorporating the general-equilibrium effects
of increased spatial correlation into an otherwise standard reduced-form framework for projecting
climate-change impacts leads to greater projected inequality.
    In Section 2, we articulate why the spatial correlation of productivity may influence welfare
inequality between trading economies using a standard model of trade. A country benefits by
trading with more productive counterparts, which demand more of its exports and sell it cheaper
imports. Since trade costs increase with geographic distance (Disdier and Head, 2008), a country
enjoys larger gains from trade when its neighbors, rather than distant trading partners, are more
productive. Thus, when productivities are spatially correlated more productive countries gain

                                                    1
more from trade because their neighbors are more productive. When productivities are spatially
uncorrelated, the gains from trade are more evenly distributed across space. We first establish
this result for small productivity changes by showing that a local approximation of the change in
welfare inequality depends on a term akin to the change in Moran’s I, a commonly used measure
of global spatial correlation. We then prove that welfare inequality increases with Moran’s I in a
four-country model. Finally, we simulate a quantitative trade model with a realistic geography to
show that Moran’s I aptly summarizes the model’s rich spatial structure. In particular, we show
that a reduced-form regression that can be readily taken to data and uses the Moran’s I statistic
captures 93% of the welfare variance generated by the model when productivities are reshuffled.
   Our main contribution is to empirically validate this global prediction about productivity and
the gains from trade. Inferring the causal effects of aggregate changes is typically difficult because
of a paucity of unaffected control units (Donaldson, 2015; Fuchs-Schündeln and Hassan, 2016; Naka-
mura and Steinsson, 2018). This is particularly true when the setting involves international trade
and the treatment of interest affects the entire global trading network. Under such circumstances,
comparisons must be made across equilibria or time. While we cannot experimentally reshuffle
productivities, we can approximate the experimental ideal using a suitably exogenous phenomenon
that varies the global spatial correlation of productivities across time.
   To that end, our identification strategy exploits a naturally-occurring climatic phenomenon
known as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), described in Section 3. In years when ENSO
is strong, there are large, spatially contiguous regions of similar temperature conditions. Figure 2
depicts the temperature deviations caused by these ENSO events. Locations near the equator tend
to become hotter (red), while mid-latitude locations tend to become cooler (blue). As a result,
ENSO increases the global spatial correlation of cereal productivities.
   In Section 4, we examine the effect of this natural experiment on trade patterns using a sufficient-
statistic approach to infer the gains from trade in cereals from observed expenditure shares. In a
broad class of trade models, a country’s gains from trade are revealed by the share of its expenditure
devoted to imports (Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare, 2012). We therefore estimate how
temperature- and ENSO-driven variation in cereal productivities affects these expenditure shares.
As predicted, we find that greater spatial correlation of productivity increases the cross-sectional
correlation between productivity and the gains from trade. Increasing the cross-sectional spatial
correlation of cereal productivities by one standard deviation above the average year increases the
dispersion of welfare attributable to cereal consumption by 2%.
   Since spatial correlation of economic features is pervasive, this mechanism may be relevant
for empirical analyses of many determinants of economic outcomes, not just those appearing in
Table F.1. Understanding the consequences of aggregate phenomena requires quantifying both
local direct effects and indirect effects due to spatial linkages. Researchers often face a trade-off
between using plausibly exogenous variation and capturing indirect effects due to spatial linkages.
Quasi-experimental designs typically estimate local direct effects but ignore spatial linkages, while
structural models used to quantify indirect effects typically impose many functional-form assump-


                                                  2
                  Figure 2: ENSO and the global spatial structure of temperature




Notes: This map depicts pixel-level correlations between ENSO in December and average temperature during the
following February for 1961–2013. Red areas are hotter with warmer ENSO conditions. Blue areas are cooler with
warmer ENSO conditions.


tions. We propose a way to extend reduced-form frameworks to incorporate the spatial correlation
of productivity without imposing the full structure of quantitative trade models.
   To illustrate this approach, we apply it to anthropogenic climate change in Section 5. A
growing reduced-form literature projects future climate impacts using estimates from historical
local temperature variation. These projections for each location implicitly hold temperatures in
other locations fixed at their historical values. Climate change, however, is a global phenomenon
and expected to simultaneously alter productivities across the planet. To examine the role of spatial
correlation, we incorporate the change in the spatial correlation of cereal productivity due to climate
change into an otherwise standard reduced-form projection. This predicts a 20% greater increase in
welfare inequality from cereal consumption by the end of the twenty-first century. A projection that
omits the change in spatial correlation considerably understates the climate-driven welfare losses
for most countries in Africa because these countries jointly experience larger productivity losses.
While these projections are not literal forecasts of future climate impacts because they abstract
from adaptation, migration, and other possible responses, they demonstrate how one can examine
the consequences of spatial interdependence within a reduced-form framework.
   This paper relates to the long-running dialogue regarding the influence of environmental and
geographic endowments on the well-being of societies (Sachs and Warner, 1997; Easterly and Levine,
2003). Persistent correlations between local geographic endowments and local economic outcomes
are often remarkable (Hornbeck, 2012), with prior work articulating numerous potential channels
of influence from local conditions to local productivities (Nordhaus, 2006; Bleakley, 2007) and
local institutions (Nunn and Puga, 2012). Our analysis advances this literature by exploring the


                                                      3
influence of non-local geographic endowments, from both neighboring and distant locations, in the
determination of local outcomes – an effect that depends critically on the overall spatial structure
of endowments. In short, we focus on the spatial linkages introduced by geography.
       This paper thus contributes to a large literature in international trade and economic geography
studying local economic consequences of the geographic distribution of economic activity (Head
and Mayer, 2004; Redding and Venables, 2004). Our results link the distribution of the gains from
trade to the spatial structure of productivity. In neoclassical trade models, a country’s gains from
trade depend on its terms of trade – the relative price of its exports compared to its imports. In
models of small open economies, these prices are exogenous, so the terms of trade do not depend on
local economic conditions. By contrast, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2014, p.251) say that “one
of the main goals of quantitative trade models therefore is to predict the terms-of-trade changes
associated with particular shocks.” The terms of trade are also important to topics in development
and growth.1 Despite this prominent theoretical role, there is little empirical evidence linking
changes in the terms of trade to their economic determinants.2 We find that expenditure shares
respond to local productivity shocks, contrary to the small-open-economy assumption. Higher
productivity worsens a country’s terms of trade, and this effect is dampened when neighboring
countries also have higher productivity.
       Spatial correlation in the level of productivity (absolute advantage) is distinct from spatial cor-
relation in the pattern of relative productivities (comparative advantage). Comparative advantage
causes countries to gain by specializing and trading with each other. Absolute advantage governs
how these gains from trade are divided between countries through the terms of trade. Our predic-
tion concerns the spatial correlation of absolute advantage. In standard quantitative trade models,
the pattern of comparative advantage is symmetric across countries. If comparative advantage were
spatially correlated, neighboring countries would gain less by trading with each other due to the
similarity of their relative productivities (Lind and Ramondo, 2018). Our empirical estimates thus
capture the consequences of spatial correlation of absolute advantage as mediated by any spatial
correlation in comparative advantage.
       The most closely related study of global agricultural trade is by Costinot, Donaldson and Smith
(2016), who examine the consequences of climate change using a model of international trade and an
agronomic productivity forecast. While we focus on the spatial correlation of absolute advantage,
they focus on changes in comparative advantage and within-country crop switching. While they
employ agronomic forecasts to predict changes in trade flows, we empirically estimate the trade
effects of historical variation in agricultural productivities.
       Finally, this paper speaks to the growing empirical literature examining how anthropogenic
climate change may affect inequality across countries, which could provide a new consideration for
   1
      For example, in Acemoglu and Ventura (2002), diminishing returns due to terms-of-trade effects govern the
dispersion of the world income distribution.
    2
      Empirical work, which “typically assumes that countries are small and that the terms of trade are exogenous”
(Debaere and Lee, 2003, 1), has primarily focused on the consequences of external shocks to countries’ commodity
terms of trade. Notable exceptions are Acemoglu and Ventura (2002) and Debaere and Lee (2003), which study the
effects of capital accumulation on the terms of trade.


                                                        4
the long-running discussion of cross-country convergence (Barro, 1991; Johnson and Papageorgiou,
2018). Prior research employing reduced-form estimates from historical local temperature variation
projects increased dispersion in various economic outcomes across countries under climate change
(Dell, Jones and Olken, 2012; Burke, Hsiang and Miguel, 2015). This paper shows that projected
future welfare inequality may be even greater when such projections incorporate the consequences
of rising spatial correlation of productivity. In doing so, this paper advances the climate-impacts
literature by bringing the reduced-form approach conceptually closer to recent structural macroeco-
nomic analyses exploring the spatial distribution of economic activity under climate change (Brock,
Engström and Xepapadeas, 2014; Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg, 2015; Krusell and Smith, 2016).


2     Theoretical framework
This section introduces our theoretical framework that shows how the spatial correlation of pro-
ductivities may affect welfare inequality and guides our empirical investigation of this prediction.
    A country’s welfare in any trade equilibrium can be stated as the sum of its welfare under
autarky and its gains from trade. A country’s welfare under autarky depends only on its own
productivity. Its gains from trade depend on the entire distribution of productivities across the
trading network. The variance of welfare across countries is the variance of this sum. It therefore
depends on not only the variances of productivity and the gains from trade but also the covariance
between these two components.
    We investigate how the spatial correlation of productivities influences the covariance between a
country’s productivity and its gains from trade. This requires an observable outcome that identifies
the gains from trade. Across a broad class of models, a country’s gains from trade are revealed
by the share of its expenditure devoted to its own output. The less a country spends on its own
output, the larger its gains from trade. In autarky, all its expenditure is on its own output. In
the trade equilibrium, this expenditure share, when combined with the “trade elasticity” governing
how consumers substitute across consumption sources, summarizes the welfare gain from exchange
with other locations (Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare, 2012).
    Section 2.1 establishes that within this class of trade models our object of interest is the covari-
ance between a country’s productivity and its domestic share of expenditure. Section 2.2 illustrates
how this covariance depends on the spatial correlation of the productivity distribution and shows
how to identify this ceteris paribus prediction in empirical settings. Section 2.3 discusses the role
of comparative advantage and describes conditions under which examining one sector in isolation
is informative about welfare dispersion in a multi-sector world. Section 2.4 describes the criteria
used to select a suitable empirical setting. Details and derivations are available in Appendix A.

2.1    Sufficient statistics for welfare dispersion
We consider a general economic environment within the class of models characterized by Arkolakis,
Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012), in which the gains from trade can be inferred from the


                                                   5
domestic share of expenditure. We assume perfect competition in the main text, while Appendix A.1
covers the case of monopolistic competition. The world economy consists of j = 1, . . . , N countries.
   Preferences. Individuals in country j have preferences with a constant elasticity of substitution
σ > 1 over goods indexed by ω. The accompanying price index is
                                           Z                        1/(1−σ)
                                                          1−σ
                                    Pj =         pj (ω)         dω              .
                                             ω

   Production. There is one factor of production, and each country j inelastically supplies Lj
units of that factor, which earns wage wj . A country’s income is therefore Yj = wj Lj . The produc-
tion technology exhibits constant returns to scale and is employed by perfectly competitive firms.
The cost of producing in country j depends on productivity Aj . This parameter’s microeconomic
meaning is model-specific: Aj governs the cost of producing j’s good in the Armington model and
the location parameter of j’s cost distribution for a continuum of goods in the Eaton and Kortum
(2002) model.
   Trade costs. There are iceberg trade costs, such that selling one unit of a good to j from i
requires τij ≥ 1 units, with τii = 1. By the no-arbitrage condition, pj (ω) ≤ τij pi (ω).
                                                                                            PN
   Gravity equation. Denote sales from i to j by Xij and j’s total expenditure by Xj ≡        i=1 Xij .
The share of expenditure by j on goods from i takes the form of a gravity equation:

                                   Xij     χi (τij wi )−      χi (τij wi )−
                           λij =       = PN               −
                                                             =                ,                    (1)
                                   Xj     l=1 χl (τlj wl )
                                                                    Φj

where χi is a function of Ai and other structural parameters that are not trade costs,  is the
                                               −
“trade elasticity”, and Φj ≡ N
                            P
                              l=1 χl (τlj wl )    is the “inward multilateral resistance” term (Head
and Mayer, 2014). Φj is a (decreasing) transformation of j’s price index that summarizes consumers’
access to goods from every source.
   Equilibrium. In equilibrium, labor-market clearing, goods-market clearing, and budget con-
straints are satisfied such that total income Yi = wi Li equals total expenditure Xi . Thus, an
equilibrium is a set of incomes {Yi }N
                                     i=1 such that

                                                    N
                                                    X
                                             Yi =          λij Yj .
                                                    j=1


   In this environment, the results of Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012) imply that
real consumption per capita is

                                                                       1
                                    ln (Ci /Li ) = ln Ai + γ −           ln λii ,                  (2)
                                                                       

where γ is a constant determined by structural parameters that are not productivity. The former
term, ln Ai + γ, is per capita welfare in autarky. In the absence of trade, a country’s welfare is
independent of other countries’ conditions and depends only on its own productivity. The latter


                                                      6
term, − 1 ln λii , is a sufficient statistic for the gains from trade relative to autarky. It is a country’s
expenditure share on its own goods, mediated by the trade elasticity  that governs how bilateral
expenditures respond to changes in bilateral trade costs. Since expenditure shares depend on
relative prices, this sufficient statistic is closely linked to the country’s terms of trade: a country
purchases less from itself when its export price is higher. With this standard equilibrium expression
for welfare in hand, we can consider how dispersion in ln (C/L) across countries depends on the
spatial distribution of productivities.
       From equation (2), variance in welfare across countries is governed by the variance of produc-
tivity, the covariance of productivities and gains from trade, and the variance of those gains.
                                                                                                                     
                                                                      −1                                     1
                     var (ln (Ci /Li )) = var (ln Ai ) + 2cov ln Ai ,    ln λii                  + var         ln λii                 (3)
                                                                                                            

       To examine the role of spatial correlation, consider two productivity distributions – a correlated
state c and an uncorrelated state u – in which the unconditional variance in productivities is
identical, var(ln Aci ) = var(ln Aui ). Under this assumption, the difference in welfare dispersion
between the correlated and uncorrelated states is

                                                          2
             var (ln (Cic /Li )) − var (ln (Ciu /Li )) = − [cov (ln Aci , ln λcii ) − cov (ln Aui , ln λuii )]
                                                          
                                                           1
                                                         + 2 [var (ln λcii ) − var (ln λuii )] .                                      (4)
                                                          

The latter term should make only a second-order contribution to the difference in welfare disper-
                1                                                           2
sion, since     2
                     is an order of magnitude smaller than                     for empirically relevant values of the trade
elasticity.3
       The first-order difference in welfare dispersion is governed by the covariance of productivities
and domestic shares of expenditure. We expect this covariance to be positive. A more productive
country produces greater output, so the relative price of its output is lower and it sells more to
every consumer, including itself. Thus, ceteris paribus, a more productive country has worse terms
of trade and purchases more from itself.4
       Our primary focus, however, is how this covariance changes with the spatial correlation of
productivities. We will estimate this relationship empirically, but we first illustrate why we expect
   3
     Typical estimates of the aggregate trade elasticity are between 4 and 8. Caliendo and Parro (2015) estimate
that the trade elasticity for agricultural goods is between 8 and 17. Provided that var (ln λcii ) − var (ln λuii ) is the
same order of magnitude or smaller than cov (ln Aci , ln λcii ) − cov (ln Aui , ln λuii ), this means that the second term
on the right side of equation (4) is an order of magnitude smaller than the first term. Appendix A.1.3 shows
that cov (ln Aci , ln λcii ) − cov (ln Aui , ln λuii ) is the same order of magnitude as var (ln λcii ) − var (ln λuii ) if trade costs are
symmetric (τij = τji ) and countries equal sized (Li = L ∀i). This is also overwhelmingly true in numerical simulations
featuring countries of different sizes reported in Appendix Figure E.1. Nonetheless, our welfare calculations, laid out
in Appendix D, incorporate 12 [var (ln λcii ) − var (ln λuii )].
   4
     Under certain conditions, productivity increases can reduce the terms of trade so much that this growth is
immiserizing (Bhagwati, 1958). The assumptions of standard quantitative trade models imply that increases in TFP
do reduce the terms of trade but not so much as to lower welfare. Consider the free-trade equilibrium, τij = 1 ∀i, j.
                                                                                                   
In this case, there is a closed-form solution for equilibrium incomes (Yi = (Ai Li ) +1 ) and we obtain the following
                            d ln λii                              d ln Ci   1
comparative statics: d ln Ai = +1 (1 − λii ) > 0 and d ln Ai = +1 ( + λii ) > 0.



                                                                    7
that cov (ln Aci , ln λcii ) < cov (ln Aui , ln λuii ) and thus that var (ln (Cic /Li )) > var (ln (Ciu /Li )).

2.2     Spatial correlation and the covariance of productivity and gains from trade
This section illustrates how the spatial correlation of productivity influences the variance of welfare
by shaping the covariance of productivity and gains from trade. The key is that bilateral trade
costs increase with the physical distance between trading partners. Thus, when proximate countries
have more similar productivity levels, more productive countries tend to enjoy greater gains from
trade because their nearby trading partners are also more productive. Conversely, less productive
countries experience lower gains from trade when productivity is more spatially correlated.
    We illustrate the theoretical role of the spatial correlation of productivity in a series of steps.
First, we use a local approximation to show that the change in the covariance of productivities and
domestic shares of expenditure resulting from an infinitesimal change in countries’ productivities
depends on the change in a term akin to the Moran’s I spatial-correlation statistic for productivity.
Second, we turn to two settings in which countries are perfectly symmetric except for productivity
differences to establish the link between welfare inequality and the Moran’s I statistic for large
productivity changes in general equilibrium. We prove our theoretical prediction in a four-country
model and show that it holds in numerical simulations of a many-country model. Finally, we
examine how to identify this ceteris paribus prediction in asymmetric environments in which coun-
tries differ by other, potentially confounding, determinants of equilibrium trade flows. These more
realistic examples inform how we empirically investigate our prediction.

2.2.1    A local approximation

We first consider the effect of an infinitesimal change in countries’ productivities on the covariance of
productivities and domestic shares of expenditure. Let {d ln Ai }i denote a set of local productivity
changes that do not alter the distribution’s variance (dvar(ln Ai ) = 0). The resulting change in
cov(ln λii , ln Ai ) can be written as the sum of four terms:

 dcov(ln λii , ln Ai ) =  dvar(ln Ai ) − cov(d ln wi , ln Ai ) − cov(d ln Φi , ln Ai ) +cov(ln λii , d ln Ai ) (5)
                           |   {z    }     |       {z         } |          {z         }
                                 =0               =0 by P.E.             ≈dI by P.E.


The first term is zero by the assumption that the distribution’s variance is unchanged. If we
take a partial-equilibrium perspective by assuming d ln wi = 0 ∀i, the second term is also zero.
Furthermore, in partial equilibrium the third term is closely related to the spatial correlation of
productivity. Appendix A.2.1 shows that, if wages are unchanged, cov(d ln Φi , ln Ai ) is akin to the
change in Moran’s I if we set spatial weights equal to initial expenditure shares ωji = λji for j 6= i.5
   5
     Moran’s I is a commonly used measure of global spatial correlation that can be computed for any geography
endowed with a distance metric. It takes values between -1 and 1. Moran’s I for productivity ln Ai is defined by
                                               P P                                     
                                     N          i  j6=i ωij ln Ai − ln A   ln Aj − ln A
                          I≡ P P                                           2             ,
                                      j6=i ωij
                                                          P
                                  i                         ` ln A` − ln A




                                                          8
The fourth term, while not taking the form of a change in Moran’s I, is also intuitively linked to
spatial correlation. Conditional on Ai and Li , λii will be lower in locations where neighboring
countries are larger and more productive. An increase in spatial correlation will tend to raise
productivity in locations with more productive neighbors, so the fourth term should also be negative
when spatial correlation increases.
    Thus, a partial-equilibrium local approximation suggests that an increase in the spatial cor-
relation of productivity should decrease the covariance of productivities and domestic shares of
expenditure and that this spatial interdependence is captured by Moran’s I. A general-equilibrium
local approximation that exploits the assumption of symmetric trade costs (τij = τji ) delivers a
very similar result, as shown in Appendix A.2.1. We could regress ln λii on the interaction of log
productivity and Moran’s I to empirically estimate this relationship. Before doing so, we relax the
assumption that the productivity changes are small.

2.2.2    Stylized example 1: Four-country case

We start with the simplest possible environment in which one can demonstrate our result. There
are four countries of equal size, Li = L for i = 1, . . . , 4. The four countries are evenly spaced on a
symmetric geography such that each country is “near” two neighboring countries and farther from
the remaining country. Thus, the trade cost matrix is
                                                        
                                          1   d1 d2 d1
                                              
                                   d1 1 d1 d2 
                                τ ≡
                                              ,               1 < d1 < d2 < d21                                (6)
                                   d2 d1 1 d1 
                                               
                                    d1 d2 d1 1

where the trade costs d2 > d1 , a mnemonic for distance, obey the triangle inequality: d2 < d21 .
    For these four countries, consider a mirror-image productivity distribution in which two coun-
tries have high productivity and the other two countries have low productivity. Without loss of
generality, normalize the lower productivity to one and denote the higher productivity level by
ã > 1. For this symmetric geography with four countries, these productivities might alternate
– high, low, high, low – or the world may be divided into a high-productivity region and a low-
productivity region. These two spatial arrangements are depicted in Figure 3. What are the
consequences for trade and welfare?
    Proposition 1 shows that the “regional” arrangement of productivities exhibits greater spatial
correlation, as measured by Moran’s I. As a result, the covariance of productivity and the domestic
share of expenditure is lower when productivities are distributed this way. That makes the variance
of welfare across countries greater. The mean of welfare across countries is lower. The proof of
Proposition 1 appears in Appendix A.2.2.

where N is the number of countries, ωij = ωji is a symmetric spatial weight, and ln A is the cross-sectional average.




                                                         9
                        Figure 3: Four-country example: Productivity distributions

                              High           Low                    High          High




                              Low           High                     Low           Low
                        “Alternating” arrangement               “Regional” arrangement



Proposition 1 (Four-country case). Consider an economy in which N = 4, Li = L ∀i,  ≥ 1, and
trade costs τij are given by condition (6). Comparing the productivity distributions Ac = (ã, ã, 1, 1)
and Au = (ã, 1, ã, 1), where ã > 1,

      • Ac is more spatially correlated than Au in the sense that the value of Moran’s I for ln Ac is
        greater for any spatial weight matrix that is a one-to-one mapping between ωij and τij and
        assigns a higher weight to the pairs with τij = d1 than pairs with τij = d2 .

      • Equilibrium income inequality, given by Y1 /Y4 , is greater for the more spatially correlated pro-
        ductivity distribution, Ac . Equivalently, the more productive economies’ equilibrium double-
        factoral terms of trade are greater for the more spatially correlated productivity distribution.

      • The covariance of productivity and the domestic share of expenditure is lower for the more
        spatially correlated productivity distribution: cov(ln Aci , ln λcii ) < cov(ln Aui , ln λuii ).

      • The variance of welfare across counties is greater for the more spatially correlated productivity
        distribution: var(ln(Cic /L)) > var(ln(Ciu /L)).

      • The mean of welfare across countries is lower for the more spatially correlated productivity
        distribution: E(ln(Cic /L)) < E(ln(Ciu /L)).

      This four-country case establishes our prediction linking the spatial correlation of productivity
to welfare inequality. Next, we illustrate this logic in a setting with an arbitrary number of countries
that are perfectly symmetric except for productivity differences.

2.2.3     Stylized example 2: Circular geography with productivity sine wave

Our second stylized environment has productivity follow a sine wave over a one-dimensional space.
There are N locations evenly spaced on the unit circle. These locations have equal population
sizes, Li = 1 ∀i. Trade costs depend only on distance: the log trade cost between two locations
is proportionate to the log distance between them. The trade elasticity is  = 1, so that welfare
is ln Ai − ln λii , a difference that is easy to depict visually.6 Productivity ln Ai follows a sine-wave
  6
      This convenient value of  is notably lower than the empirical estimates summarized in footnote 3.



                                                          10
distribution, with an integer frequency of θ over the circle’s circumference. This functional form has
two convenient properties. First, the spatial correlation of productivity is governed by the frequency
θ: lower frequencies exhibit greater spatial correlation. Second, the mean, variance, skewness, and
kurtosis of the productivity distribution are independent of the frequency. Thus, we can explore
the effect of spatial correlation by varying θ alone. While we do not have an analytical result, our
numerical simulations deliver the same patterns for all parameter values we have examined.7

                            Figure 4: Circular geography with productivity sine wave

                      1.0




                      0.5




                      0.0




                     -0.5




                     -1.0

                              -3       -2            -1            0             1         2         3
                                                   Countries’ locations on [−π, π]

                                            ln Ai , θ = 1       ln λii , θ = 1       ln Ci , θ = 1
                                            ln Ai , θ = 4       ln λii , θ = 4       ln Ci , θ = 4
Notes: This figure depicts an economy with a circular geography and a productivity distribution that follows a
sine wave with frequency θ. There are N = 50 locations evenly spaced on the unit circle. Bilateral log trade costs
are proportionate to the log length of the arc between two points on the circle. The (demeaned) distributions of
productivities, equilibrium domestic shares of expenditure, and welfare are depicted for the cases of θ = 1 and
θ = 4. The trade elasticity is  = 1, so that welfare is simply the difference ln Ai − ln λii . See Appendix A.2.3 for
parameterization details.

       Figure 4 depicts the spatial distributions of productivities (ln Ai ), domestic shares of expenditure
(ln λii ), and welfare (ln Ci ) in this circular economy for the cases in which the sine wave has
frequencies of θ = 1 and θ = 4. It is clear that the spatial correlation of productivity is greater in
the θ = 1 case, as location “zero” divides the circle into two contiguous regions with above-average
and below-average productivity. In the θ = 4 case, spatial correlation is lower because the distance
between the productivity sine wave’s peaks and troughs is shorter. Stated in terms of Moran’s I,
the spatial correlation statistic is 0.242 for θ = 1 and -0.011 for θ = 4.
       The frequency of the exogenous productivity sine wave affects the amplitude of the endogenous
welfare sine wave. In the case of higher spatial correlation, the equilibrium domestic share of
expenditure series follows the productivity series less closely, as evident by the larger vertical gap
between them. Thus, the smaller amplitude of the ln λii series when productivity is more spatially
   7
    Details of the parameters underlying Figure 4 are in Appendix A.2. By Theorem 1 of Allen, Arkolakis and
Takahashi (2017), the equilibrium solution depicted for each set of parameter values is unique.


                                                              11
             Figure 5: Circular geography with productivity sine wave: cov(ln λii , ln Ai )

                                      0.4


                                      0.3


                                      0.2
                  ln λii (demeaned)

                                      0.1


                                      0.0


                                      -0.1


                                      -0.2


                                      -0.3


                                      -0.4

                                             -1.0    -0.8   -0.6   -0.4   -0.2        0.0    0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8     1.0
                                                                           ln Ai (demeaned)

                                                θ = 1, I = 0.24    θ = 2, I = 0.05          θ = 3, I = 0.02         θ = 4, I = −0.01
Notes: This figure depicts the ln λii –ln Ai relationship for an economy with a circular geography and a productivity
distribution that follows a sine wave with frequency θ. The legend reports the value of Moran’s I for each sine wave.
Geographic locations, trade costs, and the trade elasticity are the same as in Figure 4. See Appendix A.2.3 for
parameterization details.


correlated is accompanied by a lower value of cov(ln Ai , ln λii ). As a result, the amplitude of the
welfare series is greater in the θ = 1 case. Welfare dispersion is higher when productivity is more
spatially correlated.
    Figure 5 depicts the expenditure-productivity relationship in our sine-wave example for more
values of the sine-wave frequency, θ. The scatter plot reveals an almost perfectly linear relationship
between ln λii and ln Ai . The slope of this relationship, which is proportionate to cov(ln Ai , ln λii ),
systematically varies with the spatial correlation of the sine wave. When the productivities are
more spatially correlated, a location’s domestic share of expenditure is less responsive to its own
productivity level.

2.2.4    Asymmetric environments

Our stylized, many-country example in Section 2.2.3 demonstrates the consequence of spatial cor-
relation of productivity for global welfare inequality in an ideal environment that holds fixed all
other economic elements. Our empirical investigation must address the facts that there are other
determinants of equilibrium trade flows and the distributions of trade costs and productivities are
not symmetric. In this section, we use numerical simulations to motivate our empirical estimating
equation that identifies our ceteris paribus prediction about the impact of spatial correlation in
such settings.
    First, economic characteristics other than productivity that influence domestic shares of expen-
diture complicate bivariate plots like Figure 5. A simple example is heterogeneity in country size
Li : all else equal, larger economies have a larger domestic share of expenditure. Variation in size

                                                                                 12
orthogonal to productivity simply adds noise to the bivariate plot. However, variation in size cor-
related with productivity also introduces omitted variable bias. This can be empirically addressed
by examining the covariance of the domestic share of expenditure and productivity conditional on
size. More generally, any time-invariant country characteristics that influence the domestic share
of expenditure and might be correlated with productivity can be absorbed by country fixed effects.
                    We illustrate this in Figure 6, which depicts the relationship between ln λii and ln Ai in an
environment that features, like the previous section, a circular geography and sine-wave produc-
tivity, and, unlike the previous section, heterogeneous country sizes. In particular, country size
ln Li is positively correlated with productivity ln Ai in the θ = 1 state. The left panel depicts the
covariance of ln λii and ln Ai for the frequencies θ = 1 and θ = 4. The right panel depicts these
covariances conditional on country fixed effects. While our ceteris paribus prediction is not evident
in the left panel due to omitted variable bias, the right panel shows that the covariance of ln λii and
ln Ai is lower when θ is lower after country fixed effects absorb the consequences of heterogeneous
country sizes.

                            Figure 6: Circular geography with heterogeneous sizes and productivity sine wave
                     1.0                                                                              0.4
ln λii (demeaned)




                                                                                                      0.3
                                                                                ln λii (residuals)



                     0.5
                                                                                                      0.2
                     0.0                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                      0.0
                     -0.5                                                                            -0.1
                                                                                                     -0.2
                     -1.0
                                                                                                     -0.3
                     -1.5                                                                            -0.4
                            -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

                                          ln Ai (demeaned)                                                                ln Ai (residuals)
                                              θ=1        θ=4                                                                 θ=1         θ=4
                               Unconditional relationship                                            Relationship conditional on fixed effects
Notes: This figure depicts the λii –Ai relationship for an economy with a circular geography and a productivity
distribution that follows a sine wave with frequency θ. Geographic locations, trade costs, and the trade elasticity are
the same as in Figure 4. Country sizes Li are positively correlated with Ai in the θ = 1 state. See Appendix A.2.3
for parameterization details.

                    Second, the real world features productivities and trade costs that do not exhibit the symmetry
of a sine wave on a circle. Departing from the sine-wave distribution, Figure A.1 in Appendix A.2.3
depicts the expenditure-productivity relationship for the circular geography with equal-sized coun-
tries when we shuffle a productivity vector drawn from the normal distribution so as to vary its
spatial correlation. There is a clear negative relationship: as Moran’s I increases, the equilibrium
domestic share of expenditure is less responsive to domestic productivity. Departing from the
circular geography, Figure A.2 in Appendix A.2.4 plots the expenditure-productivity relationship
against Moran’s I for an economy with countries randomly located on a two-dimensional space
and random assignments of productivity levels that differ only in their spatial correlation. In such
asymmetric geographies, some countries are more “remote” from economic activity and therefore

                                                                               13
exhibit a higher domestic share of expenditure, all else equal. This variation is absorbed by country
fixed effects, since remoteness is a time-invariant characteristic. Conditional on these fixed effects,
we find that greater spatial correlation reduces the covariance of the domestic share of expenditure
and productivity.
   To examine our prediction with realistic productivities and trade costs, we simulate a global
economy made up of 158 countries whose geographic coordinates, cereal yields, and crop areas
are their 1961–2013 averages in our data. We impose distance-related trade costs and swap pairs
of countries’ productivity levels in order to vary spatial correlation without altering the mean or
variance of the productivity distribution. We recover the covariance of expenditure and productivity
in each equilibrium by regressing the domestic share of expenditure for country i at “time” t,
where each t denotes an equilibrium associated with a different productivity distribution, on its
own productivity and fixed effects:

                                  ln λiit = βt ln Ait + πiI + πtT + µit .                          (7)

As in the right panel of Figure 6, the country fixed effects πiI control for differences in countries’
time-invariant determinants of the domestic share of expenditure, such as size and remoteness. The
“year” fixed effects πtT control for differences in the average domestic shares of expenditure across
different spatial distributions of productivity.
   The coefficients βt in equation (7) characterize the conditional covariance of ln λii and ln Ai in
each equilibrium. Since the equilibrium value of ln λii depends on the entire vector of productivities
and not just ln Ai , as shown by the gravity equation (1), this covariance differs across equilibria.
Relating the general-equilibrium elasticity βt to properties of the exogenous productivity vector
shows how this covariance’s contribution to welfare inequality depends on properties of the produc-
tivity vector. Figure 7 shows that this covariance exhibits a negative and roughly linear relationship
with Moran’s I, a statistic that summarizes the spatial correlation of productivity. On this realistic
geography, when productivity is less spatially correlated, the equilibrium covariance of ln λii and
ln Ai is more positive and thus welfare inequality is lower.
   While the line of best fit in Figure 7 is not perfect, the Moran’s I statistic aptly summarizes
how the spatial structure of productivity affects welfare inequality. In the model, the covariance
of productivity and gains from trade is determined by the general-equilibrium solution of a system
of non-linear equations. In Appendix Figure E.1, we examine how well relating this covariance to
Moran’s I for productivity captures changes in the variance of welfare per capita. For each of the
equilibria depicted in Figure 7, we compare the variance of welfare per capita in the model to that
predicted by using the line of best fit. Regressing variance of welfare per capita in the model on
its predicted value yields an R2 of .93. Thus, a log-linear specification employing Moran’s I aptly
captures how welfare inequality determined by the general-equilibrium model depends on the spatial
structure of productivity. Our empirical investigation will therefore estimate the expenditure-
productivity relationship using a linear regression and exogenous variation in productivities without



                                                   14
                              Figure 7: Real-world geography and bilateral productivity swaps




                     .24
                     .23
             ∂lnλii / ∂lnAi
                    .22
                     .21
                     .2




                              .125      .145      .165         .185          .205         .225   .245
                                                Spatial correlation of log productivity

Notes: Each observation is the estimated productivity elasticity of domestic expenditure share and spatial correlation
of productivity for the equilibrium resulting from a bilateral swap of two countries’ productivity levels. Countries’
productivities and factor endowments are set equal to their long-run averages of cereal yield and log crop area,
respectively. Bilateral trade costs are proportionate to bilateral distances between countries’ crop centroids. The
trade elasticity is set to 8.59 and the scale of trade costs is set so that the distance elasticity of trade is 1.46.
Equilibria computed for 7499 bilateral swaps of productivities. Linear fit shown as solid line. Local polynomial fit
for 1st through 99th percentiles of spatial correlation shown as dashed line. Equilibrium associated with long-run
averages shown as square.


imposing the full structure of a quantitative trade model.8

2.3    Comparative advantage
We have obtained these predictions about the spatial correlation of absolute advantage Ai using a
standard theoretical framework that makes two important assumptions about the pattern of com-
parative advantage. First, there is only one sector. Second, the pattern of comparative advantage
across varieties within that sector is symmetric across countries.
    Our empirical investigation exploits exogenous variation in the spatial distribution of produc-
tivities in the agricultural sector, which constitutes a small share of global trade. What happens
    8
      An alternative strategy would be to calibrate the trade model to rationalize the observed data from one year
and then evaluate how well the fitted model predicts the following year’s outcomes when the spatial correlation of
productivity differs. One could match the next year’s observed productivities and compare observed expenditure
shares to predicted expenditure shares or match expenditure shares and compare productivities. Since other shocks
affect both variables, this alternative approach would still require the researcher to select the relevant exogenous
variation and define a criterion for evaluating model fit. Our instrumental-variables approach employs standard
statistical criteria to define appropriate exogenous variation and perform causal inference.


                                                              15
in an economy with multiple sectors? Appendix A.3 shows that our prediction linking the spatial
correlation of productivity and the productivity-expenditure relationship holds for each sector in a
multi-sector gravity model of trade. When consumers have Cobb-Douglas preferences over sectors
and CES preferences over varieties within sectors, there are multi-sector analogues of equations
(2), (3), and (4) that sum over sectors using their expenditure shares. Thus, the previous section’s
predictions about trade in one sector can be empirically investigated in a multi-sector world that
introduces an additional dimension of comparative advantage.
    Compared to a one-sector model, the opportunity to produce non-agricultural goods is an ad-
ditional margin of adjustment that can dampen the magnitude of the welfare consequence of a
given agricultural productivity shock. If agricultural and non-agricultural activities were positively
correlated, there would be little scope for adjustment.9 To illustrate the case in which these pro-
ductivities are orthogonal, Figure A.3 in Appendix A.3 presents a multi-sector analogue of Figure 5
for an economy with two symmetric sectors that differ only in their sine-wave frequency. The id-
iosyncratic, orthogonal variation in the second sector’s productivity adds noise to the relationship
between the domestic share of agricultural expenditure and agricultural productivity, but it does
not change the comparative static of interest. When the first sector’s productivity is more spatially
correlated, the covariance of its log productivity and log domestic share of expenditure is smaller.
This raises dispersion in welfare relative to the case in which the first sector’s productivity is less
spatially correlated.
    Finally, introducing spatially correlated comparative advantage tends to attenuate the relation-
ship between welfare inequality and the spatial correlation of absolute advantage. The results above
concern the spatial correlation of absolute advantage Ai when comparative advantage is symmetric
across countries. Standard quantitative trade models assume this pattern of comparative advan-
tage.10 In Appendix A.4, we relax this assumption to examine how the spatial correlation of com-
parative advantage may interact with the spatial correlation of absolute advantage. Our thought
experiment varies the spatial correlation of absolute advantage, holding the pattern of comparative
advantage fixed.11 When this pattern of comparative advantage is sufficiently spatially correlated,
an increase in neighboring countries’ total factor productivity may reduce a country’s gains from
trade. When neighboring countries specialize in similar products, a neighbor’s productivity im-
provement may actually worsen a country’s terms of trade by increasing the world supply of that
country’s exports and thereby depressing its export price. Thus, if comparative advantage were
sufficiently spatially correlated, it would imply that βt in equation (7) would increase with the
spatial correlation of Ai . Our empirical estimates in Section 4 will reject this possibility.
   9
     Appendix A.3 shows that a multi-sector model with perfectly correlated productivities, proportionate bilateral
trade costs, and equal trade elasticities delivers a welfare-difference expression exactly proportionate to the single-
sector expression in equation (4).
  10
     A notable exception is recent work by Lind and Ramondo (2018) that generalizes quantitative Ricardian models
by tractably relaxing this assumption.
  11
     Consistent with this assumption, column 2 of Table C.1 shows that the distance elasticity of trade is unaffected
by ENSO, our source of exogenous variation in the spatial correlation of absolute advantage. In the Eaton and
Kortum (2002) model, this elasticity embodies the pattern of comparative advantage.



                                                          16
2.4       From theory to empirics
Section 2.2.4 shows that our prediction relating the productivity-expenditure relationship to the
spatial correlation of productivity can be estimated using a log-linear regression and appropriate
fixed effects. Appendix A.3 shows that this test can be conducted using a single sector in multi-
sector economy.
       Our choice of empirical setting is guided by four criteria that must be met to investigate our
prediction. First, the sector’s bilateral trade flows should conform to the gravity equation that is
at the heart of quantitative trade models and decrease with distance. Second, examining the role
of the spatial correlation of productivity across a trade network requires a measure of productiv-
ity reported in comparable terms across the globe. Third, examining variation in global spatial
correlation requires sufficient time-series variation to identify its effects. Finally, the identifying
variation in productivities and their global spatial correlation needs to be plausibly exogenous to
support causal inference.
       To satisfy these criteria, we study the cereals sector, which we define as the top eight cereals
that account for more than 99% of global cereal production and trade.12 With respect to the first
criterion, trade flows of cereals are well characterized by the gravity equation, as reported in column
1 of Table C.1 in Appendix C.1. Cereals are often both exported to and imported from the same
foreign trading partner, and cereal trade between countries that are farther apart is substantially
lower. Cereals satisfy the second and third criteria because a standard measure of productivity,
cereal yield (the output-land ratio), is available at the country-year level with nearly global coverage
since 1961 from the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).13
       Our empirical investigation requires exogenous variation in national cereal productivities and
their global spatial correlation, our fourth criterion. In an ideal experiment, a researcher would
manipulate productivities around the world in a way that alters the global spatial correlation of
productivities without changing the global mean or variance of productivities. Such an experiment
is obviously not possible. However, because of the well-established sensitivity of cereal yields to
environmental conditions (Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; Hsiang and Meng, 2015), we are able to
approximate this ideal experiment by exploiting productivity variation attributable to temperature
variation and a global climatic phenomenon known as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO),
described in the following section.
       Finally, our analysis, following convention in international economics, ignores countries’ internal
economic geography. This abstraction is motivated by our empirical application. While there is also
  12
      These cereals are barley, maize, millet, oats, rice, rye, sorghum, and wheat. According to the FAO, these eight
cereals constituted 99.3% of global production (in metric tons) and 99.6% of global trade (in nominal USD) during
1961–2013. These cereals are not homogeneous goods. FAO data report quantities of wheat produced, but trade
data distinguish durum and non-durum wheat. Trade data distinguish four types of rice, but the International Rice
Genebank holds more than 125,000 rice varieties, which are differentiated by quality, appearance, and taste (Agcaoili-
Sombilla and Rosegrant, 1994). Quantitative trade models make common predictions about trade flows while making
different assumptions about the set of goods in the utility function. We study expenditure shares, so we need not
map our data sources’ product definitions to goods indexed by ω in the theoretical framework.
  13
     Unfortunately, data on other sectors’ expenditure shares and productivities lack the spatial and temporal coverage
necessary for our empirical analysis.


                                                          17
annual variation in the within-country spatial correlation of cereal productivity, data constraints
prevent us from measuring this variation and the relevant outcome variables within countries. Data
on agricultural productivity, internal trade, and population counts for subnational spatial units on
an annual basis have not been collected by most countries for most years. We therefore focus on
international trade and the spatial correlation of productivity across countries.


3     The El Niño-Southern Oscillation
This section first summarizes the basic physics of ENSO and then empirically demonstrates that it
drives annual variation in the global spatial correlation of cereal productivity.

3.1    Background
ENSO is a naturally occurring, annual climatic phenomenon characterized by mutually reinforcing
circulation patterns between the atmosphere and the tropical Pacific ocean. While ENSO originates
in the tropical Pacific, it is a major determinant of weather conditions around the world. Indeed,
at an annual frequency, ENSO is often recovered as the first principal component of various local
atmospheric or oceanographic variables across the planet (Sarachik and Cane, 2010).
    ENSO is often colloquially described as consisting of one neutral state and two extreme states.
These conditions are broadly characterized by the amount of heat that is released from the tropical
Pacific ocean into the atmosphere (Cane and Zebiak, 1985). In typical “ENSO neutral” years,
normal circulation patterns pushing westward hold a pool of warm water against Indonesia and
other land masses in the South Pacific. A positive “El Niño” state occurs when this circulation
pattern weakens such that this pool of warm water spills eastward across a large area of the
equatorial Pacific Ocean. With warm water exposed to the atmosphere over a greater sea surface
area, El Niño years release more ocean heat into the atmosphere over a relatively short period. The
opposite occurs during the negative “La Niña” state. In La Niña years, stronger circulation patterns
push the same volume of warm water more firmly against the Indonesian landmass, reducing sea-
surface contact with the atmosphere and thus reducing heat released from the ocean. While these
three distinct states are descriptively convenient, there is in fact a continuum of ENSO conditions
corresponding to the amount of heat released into the tropical atmosphere.
    ENSO conditions in the tropical Pacific affect the spatial pattern of weather conditions across
the planet due to how heat travels when released in the tropics. Because there is almost no Coriolis
effect near the equator (a result of the simple facts that the Earth is round and spins), atmospheric
signals propagate rapidly throughout the tropics. During a positive ENSO event, the warm air ini-
tially released above the tropical Pacific Ocean is propagated throughout the tropics by a transport
mechanism in the atmosphere known as an equatorial Kelvin wave that sweeps across the globe, al-
tering weather conditions almost simultaneously throughout the tropics (Chiang and Sobel, 2002).14
  14
     This tropical phenomenon is described in Hsiang and Meng (2015). For a complete scientific treatment of ENSO
physics, see Sarachik and Cane (2010).



                                                       18
For this reason, it is often said that the tropical atmosphere is “teleconnected” during a positive
ENSO event, as atmospheric conditions in locations distant from each other are linked through this
mechanism. Because the equatorial Kelvin wave that connects local weather around the equator is
constrained primarily to the tropics, where the Coriolis effect is weak, the weather conditions that
prevail during a positive ENSO event do not generally extend to higher latitudes, which may in
fact experience opposing weather conditions because of changes to atmospheric circulation.
    This physical mechanism allows ENSO to induce large areas of the planet to experience similar
local temperature, precipitation, humidity, and other weather conditions. The spatial consequences
of a positive ENSO event are perhaps best illustrated by temperature.15 During a positive ENSO
event, temperature conditions around the world are reorganized such that there is a spatially
contiguous area of relatively warm temperature across the tropics and subtropics while almost
simultaneously there is a spatially contiguous area of relatively cooler temperatures in higher-
latitude locations. The opposite occurs during negative ENSO events: less heat is released into the
atmosphere and temperatures across the globe are less spatially organized.
    ENSO conditions are typically summarized by the average sea-surface temperature over a fixed
area in the tropical Pacific. In our main analysis, we employ the widely used NINO4 index, a
statistic defined as average ocean temperature (in degrees Celsius) over a rectangular area bounded
by 5◦ S - 5◦ N, 160◦ E - 150◦ W (see Figure E.2).16 Figure 8 plots this monthly ENSO index for
1856–2013, which extends back further than our estimation sample period of 1961–2013. There are
two important features of ENSO relevant for our empirical application: (i) the monthly timing of a
typical ENSO event and (ii) how an ENSO event influences local temperatures around the planet
both spatially and temporally.
    Due to ENSO’s tropical origins, the timing of ENSO events is phase-shifted relative to the calen-
dar year. Figure E.3 illustrates this timing by plotting the monthly ENSO index 12 months before
and after a given December for the 10 most positive ENSO events during 1961–2013. An ENSO
event generally begins during April-May of a given year and lasts until the following April-May, an
interval known as the “tropical year.” Because the ENSO index typically peaks in December, the
cleanest annual measure of any ENSO event is simply the December value of the ENSO index.17
In all following empirical analyses, we use December values as our annualized measure of ENSO.
    A typical ENSO event affects local temperatures around the planet in a spatially and temporally
distinct manner. Figure 9 depicts the month-by-month structure of warming that occurs when the
ENSO index increases. Each map displays the time-series correlation of monthly temperatures for
each pixel during the specified month and ENSO in month zero, defined as December. Yellow,
  15
     ENSO alters the spatial structure of other weather variables but these effects tend to be of smaller spatial scales.
For example, during positive ENSO events there is typically flooding over the Pacific coast of South America while
the Atlantic coast of South America primarily experiences droughts (Ropelewski and Halpert, 1987).
  16
      In robustness checks, we show that using other measures of ENSO yields similar empirical results.
  17
      This measure of ENSO is stationary and does not exhibit serial correlation. A Dickey-Fuller test strongly
rejects the presence of a unit root in favor of stationarity (p=4.15e-21). We do not detect any statistically significant
coefficients when estimating a time series regression of our annual December NINO4 measure of ENSO on a constant,
a linear trend, and five lagged terms with optimal bandwidth Newey-West standard errors.



                                                           19
                                                                 Figure 8: Monthly ENSO index (1856–2013)


                               2
                                                                                                      Sample period
            Monthly ENSO index (degrees Celsius)
                 -1         0  -2       1




                                                   1860   1880       1900     1920     1940   1960    1980        2000   2020
                                                                                      Year
Notes: Monthly ENSO index during 1856–2013. Shaded area shows our 1961–2013 sample period.


orange, and red colors indicate locations that warm as the ENSO index increases; blues indicate
locations that cool. In the May before a December ENSO event (month -7), the east equatorial
Pacific begins to warm. Regions throughout the tropics, both over land and the oceans, continue
to warm for the next several months, peaking in the eastern Pacific in December (month 0) and
over the rest of the tropics in March and April (months +3 and +4). This warming then dissipates
across the tropics, with little effect visible more than a year after the December peak. Higher
latitudes experience some cooling through these months, though the effect is weaker.
       Figure 9 shows that the local impacts on temperatures around the planet from a single ENSO
event straddles two calendar years. When using annual socioeconomic data reported by calendar
years, one must examine how outcomes in a given year depend on both ENSO in that year and
ENSO in the previous year.

3.2      ENSO and the spatial correlation of cereal productivity
The spatial and temporal patterns shown in Figure 9 suggest that ENSO could drive the spatial
correlation of cereal yields. Figure 10 shows country-level responses for log cereal yields to a 1-
degree increase in the sum of contemporaneous and lagged December ENSO indices.18 Consistent
with the tropical climatic dynamics discussed above, increases in the ENSO index tend to lower
cereal productivities in countries closer to the equator and raise cereal productivities in countries
farther from the equator. This pattern suggests an increase in the global spatial correlation of
cereal yields.
       To quantify global spatial correlation within each year, we construct an annual Moran’s I
statistic for country-level log cereal yields.19 Figure 11 shows a relationship between ENSO and
  18
     Our country-by-year measure of aggregate cereal yield is the harvested area-weighted cereal-level yield across
the eight major cereals. See Appendix B for data details.
  19
     In our empirical applications, we use spatial weights ωij = 1/(dij + 1), where dij is the great-circle distance


                                                                                     20
          Figure 9: Lead and lag local temperature correlation with December ENSO




Notes: Each panel shows pixel-level (0.5◦ latitude by 0.5◦ longitude resolution) correlation between the ENSO
index in December and pixel-level monthly temperatures for 11 months before (lead) and 12 months after (lag)
December. Blue shows areas with negative correlation. Red shows areas with positive correlation.


                                                     21
                                Figure 10: ENSO’s effects on cereal yields




Notes: This map shows the linear coefficient on the sum of contemporaneous and lagged ENSO for each country’s
log cereal yield. Each country-specific time-series model includes a constant and a linear time trend.



the global spatial correlation of cereal productivity. To characterize the ENSO phenomenon in
terms of a scalar, we plot the sum of December ENSO indices in years t and t − 1 on the horizontal
axis and Moran’s I in year t on the vertical axis. An increase in the ENSO index raises this measure
of spatial correlation. ENSO, in this simple bivariate model, explains 12% of annual variation in
the global spatial correlation of cereal productivities.
    To relax the timing simplification of Figure 11, Table 1 presents regressions of the annual
Moran’s I statistic for log cereal yields on flexible polynomial functions of December ENSO in
years t and t − 1. Each model includes a linear time trend and reports standard errors robust
to serial correlation and heteroskedasticity. In column 1, we include only linear contemporaneous
and lagged ENSO terms. Column 2 adds quadratic contemporaneous and lagged ENSO terms
and a linear interaction term. Column 3 estimates the linear and quadratic effects for the sum
of contemporaneous and lagged ENSO. This more parsimonious specification effectively imposes a
common coefficient for EN SOt and EN SOt−1 and a common coefficient for EN SOt × EN SOt−1 ,
EN SOt2 , and EN SOt−1
                   2 . Two results are evident. First, both contemporaneous and lagged ENSO

affect the spatial correlation of cereal productivity but only after controlling for higher-order terms,
as shown in column 2. Second, compared with the model in column 2, column 3 produces a stronger
fit, as summarized by a lower Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) value. As a consequence, all
empirics in Section 4 will use the functional form in column 3 to model the relationship between
ENSO and the global spatial correlation of cereal productivity as it strikes a balance between
allowing nonlinearity while limiting overfitting.
    Columns 1–3 illustrate the overall effect of ENSO on the global spatial correlation of cereal
productivity. It is natural to wonder whether one could simply drive global spatial correlation of
cereal productivity using the global spatial correlation of temperature. This measure would capture
between the two countries’ area-weighted centroids.



                                                      22
                                                     Figure 11: Moran’s I for log cereal yields and ENSO
                                                                                          coef=0.005, se=0.002, R2=0.12



                             .24
              Moran's I of log cereal yield
                   .2        .18   .22




                                              -2.5      -2      -1.5    -1    -.5     0    .5     1    1.5    2     2.5
                                                             Sum of contemp. and lagged December ENSO index

Notes: Figure shows the relationship between Moran’s I of crop-weighted country-level log cereal yields in year t
and the sum of contemporaneous and lagged December ENSO. Linear fit shown as solid line. Local polynomial fit
shown as dashed line.

both ENSO and variation in local temperatures due to other climatic factors. Column 4 shows that
while annual Moran’s I in temperature is correlated with annual Moran’s I in cereal productivity,
it has poorer predictive power than ENSO, as reflected by a higher BIC statistic. This may be
because cereal yields depend on weather variables besides temperature, many of which become
more spatially correlated under a positive ENSO event. These other local weather channels are
captured by ENSO in columns 1–3 and not by the global spatial correlation of only temperature
in column 4. As a result, our regression results in the following section that use ENSO rather than
the spatial correlation of temperature are estimated more precisely.
    Finally, consistent with our thought experiment in Section 2.1, ENSO appears to affect neither
the global mean nor the variance of cereal productivity, as shown by the left and right panels of
Figure 12, respectively. Moreover, when we estimate a gravity model that relates bilateral trade
flows to bilateral distances, column 2 of Table C.1 shows that the distance elasticity is invariant to
ENSO. This is consistent with the assumption, introduced in equation (4), that the trade elasticity
is invariant to the spatial structure of productivity.




                                                                                23
                                                                       Table 1: Moran’s I in cereal productivity and ENSO
                                                                                    Outcome is Moran-I in log cereal yields
                                                                                                   (1)       (2)        (3)                                                                           (4)

                                                                   EN SOt                                   0.008                                              0.008
                                                                                                           (0.002)                                            (0.002)
                                                                                                           [0.000]                                            [0.000]
                                                                   EN SOt−1                                 0.003                                              0.005
                                                                                                           (0.002)                                            (0.002)
                                                                                                           [0.121]                                            [0.008]
                                                                   EN SOt x EN SOt−1                                                                            0.004
                                                                                                                                                              (0.003)
                                                                                                                                                              [0.148]
                                                                   EN SOt2                                                                                     -0.001
                                                                                                                                                              (0.002)
                                                                                                                                                              [0.639]
                                                                        2
                                                                   EN SOt−1                                                                                     0.004
                                                                                                                                                              (0.003)
                                                                                                                                                              [0.197]
                                                                   (EN SOt + EN SOt−1 )                                                                                                0.006
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.001)
                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.000]
                                                                   (EN SOt + EN SOt−1 )2                                                                                               0.002
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.001)
                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.070]
                                                                   It (Tit )                                                                                                                        0.541
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.163)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.001]

                                                                   BIC                                     -275.84                                           -267.21                  -276.63      -272.95
                                                                   Observations                              53                                                53                       53           53
                                                                Notes: Time-series regressions of Moran’s I in log cereal yields on nonlin-
                                                                ear functions of contemporaneous and lagged December ENSO. All mod-
                                                                els include a linear time trend. Serial correlation and heteroskedasticity-
                                                                robust Newey-West standard errors with optimal bandwidth in parenthe-
                                                                ses (Newey and West, 1987); p-values in brackets.

                                          Figure 12: Global cross-sectional mean and variance in cereal productivity and ENSO
                                                                                  coef=0.007, se=0.020, R2=0.002                                                                                                 coef=0.003, se=0.013, R2=0.001
                     1




                                                                                                                                                                    .7
                                                                                                                        Global annual variance of log cereal yields
Global annual mean of log cereal yields
                               .8




                                                                                                                                                        .6
                  .6




                                                                                                                                           .5
        .4




                                                                                                                               .4
                     .2




                                                                                                                                                .3




                                          -2.5   -2      -1.5    -1    -.5    0     .5    1    1.5     2     2.5                                                         -2.5   -2      -1.5    -1    -.5    0     .5    1    1.5     2     2.5
                                                      Sum of contemp and lagged December ENSO index                                                                                  Sum of contemp and lagged December ENSO index

            Notes: Left (right) panel shows the relationship between the mean (variance) of cross-sectional country log
            cereal yields and the sum of contemporaneous and lagged December ENSO. Linear fit shown as solid line. Local
            polynomial fit shown as dashed line.
                                                                                                                   24
4     Empirical results
The theoretical results in Section 2 suggest that the covariance between agricultural productivity,
ln Ai , and the domestic share of expenditure, ln λii , should be lower when the spatial correlation
of productivity across the entire trading network increases. This section examines this relationship
empirically using exogenous temperature- and ENSO-driven changes in productivities and their
global spatial correlation. We first describe our estimation strategy, then report our main finding
and subject it to a series of robustness checks. Appendix B details our data sources.

4.1     Estimation strategy
Following the logic of Section 2.2.4, we empirically estimate a variant of equation (7) that uses
Moran’s I to summarize the spatial structure of productivity. Figure 7 demonstrated that this
specification can capture most of the relevant variation generated by a quantitative trade model.
Specifically, for country i in year t during 1961–2013, we estimate the following regression equation:

                              ln λiit = β0 ln Ait + β1 ln Ait It + Π0 Zit + µit                        (8)

where λiit is country i’s domestic share of cereal expenditure in year t, constructed using FAO
output and trade data (see Appendix B). Ait is cereal yield, also from the FAO. It is the Moran’s I
statistic capturing the spatial correlation of ln Ait for all countries in year t. Zit is a vector of semi-
parametric controls. In Section 2.2.4, we discussed how time-invariant country characteristics such
as size and remoteness could potentially generate omitted variable bias. We also noted that the
average domestic share of expenditure may differ across equilibria. We therefore include country
fixed effects and year fixed effects in Zit . Zit also includes country-specific time trends. µit is an
error term.
     β0 and β1 are our two reduced-form parameters of interest. β0 captures the relationship between
a country’s gains from trade and productivity when productivity is spatially uncorrelated (when
Moran’s I is zero). β1 captures the degree to which the global spatial correlation of productivities
mediates this relationship between gains from trade and productivity.
  βb1 connects the spatial correlation of productivity to the global variance of welfare. βb1 < 0
means that greater spatial correlation lowers the covariance of productivity and the domestic share
of expenditure. Since ENSO does not alter the trade elasticity  (see column 2 of Table C.2), this
implies a lower covariance of productivity ln Ai and the sufficient statistic for the gains from trade,
−1
    ln λii . Greater spatial correlation of agricultural productivity causes more productive countries
to experience greater gains from trade and less productive countries to experience lower gains from
trade. Thus, all else equal, an increase in the spatial correlation of productivities increases global
welfare dispersion.
     Estimation of equation (8) by ordinary least squares (OLS) may be problematic if expendi-
ture shares and productivity are simultaneously determined or if there are omitted determinants
of expenditure shares that are correlated with productivity, even after conditioning on Zit . For

                                                     25
example, demand shocks could affect expenditure shares and elicit supply responses that change
average yields. Similarly, if domestic cereal production employs imported intermediate goods, then
unobserved trade-cost shocks could jointly affect domestic cereal yields and the domestic share of
expenditure.
   To address these potential sources of bias, we employ an instrumental-variables (IV) strategy
that exploits plausibly exogenous variation in local yields and the global spatial correlation of yields.
To drive local yields, we use country-level crop-area-weighted annual temperature, Tit , constructed
from Legates and Willmott (1990a,b) (see Appendix B). As described in Section 3, global spatial
correlation of yields is driven by contemporaneous and lagged ENSO.
   Our second-stage equation (8) has two endogenous variables, ln Ait and ln Ait It . We instrument
for them using the following first-stage equations:

                           0              0
                 ln Ait = α11 f (Tit ) + α12 f (Tit )g(EN SOt + EN SOt−1 ) + Γ01 Zit + υ1it                 (9)
                              0                  0
               ln Ait It =   α21 f (Tit )   +   α22 f (Tit )g(EN SOt   + EN SOt−1 ) +   Γ02 Zit   + υ2it   (10)

where the vector of semi-parametric controls, Zit , includes the same variables as our second-stage
               0 , α0 , α0 , and α0 are vectors of first-stage coefficients. f () captures the rela-
equation (8). α11   12   21       22
tionship between local temperature and yield; nonlinearity in f () is well documented around the
world (Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; Schlenker and Lobell, 2010; Welch et al., 2010; Moore and
Lobell, 2015). In particular, f () is modeled as a restricted cubic spline of local temperature; the
choice of the number of splines is detailed below. g() captures the relationship between ENSO and
the global spatial correlation of yields. Following the model-selection results in Table 1, g() is a
quadratic function of (EN SOt + EN SOt−1 ). υ1it and υ2it are error terms.
   Nonlinear functional forms for f () and g() are necessary to capture nonlinearities in our first-
stage equations, but this means that we have more than two instruments for the two endogenous
variables. Two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimation in such over-identified IV settings can exac-
erbate issues with biased point estimates and incorrectly sized inference. These issues worsen if the
many instruments are also weak (Bound, Jaeger and Baker, 1995).
   We address this concern using several weak-instrument diagnostics. First, we employ the limited
information maximum likelihood (LIML) IV estimator, which is approximately median-unbiased for
over-identified models (Mariano, 2001). Second, we conduct tests to detect weak instruments in our
LIML estimator. Third, we conduct inference that is robust to the presence of weak instruments.

4.2   Main results
To begin, consider OLS estimates of β0 and β1 from equation (8), reported in column 1 of Table 2.
The OLS estimate of β0 has the expected sign and is distinct from zero, but the OLS estimate of
β1 is indistinct from zero and, in fact, positive.
   Columns 2 through 6 of Table 2 report IV estimates that address the potential bias of the OLS
estimates. Across columns, we vary the number of spline terms in the temperature function f ().


                                                            26
Column 2 has 2 spline terms, the minimum needed to capture nonlinearity in f (). Each subsequent
column adds another spline term in f ().20 Because all models include a quadratic function of the
sum of contemporaneous and lagged ENSO, this corresponds to 6, 9, 12, 15, and 18 instruments
used jointly across the first-stage equations (9) and (10).21 Panel A shows 2SLS estimates, while
panel B shows LIML estimates. Because ENSO varies only in the time dimension, we cluster
standard errors by year to allow arbitrary forms of spatial correlation and heteroskedasticity across
countries within a given year. In robustness checks, we consider other error structures, including
the Bekker (1994) adjustment that accounts for LIML standard errors being potentially too small
in the presence of many weak instruments.
    The OLS estimate of β0 appears to be biased downward relative to the IV estimates, suggesting
that ln Ait and µit are negatively correlated. One potential source of such OLS bias would be
demand shocks for domestic output, as a positive shock would raise the value of the dependent
variable and lower the average-productivity regressor if domestic production exhibited decreasing
returns. Similarly, an exogenous increase in trade costs could increase the value of the dependent
variable and decrease cereal yields if production employs imported inputs.
    The 2SLS estimates reported in panel A of Table 2 show βb0 > 0 and βb1 < 0, with little
variation in the point estimates across columns 2 to 6. The 2SLS estimates of both parameters
are also statistically different from the OLS estimates, suggesting that the 2SLS estimates do not
exhibit the same bias as the OLS estimates and thus are not the result of completely uninformative
instruments. However, in over-identified IV settings, 2SLS estimates are still biased and incorrectly
sized. This is evident in that the Cragg and Donald (1993) joint F-statistic for both first-stage
regressions is well below the Stock and Yogo (2005) critical values for 10% maximal 2SLS bias and
size across columns 2 to 6 of Panel A.
   As an alternative to 2SLS, panel B of Table 2 presents LIML estimates. Again, we find very
similar point estimates for βb0 > 0 and βb1 < 0 across the varying number of temperature splines in
columns 2 to 6. The LIML estimates are even farther away from the OLS estimates than the 2SLS
estimates, suggesting that the LIML estimator mitigates bias in our 2SLS estimates.
    LIML is an approximately median-unbiased estimator in over-identified settings, but its stan-
dard errors may still be incorrectly sized in the presence of weak instruments. We report two tests
to assess whether weak instruments are a concern. First, across columns 2 to 6, the Cragg-Donald
joint F-statistic for both first-stage regressions is above the Stock-Yogo critical values for 10% max-
imal LIML size, which rejects the presence of weak instruments. However, the Stock-Yogo critical
values are only valid for iid errors. While we also report the Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic, which
  20
      2 to 6 spline terms correspond to 3 to 7 knots. Knots are placed between equally spaced percentiles of the
temperature empirical distribution according to Harrell (2001).
  21                                                               0         0                             0         0
      Columns 1–5 of Table F.2 show first-stage statistics for α11    and α12    from equation (9) and α21    and α22  from
equation (10), corresponding to the IV specifications shown in columns 2–6 of Table 2. They show p-values from
F-tests examining the joint significance of elements in each vector of first-stage coefficients. As expected, uninteracted
local temperature is consistently a strong predictor of local cereal yields in first-stage equation (9). For the interaction
between local yields and the global spatial correlation of yields in first-stage equation (10), both uninteracted local
temperature (i.e., 0th order ENSO) and local temperature interacted with ENSO (i.e., 1st and 2nd order ENSO) are
strong predictors.


                                                            27
            Table 2: Domestic share of expenditure and spatial correlation of productivity
                                    Outcome is log domestic share of expenditure
                                                    (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                    OLS        IV         IV          IV         IV          IV
                                                                           Panel A: 2SLS estimates
  ln Ait (β0 )                                     0.284       1.541       1.746     1.696      1.701        1.654
                                                  (0.119)     (0.515)    (0.542)    (0.412)    (0.425)     (0.431)
                                                  [0.021]     [0.004]    [0.002]    [0.000]    [0.000]     [0.000]
  ln Ait × It (β1 )                                0.758       -3.321     -3.440     -3.391     -3.350      -3.290
                                                  (0.487)     (2.071)    (2.148)    (1.476)    (1.493)     (1.555)
                                                  [0.126]     [0.115]    [0.115]    [0.026]    [0.029]     [0.039]

  Pct. change in welfare variance                  -0.353      1.536      1.591      1.568      1.549       1.521
  from 1 s.d. increase in It                      (0.226)     (0.976)    (1.023)    (0.716)    (0.728)     (0.754)
                                                  [0.119]     [0.116]    [0.120]    [0.029]    [0.033]     [0.044]

                                                                           Panel B: LIML estimates
  ln Ait (β0 )                                                 2.110       2.380     2.114      2.196        2.308
                                                              (0.837)    (0.847)    (0.604)    (0.669)     (0.771)
                                                              [0.015]    [0.007]    [0.001]    [0.002]     [0.004]
  ln Ait × It (β1 )                                            -4.530     -4.907     -4.144     -4.218      -4.463
                                                              (2.752)    (2.937)    (1.834)    (1.949)     (2.194)
                                                              [0.106]    [0.101]    [0.028]    [0.035]     [0.047]

  Pct. change in welfare variance                              2.091      2.264      1.914      1.948       2.060
  from 1 s.d. increase in It                                  (1.407)    (1.497)    (0.954)    (1.035)     (1.191)
                                                              [0.137]    [0.131]    [0.045]    [0.060]     [0.084]

  Number of temperature splines in f ()                            2          3          4           5          6
  ENSO polynomial order in g()                                     2          2          2           2          2
  Number of instruments                                            6          9         12          15         18
  Cragg-Donald F-stat                                            7.052      5.832     5.174        4.324     3.801
  Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max 2SLS bias                      9.480     10.430     10.780      10.930     11.000
  Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max 2SLS size                     21.680     27.510     32.880      38.080     43.220
  Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max LIML size                      4.060      3.700      3.580       3.540      3.560
  Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                                         6.100      5.664     3.963        3.332     3.069
  Anderson-Rubin weak-id robust joint p-value                    0.000      0.000     0.000        0.000     0.000
  BIC for first stage equations                                -30933.7 -30917.4 -31134.0 -31120.2 -31091.8
  Observations                                         5452      5452       5452       5452        5452       5452
 Notes: This table reports estimates of β0 and β1 from equation (8). Column 1 shows OLS estimates. Columns
 2–6 show IV estimates that vary by the number of temperature spline terms in f (). Panel A (B) shows 2SLS
 (LIML) IV estimates. All models include quadratic EN SOt + EN SOt−1 terms and incorporate country fixed
 effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific linear trends as included instruments. Standard errors, clustered
 by year, in parentheses; p-values in brackets. Appendix D.1 describes how we compute the percentage change in
 the variance of welfare for a one-standard-deviation increase in Moran’s I relative to the historical mean assuming
  = 8.59, with those standard errors calculated using the delta method.


is more appropriate given our clustered error structure (Kleibergen and Paap, 2006), there are no
established critical values for non-iid errors. We therefore cannot entirely rule out the presence of
weak instruments solely by looking at first-stage F-statistics. Second, we turn to inference methods
that are robust to the presence of weak instruments. For each IV model in columns 2 to 6, we
present the p-value from the Anderson-Rubin test of the null hypothesis that β0 and β1 in equation
(8) are jointly zero (Anderson and Rubin, 1949). This null hypothesis is strongly rejected. The


                                                         28
combined evidence from these various diagnostics suggests that weak instruments are not a concern.
This gives us confidence that our LIML estimates are unbiased and correctly sized.
       Which number of spline terms in the temperature function f () yields the most informative esti-
mates of our parameters of interest? Note that this model selection is not crucial to our conclusions:
across columns 2 through 6, the point estimates of β0 and β1 do not vary much. All the estimates of
β0 have p-values near or below 0.01, and the LIML estimates of β1 have p-values ranging from 0.03
to 0.11. To select one specification, we employ the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) statistic
from a joint seemingly unrelated regression of first-stage equations (9) and (10) to address the
trade-off between capturing nonlinearities in f () and having too many spline terms in f (). Table 2
shows that the BIC statistic is minimized with four temperature spline terms in column 4. This
corresponds to the specification with the most precise LIML estimates of β0 and β1 , with p-values
of 0.001 and 0.03, respectively, and will serve as our benchmark model moving forward.
       Our empirical estimates show that the spatial distribution of productivity affects a country’s
terms of trade, as revealed by its domestic share of expenditure. The positive relationship between
its own productivity and domestic share of expenditure (β̂0 > 0) reveals that higher productivity
worsens the terms of trade. This deterioration is dampened when productivity is more spatially
correlated (β̂1 < 0) since higher productivity in neighboring countries improves a country’s terms
of trade.22
       To quantify these estimates in welfare terms, suppose that the cross-sectional global spatial
correlation of agricultural productivity were to increase by one standard deviation relative to the
historical mean. Applying the expression for the variance of welfare in equation (3) to our bench-
mark LIML estimates in column 4, panel B of Table 2, we find that a one-standard-deviation
increase in the spatial correlation of productivity leads to a statistically significant 2% increase in
the global variance of welfare (see Appendix D.1 for details).23

4.3      Additional robustness checks
This section presents several robustness checks of our main empirical result. They are designed
to test the validity of our statistical assumptions, the interpretation of our results, and the con-
sequences of our data-construction choices. Our benchmark model throughout is that shown in
column 4, panel B of Table 2.

Randomization inference Our main source of identifying variation is global time-series fluctua-
tions in the ENSO cycle, as shown in Figure 8. While it is plausible that ENSO is uncorrelated with
unobserved determinants of domestic shares of expenditure over a large sample of years, spurious
correlations could occur within a 53-year sample.
  22
     At empirically observed levels of spatial correlation, this does not reverse the positive relationship between ln Ait
and ln λiit . As shown in Figure 11, the spatial correlation of cereal yields lies between 0.17 and 0.25 in our estimation
sample. Thus, β̂0 + β̂1 × It > 0 at all historical values of It for the estimates reported in Table 2.
  23
     As a point of comparison, Kopczuk, Saez and Song (2010) find that the annual variance of log earnings across
U.S. workers increased on average by 2% per year between 1970–2003.



                                                           29
                       To examine the relevance of this concern, we conduct a placebo test by randomly reshuffling
years in our panel data, breaking the time-series link between domestic shares of expenditure and
ENSO-driven changes in country-level cereal yields and the global spatial correlation of yields. This
allows us to obtain an empirical distribution of our estimated reduced-form coefficients, βb0 and βb1 ,
under placebo conditions and compute the probability of observing our benchmark estimates if
years were randomly assigned.
                       The left and right panels of Figure 13 show the empirical distribution for βb0 and βb1 , respectively,
for 10,000 randomly reshuffled years without replacement. The vertical lines show the location of
our estimated βb0 and βb1 from the observed data. We find that it is highly unlikely that our main
result is due to small-sample bias.

                                                     Figure 13: Randomization inference




                                                                                           .08
                .08




                                                                                                      .06
    Randomization distribution




                                                                              Randomization distribution
                         .06




                                                                                       .04
           .04




                                                                            .02
 .02            0




                                                                                           0




                                 -1    0             1             2                                        -4   -2    0   2   4
                                               β0                                                                     β1


Notes: Empirical distributions of βb0 (left panel) and βb1 (right panel) from 10,000 random assignments of years.
Vertical lines show βb0 and βb1 from observed data estimated using benchmark model in column 4, panel B of Table 2.



Standard errors                            Standard errors are clustered by year in our benchmark model because ENSO
treatment occurs at the global time-series level. Table F.3 considers alternative error structures.
Column 1 reproduces our benchmark results. To account for serial correlation, column 2 allows
year-level clustering and common serial correlation across countries within a 20-year rolling win-
dow following Driscoll and Kraay (1998). Column 3 allows differential serial correlation and het-
eroskedasticity across countries over our entire sample period by clustering standard errors by both
year and country. Allowing both forms of serial correlation has little effect on standard errors. Fi-
nally, if instruments are weak, standard errors from the LIML estimator may be too small (Hansen,
Hausman and Newey, 2008). Column 4 applies the Bekker (1994) adjustment to our benchmark
LIML estimates. This only slightly inflates our standard errors, which is unsurprising given that
the various tests in Table 2 do not suggest our instruments are weak.

Controlling for time-varying trade costs                               Our IV model correctly identifies β0 and β1 when
ENSO conditions influence a country’s domestic share of cereal expenditure only through its effects


                                                                       30
on local yields and the global spatial correlation of yields.24 While it is unlikely that ENSO, as a
naturally occurring climatic phenomenon, is affected by economic activity, the exclusion restriction
could be violated if ENSO affects domestic cereal expenditure outside of its influence on cereal
yields. For example, a violation would occur if ENSO were to directly affect trade costs.
       To address this potential violation of the exclusion restriction, Table F.4 augments our bench-
mark model with additional controls designed to capture time-and-country-varying trade costs.
Column 1 replicates our benchmark result. In column 2, we add a country-year-varying proxy for
trade costs by interacting the global annual crude oil price with the country’s average log domestic
share of expenditure over our sample period. Column 3 uses an alternative measure of cross-
sectional trade openness by interacting the global oil price with a country’s centrality, measured
as the average of its inverse distance to every other country weighted by that trading partner’s
long-run average log agricultural output. In both cases, these proxies for trade costs do not mean-
ingfully alter our estimates of β0 and β1 . Columns 4 and 5 provide more flexible specifications
by interacting year fixed effects with the two cross-sectional measures of trade openness used in
columns 2 and 3. Again, our coefficients of interest are relatively unaffected by the inclusion of
these controls, suggesting that unobserved shocks to trade costs are not correlated with our ENSO-
driven instruments. Cereals may be subject to export restrictions that are imposed in response to
productivity shocks. In column 6, we include a dummy variable that indicates if a country imposed
a new export restriction on cereals that year, using data from the UNCTAD TRAINS database.
Controlling for such export restrictions does not alter our result. ENSO also alters local precipi-
tation. If precipitation is also a determinant of trade costs, there may be an exclusion restriction
violation. In column 7, we include quadratic terms for total annual precipitation for each country
and find that it does not affect our result.

Large economies Our estimate of β̂0 > 0 implies that a positive productivity shock worsens an
economy’s terms of trade. This is at odds with the small-open-economy assumption that terms of
trade are exogenous to local conditions. Of course, some economies must influence world prices, but
since our estimating equation treats each country as an informative observation without weighting
by size, our results suggest that the “typical” economy is not small. To examine this more explicitly,
column 2 of Table F.5 excludes the ten largest economies that account for more than half of world
cereal production from our estimation sample. The resulting estimates of β̂0 and β̂1 are very
similar to our benchmark estimates. This finding is consistent with the idea that trade costs make
  24
      For example, Hsiang, Meng and Cane (2011) show that warmer ENSO conditions increase the likelihood of civil
conflicts in the tropics over the same period. This relationship, however, need not imply an exclusion-restriction
violation. Suppose ENSO increases civil conflicts in the tropics only through lowered cereal yields. In that scenario,
civil conflict would serve as a “bad control” in our IV specification, potentially biasing our coefficients of interest
(see Angrist and Pischke 2009, p. 64-68). Our exclusion-restriction assumption is invalid only if ENSO increases
civil conflicts partially through non-agricultural channels and if civil conflicts affect domestic share of expenditure
by, for example, raising international trade costs relative to internal trade costs. Because the current climate-conflict
literature currently supports both agricultural and non-agricultural channels (Hsiang, Burke and Miguel, 2013), the
inclusion of conflict as a control would not deliver a unique interpretation: it either jeopardizes a valid identification
strategy or show that our instrumental-variable strategy is invalid.



                                                           31
all markets “local”, so that no exporter is a price taker.

Sample split       Table F.5 further examines whether β0 and β1 vary over our sample period. Column
3 shows estimates using the years 1961–1987, the first half of our sample period. Column 4 restricts
the years to 1988–2013, the second half of our sample period. While estimates from the second
half of our sample period are smaller in absolute magnitude than those from the first half, the
differences are not statistically significant.

Dynamic effects Table F.6 empirically estimates dynamic responses that the static model pre-
sented in Section 2 necessarily omits. Column 1 replicates our benchmark contemporaneous-
productivity specification for a sample in which t is restricted to 1962–2012, the sample period
that allows for both lead and lagged yields. Before discussing our lead and lagged results, it is im-
portant to note that because current productivity is affected by EN SOt and EN SOt−1 , we would
not expect lead productivity, driven in part by EN SOt , or lagged productivity, driven in part by
EN SOt−1 , to have zero effect on current domestic share of expenditure. Rather, the absence of dy-
namics would produce lead and lagged effects that are muted compared with the contemporaneous
effect.
    Improvements since the 1980s in the forecasting of strong ENSO events (Chen et al., 2004;
Shrader, 2017) could allow the domestic share of expenditure to respond to future ENSO-driven
cereal yields. To examine whether agricultural trade anticipates future ENSO events, column 2
tests for the effects of lead log yields, as instrumented by ENSO in years t + 1 and t and local
temperature in year t + 1. Lead effects are much smaller in magnitude than contemporaneous
effects and are not statistically significant.
    Past yields might influence the domestic share of expenditure if past productivity affects con-
temporary productivity through intertemporal channels such as depletion of soil nutrients or if past
output is stored to facilitate current consumption. Cereal storage, in particular, has been shown
to facilitate consumption smoothing in many settings (Williams and Wright, 2005; Roberts and
Schlenker, 2013). We address this in two ways. Column 3 examines the effects of lagged log yields
generally, as instrumented by ENSO in years t − 1 and t − 2 and local temperature in year t − 1.
Compared with contemporaneous effects, lagged effects are smaller in magnitude and not significant
at conventional levels. Our standard measure of domestic expenditure is contemporaneous output
minus exports; this includes potential changes in stored cereal inventories. In column 4, we use a
measure of domestic expenditure that removes changes in cereal inventory using cereal storage data
from the FAO.25 The estimated coefficients are smaller in absolute magnitude than our benchmark
estimates; however, they are not statistically different.
    The static model of Section 2 assumes that trade is balanced. To verify the plausibility of
this assumption, we have estimated a variant of the regression specification in equation (8) in
   25
      This measure is contemporaneous output minus exports minus change in cereal inventory, where the latter is
defined as the difference in stored cereals in year t minus stored cereals in year t − 1. This implicitly assumes that
all stored cereals are domestically produced. The sample is smaller due to observations with missing storage data.


                                                         32
which the dependent variable is instead country i’s aggregate goods trade deficit in year t. Neither
instrumented cereal productivity nor its interaction with Moran’s I for cereal productivities have
statistically significant effects on the trade deficit.

Terms-of-trade interpretation             To corroborate that our expenditure-share results reflect terms-
of-trade effects, in Appendix C.2 we regress a measure of the terms of trade on productivity and
spatial correlation. We find that an increase in productivity worsens a country’s terms of trade,
but this effect is dampened when productivity is more spatially correlated. This regression em-
ploys a revealed-preference measure of changes in the terms of trade that cannot be used to make
quantitative statements about welfare inequality.

ENSO and local temperature definitions Table F.7 considers alternative definitions of ENSO
and country-level local temperatures. Column 1, panel A reproduces our benchmark results using
the NINO4 measure as our ENSO index and crop-area-weighted country-level temperatures. In
columns 2, 3 and 4, we use NINO3, NINO34, and NINO12, alternative measures of ENSO that
differ by the spatial area over which average sea-surface temperature is calculated (see Figure E.2).
In panel B, we construct country-level temperature from pixel-level temperature data by taking
the pixel average across the total area of a country rather than weight by growing crop area.26 Our
results are largely unaffected by these two data-construction choices.
       Our identification strategy need not require ENSO per se. Rather, one needs an exogenous
driver of the global spatial correlation of cereal yields that exhibits a sufficiently strong first stage.
In Table F.8, we report estimates produced by replacing g(EN SOt + EN SOt−1 ) in equations
(9) and (10) with the annual global spatial correlation of temperature, It (Tit ). While the point
estimates in Table F.8 do not differ drastically from the corresponding estimates in panel B of
Table 2, the first stages are generally weaker. This is consistent with Table 1, which shows that
It (Tit ) does not predict the global spatial correlation of cereal yields as strongly as ENSO. In short,
ENSO is preferred to the spatial correlation of an intermediate local weather variable as the source
of exogenous variation in the global spatial correlation of cereal yields on the basis of the strength
of the first-stage relationship.

Domestic expenditure share construction As detailed in Appendix B, we do not observe
cereal prices for all cereal-country-year observations with positive cereal output. Our benchmark
measure of domestic share of expenditure imputes missing cereal-level prices using the average
export-volume-weighted cereal export unit value for that country and year. While this imputation
increases the number of observations in our estimation sample, this procedure could bias our es-
timates if it introduces measurement error into our outcome variable that is correlated with our
instrumented regressors.
  26
     Our sample of countries increases slightly when using total-area-weighted temperature compared with using crop-
area-weighted temperature because a handful of small-sized countries have no agricultural activity in the Ramankutty
et al. (2008) dataset.



                                                        33
         Table F.9 considers alternative approximations for the domestic expenditure share. Column
1 reproduces our benchmark result. Columns 2 through 4 consider alternative price imputations.
Column 2 imputes missing export unit values using producer prices.27 Columns 3 and 4 impute
missing cereal prices using the lowest and highest observed export unit values, rather than the
average, for a given country and year. All three alternative imputation methods yield estimates of
β0 and β1 that are statistically indistinguishable from the benchmark estimate in column 1. To see
if our benchmark result is sensitive to the source of trade data, in column 5 we compute domestic
expenditure shares using trade data from Comtrade instead of FAO. Finally, in column 6 we drop
observations where our benchmark measure of log domestic expenditure share is in the bottom and
top 1% of its unconditional distribution. Neither robustness check alters our conclusions.


5         Application: Inequality under future climate change
In this section, we demonstrate how to incorporate the role of spatial interdependence via trade
into reduced-form analyses of economic outcomes when the global spatial structure of produc-
tivity changes. Recent reviews of reduced-form studies of climate-change impacts emphasize the
need to consider spatial spillovers in projections of economic outcomes under climate change (Dell,
Jones and Olken, 2014; Hsiang, 2016; Auffhammer, 2018). To that end, we amend a standard
reduced-form approach for projecting climate impacts, which implicitly holds spatial correlation
fixed, to incorporate changes in the spatial correlation of productivities due to climate change.28
By allowing the expenditure-productivity relationship to depend on spatial correlation, this ap-
proach introduces spatial interdependence into a reduced-form framework without imposing the
full structure of quantitative trade models. This strategy is similar to that of Monte, Redding
and Rossi-Hansberg (2018), who use observables to account for heterogeneous local employment
elasticities implied by a quantitative model of commuting flows.
         Because our exercise serves only to highlight the implications of incorporating this particular
mechanism, let us also emphasize that it omits other potential general-equilibrium effects. First,
these projections study changes in cereal productivity due to climate-driven changes in local tem-
peratures over the twenty-first century in isolation. We fix all other variables, such as the spatial
pattern of comparative advantage within cereals, at recent historical values. Thus, we do not take
into account important trends such as technological change. Second, we apply estimates based on
past exogenous annual changes in cereal productivity to future long-term productivity changes due
to climate change. This implies that we omit possible adaptations in anticipation of future climate
change (Deschênes and Greenstone, 2007; Hsiang, 2016). Third, we do not consider other poten-
tial adjustments such as factor reallocation across sectors and across crops within the agricultural
sector. All three practices are standard in reduced-form analyses of climate impacts, due to the ab-
    27
    See discussion in Appendix B regarding concerns with using FAO’s producer prices.
    28
     There is currently no scientific consensus on how ENSO will be affected by anthropogenic climate change (Stocker
et al., 2013). Our projection exercise therefore assumes ENSO is stationary over the twenty-first century and does
not contribute to long-run changes in the global spatial correlation of cereal productivities.



                                                         34
sence of credible estimates of the relevant phenomena, and these assumptions may ultimately cause
these projections to differ from realized climate impacts. Our objective is merely to demonstrate
how the economic consequences of spatial correlation can be incorporated into reduced-form pro-
jections of climate impacts. This exercise helps bridge the gap between reduced-form approaches
and structural models of climate impacts (Brock, Engström and Xepapadeas, 2014; Desmet and
Rossi-Hansberg, 2015; Costinot, Donaldson and Smith, 2016; Krusell and Smith, 2016).
       We first report climate change’s anticipated effects on the global variance and spatial correlation
of cereal productivity. We then show how incorporating these changes in the spatial correlation of
productivities affects welfare projections.

5.1       Cereal productivity under climate change
To examine how climate change will affect cereal productivity, we estimate a nonlinear log cereal
yield response function using historical variation in annual temperatures across countries and years.
Specifically, for the period 1961–2013, we estimate:

                                          ln Ait = k(Tit ) + Ψ0 Xit + νit                                       (11)

where k() is a restricted cubic spline function and the benchmark set of controls in Xit include
country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific quadratic trends. Figure 14 shows the
estimated cubic spline response function, k(), using four temperature spline terms. It also shows
two cross-sectional temperature distributions: observed temperatures in 2013 and the forecast
for 2099 under a business-as-usual (Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5) climate scenario
obtained from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) multi-model ensemble mean.29
Column 1 of Table F.10 shows that the coefficients of k() shown in Figure 14 are jointly statistically
significant with a productivity-maximizing temperature around 9◦ C. Table F.10 also indicates that
the predicted optimal temperature is relatively insensitive to the number of knots in the spline
function and to the inclusion of precipitation controls. Next, we combine the estimated coefficients
in equation (11) with local temperature projections under a business-as-usual climate scenario to
project log cereal yields in the 2014–2099 period. All other variables in equation (11) are fixed at
2013 levels (see Appendix D.2 for details).
       Climate change alters two important moments of the cross-country cereal productivity distri-
bution. First, the variance of cereal productivity increases. In 2013, of the 12 countries with
temperatures below the global productivity-maximizing temperature, 10 had productivities above
the cross-sectional mean (see Figure E.4).30 As temperatures increase under climate change, these
  29
     The Coupled Model Intercomparison Project is a coordinated effort by the climate-science community to har-
monize model runs across various climate models. The average climate projection across CMIP models is known as
the multi-model ensemble mean. CMIP5 was used to inform the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (see Taylor, Stouffer and Meehl (2012) for details).
  30
     Figure E.4 shows that the unconditional relationship between log productivity and temperature is very similar
to the conditional relationship depicted in Figure 14, k(Tit ). Thus, we can describe how climate change alters the
variance and spatial correlation of productivity in terms of the nonlinear shape of k(Tit ), even though productivity



                                                         35
               Figure 14: Estimated temperature response function for log cereal yields




                                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                                           Predicted yield for hist. temp.




                                     0
                                                                                           Predicted yield for future temp.



                Temperature predicted log cereal yields
                                                                                           2013 country temp. distribution




                                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                                           2099 country temp. distribution




                                                                                                                                  Temperature distribution
                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                         -.5




                                                                                                                                    .2      .3
                        -1




                                                                                                                                  .1
                                     -1.5




                                                                                                                                  0
                                                          -5   0   5   10    15       20   25             30                 35
                                                                        Temperature (C)

     Notes: Gray solid line shows k() in equation (11), the predicted relationship between crop-area-weighted
     country-level temperature and log cereal yields, estimated during 1961–2013. Restricted cubic spline func-
     tion is estimated using four spline terms with knots placed along the temperature support according to
     Harrell (2001). Gray dashed line shows additional predicted log cereal yields using extrapolated tempera-
     ture in 2099. Estimated model corresponds to column 1 of Table F.10. Orange line shows the distribution
     of observed country-level temperature in 2013. Red line shows country-level projected temperature in
     2099 from CMIP5 ensemble mean under a business-as-usual (RCP 8.5) scenario.


countries with high relative productivity will gain further by moving towards the productivity-
maximizing temperature shown in Figure 14. Concurrently nearly all other countries will experi-
ence productivity losses as they move away from the optimal temperature. Because the gains from
climate change are experienced almost exclusively by relatively high-productivity countries, there
is a resulting increase in the cross-country variance of productivity, depicted by the black line in
the left panel of Figure 15.
    Second, as temperatures increase across the planet, the spatial correlation of cereal produc-
tivities increases. This is again due to the non-monotone yield response function shown in Fig-
ure 14 and the fact that surface temperatures are generally decreasing in distance to the equator.
Absent climate change, mid-latitude locations experience the productivity-maximizing tempera-
ture. Locations closer to and farther from the equator both generally exhibit lower yields. As
climate change increases temperatures across the globe, latitudes closer to the poles now expe-
rience the productivity-maximizing temperature, with less productive locations becoming more
bunched around the equator. This bifurcation of global agriculture into high-productivity poles
and a low-productivity band around the equator increases the spatial correlation of cereal pro-
incorporates other determinants contained in controls Ψ0 Xit and residual νit from equation (11).




                                                                              36
                   Figure 15: Variance in climate-driven welfare over the 21st century




Notes: Left panel shows the change in the global variance (black line) and Moran’s I (blue line) of log cereal yields
over the twenty-first century under climate change. Right panel shows the change in the variance of welfare omitting
(gray line) and including (red line) changes in the spatial correlation of log cereal yields over the same period. Climate
projections from CMIP5 ensemble mean under a business-as-usual (RCP 8.5) scenario. Appendix D.2 describes welfare
calculations assuming  = 8.59.


ductivity.31 The resulting increase in Moran’s I for cereal productivity under climate change is
indicated by the blue series in the left panel of Figure 15.

5.2    Welfare projections and changes in spatial structure
The change in the spatial correlation of cereal productivity due to climate change is consequential for
global welfare inequality. To demonstrate this, we combine projected local cereal productivity under
climate change with our benchmark estimates of βb0 and βb1 from Section 4 to project future domestic
shares of expenditure via equation (8) and welfare variance via equation (3) (see Appendix D.2 for
details). We consider two scenarios with different terms-of-trade effects.32 In the first scenario,
we fix the spatial correlation of temperature-predicted cereal productivities to its 2013 value. In
the second scenario, we allow climate change to increase the spatial correlation of productivities as
depicted by the blue series in the left panel of Figure 15.
    The projected change in the variance of welfare over the twenty-first century is shown in the right
panel of Figure 15. The gray line shows the projection that omits changes in spatial correlation and
the red line shows the projection that include such changes. Omitting changes in spatial correlation,
the projected increase in the variance of cereal productivity generates a projected increase in the
variance of welfare. The projection that incorporates increases in the spatial correlation of cereal
  31
      Additionally, the country-specific shift in temperature due to climate change is not spatially uniform. Because
of surface albedo changes due to polar ice melt, there is higher warming in the poles relative to lower latitude areas.
However, this latitude-dependent gradient is relatively small compared to the average global temperature change and
thus plays a second-order role in determining changes in the spatial correlation of productivity. For example, the
projected temperature change over the twenty-first century for Gabon, the country located closest to the equator, is
3.4◦ C. For Finland, the country located closest to the north pole, the projected temperature change is 2.9◦ C.
  32
      In autarky, the variance of welfare would be proportionate to the variance of productivity. Since a productivity
increase is associated with worse terms of trade, an increase in the variance of productivity causes a smaller increase
in the variance of welfare when there is international trade.


                                                           37
productivity due to climate change predicts a 20% greater increase in welfare inequality between
2013–2099 compared to the projection that holds spatial correlation fixed.

Figure 16: Differences in projected welfare changes due to change in spatial correlation (2013–2099)




  Notes: Map shows the difference in projected country-level welfare change over 2013–2099 between projections
  that include and omit changes in spatial correlation. Climate projections from CMIP5 ensemble mean under a
  business-as-usual (RCP 8.5) scenario. Appendix D.3 describes welfare calculations assuming  = 8.59.

      How do the projections differ across countries? Figure 16 maps the difference between the two
projections.33 Including an increase in the spatial correlation of productivity causes the gains from
trade to be lower in less productive countries and higher in more productive countries than in a
projection that holds spatial correlation fixed. In particular, Figure 16 shows that most countries
in Africa, and a few in Asia and South America have lower gains from trade in the projection that
incorporates changes in spatial correlation. This is because the relatively high local temperatures
that drive yield losses in these countries are compounded by similar temperatures simultaneously
experienced by neighboring countries. In the simplest terms, a key feature of climate change
is that it makes Ethiopia and Kenya less productive at the same time, lowering the gains from
trade compared to a scenario in which each country warms independently. By the same logic,
parts of Europe and North American have higher gains from trade when the projection includes
increases in spatial correlation. The relatively milder temperatures experienced by these countries
are accompanied by similar temperatures over neighboring locations.
      Figure 17 depicts climate-change forecasts for each country in terms of the predicted change
in cereal productivity and the difference in projected welfare from omitting the change in spatial
correlation shown in Figure 16 on the vertical axis. The vast majority of countries suffer a decrease
in cereal productivity as a result of increased temperature. As in Figure 16, the strongest contrast
in Figure 17 is between outcomes for African and European economies. While there is substantial
heterogeneity in the productivity declines across countries within each continent, most economies
in Africa, and a few in South America and Asia, experience productivity losses that would be
considerably amplified by changes in spatial correlation. By contrast, most European economies
 33
      See equation (D.14) at the end of Appendix D.3.


                                                        38
Figure 17: Differences in welfare projections due to change in spatial correlation and projected
yield changes

                             .01                Spatial structure                                                     Spatial structure
                                                reduces loss                                                          amplifies gain
             Difference in welfare projection
                 -.005       0
                             -.01     .005




                                                Spatial structure                                                     Spatial structure
                                                amplifies loss                                                        reduces gain

                                                     -.5             -.4     -.3          -.2       -.1           0               .1
                                                                             Projected yield change

                                                    Africa          Asia   Europe    N. America      S. America           Pacific

    Notes: Scatter shows the difference in projected country-level welfare change between projections that include
    and omit changes in spatial correlation (from Figure 16) plotted against change in log cereal yields over 2013–
    2099 under climate change. Countries are color-coded by continent. See Figure E.5 for the same plot with
    country identifiers. Appendix D.3 describes welfare calculations assuming  = 8.59.


have reduced projected welfare losses when the change in spatial correlation is incorporated. For the
few economies with increased productivity under climate change, the differences across projections
are close to zero.


6         Conclusion
This paper studies how the spatial structure of the global productivity distribution shapes the
distribution of welfare across countries. In particular, we use a standard trade model with distance-
related trade costs to show that, holding the unconditional moments of the productivity distribution
fixed, greater spatial correlation of productivity can increase welfare inequality. The increase in
spatial correlation causes high-productivity locations to enjoy larger gains from trade than they
would if productivity were spatially uncorrelated. In settings in which welfare differences are
arbitraged away by mobile factors of production, greater spatial correlation of productivity would
make population density, rather than welfare per capita, more unequal across locations.34
    34
         Appendix A.5 proves that this is the case for a symmetric geography with four locations.



                                                                                    39
   To empirically investigate this relationship, we exploit a global natural experiment that is well-
suited for identifying the economic consequences of a change in the spatial structure of productivity.
Specifically, we use the El Niño-Southern Oscillation, a naturally occurring global climatic phe-
nomenon, which exogenously alters the annual spatial correlation of cereal productivity around the
planet. We examine how the spatial correlation of cereal productivity governs the response of the
domestic share of expenditure, a sufficient statistic for the gains from trade in a broad class of trade
models, to local productivity. Using data from the past five decades of cereal trade, we find that
high-productivity countries enjoy larger gains from trade when cereal productivity is more spatially
correlated, as predicted. More broadly, our empirical approach advances the use of causal-inference
techniques to validate general-equilibrium predictions.
   In our application, we demonstrate that incorporating changes in the spatial correlation of
productivities substantially alters predictions about global welfare inequality when forecasting the
consequences of anthropogenic climate change. This interplay between the spatial structure of
productivity and welfare inequality is potentially important in many other domains. Many deter-
minants of productivity – such as demographics, political institutions, and natural endowments
– tend to exhibit substantial spatial correlation. For natural endowments in particular, spatial
correlation may change following the relocation of existing endowments (e.g., migrating wildlife
stocks), the discovery of new uses for them (e.g., solar and wind availability), or the discovery of
new endowments (e.g., fossil fuel deposits). This paper provides a framework for analyzing the
welfare consequences of such widespread productivity changes.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Jaume Ventura. 2002. “The World Income Distribution.” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 117(2): 659–694.

Agcaoili-Sombilla, Mercedita C, and Mark W Rosegrant. 1994. “International trade in a differenti-
  ated good: Trade elasticities in the world rice market.” Agricultural Economics, 10(3): 257–267.

Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis. 2014. “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy.” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1085–1140.

Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Yuta Takahashi. 2017. “Universal Gravity.”

Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
  Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 170–192.

Anderson, T. W., and Herman Rubin. 1949. “Estimation of the Parameters of a Single Equation in a
  Complete System of Stochastic Equations.” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 20(1): 46–63.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiri-
  cist’s Companion. Princeton University Press.


                                                  40
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare. 2012. “New Trade Models, Same
  Old Gains?” American Economic Review, 102(1): 94–130.

Auffhammer, Maximilian. 2018. “Quantifying Economic Damages from Climate Change.” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 32(4): 33–52.

Barro, Robert J. 1991. “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries.” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 106(2): 407–443.

Bekker, Paul A. 1994. “Alternative Approximations to the Distributions of Instrumental Variable
  Estimators.” Econometrica, 62(3): 657–681.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1958. “Immiserizing Growth: A Geometrical Note.” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 25(3): 201–205.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
  American South.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 73–117.

Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker. 1995. “Problems with Instrumental Variables
  Estimation When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogeneous Explanatory
  Variable is Weak.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90(430): 443–450.

Brock, William, Gustav Engström, and Anastasios Xepapadeas. 2014. “Spatial climate-economic
  models in the design of optimal climate policies across locations.” European Economic Review,
  69: 78 – 103.

Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. 2015. “Global non-linear effect of tem-
  perature on economic production.” Nature, 527(7577): 235–239.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2015. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
  NAFTA.” The Review of Economic Studies, 82(1): 1–44.

Cane, Mark A., and Stephen E. Zebiak. 1985. “A Theory for El Niño and the Southern Oscillation.”
  Science, 228(4703): 1085–1087.

Chen, Dake, Mark A. Cane, Alexey Kaplan, Stephen E. Zebiak, and Daji Huang. 2004. “Pre-
  dictability of El Nino over the past 148 years.” Nature, 428(6984): 733—736.

Chiang, John C.H., and Adam H. Sobel. 2002. “Tropical Tropospheric Temperature Variations
  Caused by ENSO and Their Influence on the Remote Tropical Climate.” Journal of Climate,
  15(18): 2616–2631.

Costinot, Arnaud, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare. 2014. “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying
  the Consequences of Globalization.” Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, Chapter 4,
  197–261. Elsevier.


                                               41
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith. 2016. “Evolving Comparative Advantage and
  the Impact of Climate Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from 1.7 Million Fields around
  the World.” Journal of Political Economy, 124(1): 205–248.

Cragg, John G., and Stephen G. Donald. 1993. “Testing Identifiability and Specification in Instru-
  mental Variable Models.” Econometric Theory, 9(2): 222–240.

Debaere, Peter, and Hongshik Lee. 2003. “The Real-Side Determinants of Countries’ Terms of
  Trade.” mimeo.

Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. “Temperature Shocks and Eco-
  nomic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century.” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 4(3): 66–95.

Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2014. “What Do We Learn from the
  Weather? The New Climate-Economy Literature.” Journal of Economic Literature, 52(3): 740–
  98.

Deschênes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2007. “The Economic Impacts of Climate Change:
  Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather.” American Economic
  Review, 97(1): 354–385.

Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2015. “On the spatial economic impact of global
  warming.” Journal of Urban Economics, 88: 16 – 37.

Disdier, Anne-Célia, and Keith Head. 2008. “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on
  Bilateral Trade.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1): 37–48.

Dixit, Avinash, and Victor Norman. 1980. Theory of international trade: A dual, general equilib-
  rium approach. Cambridge University Press.

Donaldson, Dave. 2015. “The Gains from Market Integration.” Annual Review of Economics,
  7(1): 619–647.

Driscoll, John C., and Aart C. Kraay. 1998. “Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Spa-
  tially Dependent Panel Data.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(4): 549–560.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. 2003. “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence
  Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1): 3–39.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econometrica,
  70(5): 1741–1779.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer. 2015. “The Next Generation of the
  Penn World Table.” American Economic Review, 105(10): 3150–82.


                                               42
Fuchs-Schündeln, Nicola, and Tarek A. Hassan. 2016. “Natural Experiments in Macroeconomics.”
  In . Vol. 2 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, , ed. John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, 923 – 1012.
  Elsevier.

Gallup, John Luke, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Andrew D. Mellinger. 1999. “Geography and Economic
  Development.” International Regional Science Review, 22(2): 179–232.

Hansen, Christian, Jerry Hausman, and Whitney Newey. 2008. “Estimation With Many Instru-
  mental Variables.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 26(4): 398–422.

Harrell, Frank. 2001. Regression Modeling Strategies: With Applications to Linear Models, Logistic
  Regression, and Survival Analysis. Springer.

Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2004. “The Empirics of Agglomeration and Trade.” , ed. J. V.
  Henderson and J. F. Thisse Vol. 4 of Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Chapter 59,
  2609–2669. Elsevier.

Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2014. “Gravity Equations: Workhorse,Toolkit, and Cookbook.”
  Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, Chapter 3, 131–195. Elsevier.

Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. “Nature versus Nurture: The Environment’s Persistent Influence through
  the Modernization of American Agriculture.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceed-
  ings, 102(3): 245–249.

Hsiang, Solomon. 2016. “Climate Econometrics.” Annual Review of Resource Economics, 8(1): 43–
  75.

Hsiang, Solomon M., and Kyle C. Meng. 2015. “Tropical Economics.” American Economic Review:
  Papers and Proceedings, 105(5): 257–61.

Hsiang, Solomon M, Kyle C Meng, and Mark A Cane. 2011. “Civil conflicts are associated with
  the global climate.” Nature, 476(7361): 438–441.

Hsiang, Solomon M., Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel. 2013. “Quantifying the Influence of
  Climate on Human Conflict.” Science, 341(6151).

Jameson, G. J. O. 2006. “Counting Zeros of Generalised Polynomials: Descartes’ Rule of Signs and
  Laguerre’s Extensions.” The Mathematical Gazette, 90(518): 223–234.

Johnson, Paul, and Chris Papageorgiou. 2018. “What Remains of Cross-Country Convergence?”
  University Library of Munich, Germany MPRA Paper 89355.

Kaplan, A., M. Cane, Y. Kushnir, A. Clement, M. Blumenthal, and B. Rajagopalan. 1998. “Analy-
  ses of global sea surface temperature 1856-1991.” Journal of Geophysical Research, 103: 18,567–
  18,589.


                                                 43
Kleibergen, Frank, and Richard Paap. 2006. “Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular
  value decomposition.” Journal of Econometrics, 133(1): 97 – 126.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, Emmanuel Saez, and Jae Song. 2010. “Earnings inequality and mobility in
  the United States: evidence from social security data since 1937.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(1): 91–128.

Krugman, Paul. 1980. “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade.” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 70(5): 950–59.

Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith. 2016. “Climate Change around the World.” mimeo.

Legates, D. R., and C. J. Willmott. 1990a. “Mean Seasonal and Spatial Variability Global Surface
  Air Temperature.” Theoretical and Applied Climatology, 41: 11–21.

Legates, D. R., and C. J. Willmott. 1990b. “Mean Seasonal and Spatial Variability in Gauge-
  Corrected, Global Precipitation.” International Journal of Climatology, 10: 111–127.

Lind, Nelson, and Natalia Ramondo. 2018. “Trade with Correlation.” National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 24380.

Mariano, Roberto S. 2001. “Simultaneous Equation Model Estimators: Statistical Properties and
  Practical implications.” A Companion to Theoretical Econometrics, , ed. B. Baltagi, 122–143.
  Blackwell: Oxford, UK.

Monte, Ferdinando, Stephen J. Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2018. “Commuting, Migra-
  tion, and Local Employment Elasticities.” American Economic Review, 108(12): 3855–90.

Moore, Frances C., and David B. Lobell. 2015. “The fingerprint of climate trends on European crop
  yields.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(9): 2670–2675.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2018. “Identification in Macroeconomics.” The Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 32(3): 59–86.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West. 1987. “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedas-
  ticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica, 55(3): 703–708.

Nordhaus, William D. 2006. “Geography and macroeconomics: New data and new findings.” Pro-
  ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103(10): 3510–3517.

Nunn, Nathan, and Diego Puga. 2012. “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa.”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1): 20–36.

Ramankutty, Navin, Amato T. Evan, Chad Monfreda, and Jonathan A. Foley. 2008. “Farming
  the planet: 1. Geographic distribution of global agricultural lands in the year 2000.” Global
  Biogeochemical Cycles, 22.

                                                44
Redding, Stephen, and Anthony J. Venables. 2004. “Economic geography and international inequal-
  ity.” Journal of International Economics, 62(1): 53–82.

Roberts, Michael J., and Wolfram Schlenker. 2013. “Identifying Supply and Demand Elasticities
  of Agricultural Commodities: Implications for the US Ethanol Mandate.” American Economic
  Review, 103(6): 2265–95.

Ropelewski, C. F., and M. S. Halpert. 1987. “Global and Regional Scale Precipitation Patterns
  Associated with the El Niño/Southern Oscillation.” Monthly Weather Review, 115(8): 1606–1626.

Sachs, Jeffrey D, and Andrew M Warner. 1997. “Fundamental Sources of Long-Run Growth.”
  American Economic Review, 87(2): 184–188.

Sarachik, Edward S., and Mark A. Cane. 2010. The El Niño-Southern Oscillation Phenomenon.
  Cambridge University Press.

Schlenker, Wolfram, and David B Lobell. 2010. “Robust negative impacts of climate change on
  African agriculture.” Environmental Research Letters, 5(1): 014010.

Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe
  damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change.” Proceedings from the National Academy of
  Science, 106(37): 15594–8.

Shrader, Jeffrey. 2017. “Expectations and adaptation to environmental risks.” mimeo.

Stock, James, and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression.”
  Identification and Inference for Econometric Models, , ed. Donald W.K. Andrews, 80–108. New
  York:Cambridge University Press.

Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, L.V. Alexander, S.K. Allen, N.L. Bindoff, F.-M. Bréon,
  J.A. Church, U. Cubasch, S. Emori, P. Forster, P. Friedlingstein, N. Gillett, J.M. Gregory, D.L.
  Hartmann, E. Jansen, B. Kirtman, R. Knutti, K. Krishna Kumar, P. Lemke, J. Marotzke, V.
  Masson-Delmotte, G.A. Meehl, I.I. Mokhov, S. Piao, V. Ramaswamy, D. Randall, M. Rhein,
  M. Rojas, C. Sabine, D. Shindell, L.D. Talley, D.G. Vaughan, and S.-P. Xie. 2013. “Technical
  Summary.” Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group
  I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, , ed. T.F.
  Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V.
  Bex and P.M. Midgley, Chapter TS, 33–115. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
  USA:Cambridge University Press.

Taylor, Karl E., Ronald J. Stouffer, and Gerald A. Meehl. 2012. “An Overview of CMIP5 and the
  Experiment Design.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 93(4): 485–498.

Tobler, Waldo R. 1970. “A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region.” Eco-
  nomic geography, 46(sup1): 234–240.

                                               45
Welch, Jarrod R., Jeffrey R. Vincent, Maximilian Auffhammer, Piedad F. Moya, Achim Dober-
  mann, and David Dawe. 2010. “Rice yields in tropical/subtropical Asia exhibit large but opposing
  sensitivities to minimum and maximum temperatures.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 107(33): 14562–14567.

Williams, Jeffrey C, and Brian D Wright. 2005. Storage and Commodity Markets. Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press.




                                               46
                         Appendix – For Online Publication

A      Theory appendix
A.1     General economic environment
This appendix section provides details of perfect-competition results presented in Section 2 and
extends them to the Krugman (1980) model of monopolistic competition.

A.1.1        Perfect-competition microfoundations

Production function. In the Armington model, each country i produces a distinct variety using
a linear production technology such that one unit of labor yields Ai units of output. Under perfect
                                                                                P                       1/(1−σ)
                                                                                   N                 1−σ
competition, its price is wi /Ai and thus the Dixit-Stigliz price index is Pj =    i=1 (w τ
                                                                                         i ij /A i )              .
In the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model, there is a continuum of varieties, and each country’s effi-
ciency in producing them follows a Fréchet distribution with location parameter Ti and dispersion
parameter ϑ.
    Gravity equation. Written in terms of expenditure shares, the gravity equation is

                                                 χi (τij wi )−
                                         λij = PN               −
                                                                   .
                                                l=1 χl (τlj wl )

In the Armington model,  = σ − 1 and χi = Ai . In the Eaton-Kortum model without intermediate
inputs,  = ϑ and χi = Ti . Thus, the equilibrium trade flows associated with a productivity
distribution {Ai }i and trade elasticity  in the Armington model are equal to the equilibrium
trade flows for an Eaton-Kortum model in which efficiency distributions have location parameters
Ti = Ai .
    Welfare. Equation (2) is an immediate consequence of the main result in Arkolakis, Costinot
and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012). They show that, in a broad class of models, the gains from trade
relative to autarky are equal to − 1 ln λii . In our theoretical environment, autarky welfare is equal
to ln Ai + γ, as implied by equation (2). γ is a function of structural parameters. In the Arm-
ington model with symmetric preferences, γ is zero. In the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model,
              1/(1−σ)
γ = Γ 1 + 1−σ
    
            θ           where Γ is the gamma function.

A.1.2        Krugman (1980) microfoundations

We now discuss the case of monopolistic competition with homogeneous firms, in which the measure
of varieties available in equilibrium is endogenously determined. Consider a many-country version of
the Krugman (1980) model in which fixed costs fj and marginal costs cj may vary across countries.
Denote the equilibrium number of homogeneous firms producing in country j by nj .
    Gravity equation. In the free-entry equilibrium,  = σ − 1, ni = Li / (σfi ), and χi = ni c−
                                                                                               i .




                                                     47
    Welfare. In this setting, real per capita consumption is
                                                                                        
                                          1                                      σ−1              1
                            ln (Ci /Li ) = ln ni − ln ci + ln                                 −     ln λii
                                                                                 σ               

If population size Li and fixed costs fi are country-invariant (ni = n ∀j) and we interpret
productivity as shifting marginal costs, Ai = c−1
                                               i , then this is equivalent to equation (2) with
    1            σ−1
                     
γ =  ln n + ln σ . If population size Li and marginal costs ci are country-invariant and we
                                                                          −1/
interpret productivity as shifting fixed costs, Ai = fi                          , then this is equivalent to equation (2)
with γ = 1 ln (L/σ) + ln σ−1
                              
                           σc .
    In the case of countries with heterogeneous population sizes, equation (2) must be extended to
replace γ with a location-specific γi that depends on structural parameters other than productivity.
For example, if productivity shifts marginal costs, Ai = c−1
                                                          i , then we obtain
                                                          
                                                      Ci                         1
                                             ln                = ln Ai + γi −      ln λii ,                           (20 )
                                                      Li                         

               1                σ−1
                                          . If we assume that cov(ln Aui , γi ) = cov(ln Aci , γi ), we obtain an
                                      
where γi =        ln ni + ln    σ
extension of equation (4):

                                                      2
             var (ln Cic /Li ) − var (ln Ciu /Li ) = − [cov (ln Aci , ln λcii ) − cov (ln Aui , ln λuii )]
                                                      
                                                      2
                                                     − [cov (γi , ln λcii ) − cov (γi , ln λuii )]
                                                       
                                                       1
                                                     + 2 [var (ln λcii ) − var (ln λuii )] .                          (40 )
                                                      

A.1.3     The case of symmetric trade costs

Starting from the equilibrium system of equations and using the assumption of symmetric trade
costs (τij = τji ):

                                              X  wi −                 wj Lj
                                                                                     
                                                                                         wi
                                                                                              −
                           Yi = wi Li =                            τij−         =                  Ωi
                                                           Ai             Φj             Ai
                                                  j
                                               1
                                  wi     Ωi     +1
                                ⇒    =
                                  Ai    Ai L i
                                                − X
                                           − wj                                 
                                       X
                                                                −
                                ⇒ Φi =   τji           =       τji (Aj Lj /Ωj ) +1
                                                 Aj
                                       j                     j
                                       X                   
                                           −
                                     =   τji (Aj Lj /Φj ) +1
                                                  j


The last equality exploits the fact that we can normalize incomes such that Φi = Ωi when trade
is balanced and τij− is symmetric, as established in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) and Head
and Mayer (2014).


                                                                    48
                           (wi /Ai )−
    Combining λii =             Φi     ,   the above expression for wi /Ai , and the assumption of symmetric
trade costs yields the result that
                                                           −
                                          (Ωi /(Ai Li )) +1                − 2+1
                                    λii =                    = (Ai Li ) +1 Φi +1 .
                                                 Φi
                                                                                              1+2
Thus, in the case in which Li = L ∀i, var(ln λii ) =                +1 cov(ln Ai , ln λii ) − 1+ cov(ln Φi , ln λii ).
Comparing these outcomes for productivity               distributions Ac and Au in the case in which Li = L ∀i,

                                                    h                                                 i
                var(ln λcii ) − var(ln λuii ) =        cov(ln Aci , ln λcii ) − cov(ln Aui , ln λuii )
                                                  +1
                                                    1 + 2 h                                               i
                                                  −         cov(ln Φci , ln λcii ) − cov(ln Φui , ln λuii ) .
                                                    1+

Heuristically, the latter term is of smaller magnitude, since Φi is a price-index term that is a
weighted sum of all other countries’ prices. Thus, var (ln λcii ) − var (ln λuii ) is the same order of
magnitude as cov (ln Aci , ln λcii ) − cov (ln Aui , ln λuii ).

A.2     Spatial correlation and the covariance of productivity and gains from trade
This appendix section contains the derivation of the local approximations discussed in Section 2.2.1,
the proof of the four-country case presented in Section 2.2.2, and details the construction and
parameterization of the illustrative examples presented in Section 2.2.

A.2.1     A local approximation

This section derives the local approximations discussed in Section 2.2.1.

Partial-equilibrium case

Using the facts that ln λii =  ln Ai −  ln wi − ln Φi and dcov(yi , xi ) = cov(dyi , xi ) + cov(yi , dxi ), we
can derive the following

dcov(ln λii , ln Ai ) = dcov(ln Ai , ln Ai ) − dcov(ln wi , ln Ai ) − dcov(ln Φi , ln Ai )
                      = dvar(ln Ai ) − cov(d ln wi , ln Ai ) − cov(ln wi , d ln Ai ) − cov(d ln Φi , ln Ai ) − cov(ln Φi , d ln Ai )
                      =  dvar(ln Ai ) − cov(d ln wi , ln Ai ) − cov(d ln Φi , ln Ai ) − cov( ln wi + ln Φi , d ln Ai ),
                          |   {z    }     |       {z         } |          {z         } |               {z              }
                                 =0                 =0 by P.E.              ≈dI by P.E.                =cov(ln λii ,d ln Ai )


which yields equation (5). The first two terms are zero by the assumptions of unchanged variance
and partial equilibrium, respectively. The fourth term is equivalent to cov(ln λii , d ln Ai ) because
ln λii =  ln Ai −  ln wi − ln Φi and dvar(ln Ai ) = 2cov(ln Ai , d ln Ai ) = 0. We proceed to show why
the third term is related to the change in Moran’s I, dI.
    Starting from the definition of Moran’s I for productivity, we can write changes in Moran’s I



                                                             49
as a covariance of ln Ai and a weighted sum of d ln Aj .

       N                   1           XX                                  
  I≡P P                             2        ωij ln Ai − ln A ln Aj − ln A
         j6=i ωij
                  P
       i             ` ln A` − ln A    i j6=i
     |              {z               }
                    ≡Ω
       XX                                                    
dI = Ω        ωij d ln Ai ln Aj − ln A + ln Ai − ln A d ln Aj                                                      by dvar(ln A) = 0
           i       j6=i
           XX                                 
    = 2Ω                      ωij ln Aj − ln A d ln Ai                                                              by ωij = ωji ∀i, j
               i    j6=i
                                                
                       X
    = 2Ωcov                   ωji d ln Aj , ln Ai                                                                     by ωii = 0 ∀i
                          j


The third term in equation (5) evaluated at fixed wages is a covariance of ln Ai and a weighted sum
of d ln Aj .
                                                                   X
                                                                                 − −
                                                          Φi =              Aj τji wj
                                                                    j
                                                                                                  
                                                              1 X  − − 1                 1
                                                    d ln Φi =       Aj τji wj        dAj −    dwj
                                                              Φi                   Aj       wj
                                                                 j
                                                               X
                                                            =    λji (d ln Aj − d ln wj )
                                                                        j
                                                                                                      
                                                                                 X
                          cov(d ln Φ, ln Ai |d ln wi =0   ∀i )   = cov             λji d ln Aj , ln Ai 
                                                                                 j


As a result, this covariance is proportionate to the expression for dI above if ωji = λji . It is not
identical to the change in Moran’s I because ωii = 0 and while spatial weights are symmetric,
ωji = ωij , the initial equilibrium’s expenditures shares need not be.

General-equilibrium case with symmetric trade costs

Assume that τij = τji ∀i, j. Using the previously noted facts that (1) dcov(yi , xi ) = cov(dyi , xi ) +
                                                                                                   − 2+1
                                                                                                      +1
cov(yi , dxi ), and (2) symmetric trade costs imply λii = (Ai Li ) +1 Φi                                    , we obtain the following
expression for dcov(ln λii , ln Ai ):

dcov(ln λii , ln Ai ) = cov(d ln λii , ln Ai ) + cov(ln λii , d ln Ai )
                                                                       
                                                                        2 + 1
                      =         dvar(ln Ai ) − cov(d ln Li , ln Ai ) −          cov(d ln Φi , ln Ai ) + cov(ln λii , d ln Ai )
                        +1 |          {z     } |         {z          }    +1
                                               =0                           =0




                                                                        50
Section A.1.3 showed that when τij = τji ∀i, j, we can characterize equilibria in terms of {Φi }i and
exogenous variables. We therefore obtain an expression for d ln Φi .
                               X                         X                        
                                        −  −                −
                        Φi =           τji Aj wj =            τji (Aj Lj /Φj ) +1
                                   j                      j
                                                                                
                              1            −
                                                X               1        1
                    d ln Φi =             τji (Aj Lj /Φj ) +1      dAj −    dΦj
                              Φi  + 1                           Aj       Φj
                                       j
                                 X
                            =          λji (d ln Aj − d ln Φj )                                               (A.1)
                              +1
                                            j


   To establish the connection between cov(d ln Φi , ln Ai ) and the change in Moran’s I, we switch
to matrix notation. Define the following matrices:
                             
                      ln Ã ≡ ln Ai − ln A           i
                                                                                n-element vector
                    d ln A ≡ {d ln Ai }i                                        n-element vector
                       W ≡ {ωij }i,j                                              n-by-n matrix

Using these matrices, we can write the change in Moran’s I as
                             XX
                                           ωij ln Aj − ln A d ln Ai = 2Ω · ln Ã0 Wd ln A.
                                                           
                   dI = 2Ω
                               i       j

                                                                
If we define B as the matrix whose ij element is               +1 λji ,   then equation (A.1) can be written as

                                                d ln Φ = B (d ln A − d ln Φ)
                                           ⇒ d ln Φ = (I + B)−1 Bd ln A,

where the inverse exists because I + B is diagonal-dominant. As a result

                                                         1 h                         i
                          cov(ln Ai , d ln Φi ) =            ln Ã0 (I + B)−1 Bd ln A .
                                                         N

This covariance would be proportionate to the change in the Moran’s I spatial-correlation statistic
for {ln Ai }i if we were to use the spatial weight matrix W = (I + B)−1 B = ∞             n+1 n
                                                                               P
                                                                                 n=1 (−1)      B .
That is, if the spatial weights were equal to the infinite sum of expenditure-share interactions that
summarize the entire trading network, the change in Moran’s I would capture cov(d ln Φi , ln Ai ).
The first term in this infinite sum, B, is the “direct effect” in which productivity changes are
simply weighted by their expenditure share. Since the gravity equation relates expenditure shares
to bilateral distances, we thus expect the change in spatial correlation to affect dcov(ln λii , ln Ai ).

A.2.2    Four-country case

The proof of Proposition 1 follows.


                                                              51
Ac is more spatially correlated than Au

Proof. Recall that Moran’s I is given by
                                                          P                    P                     
                                     N                      i     ln Ai − ln A     j ωij ln Aj − ln A
                     I(ln A, W ) = P P                                                    2            ,
                                                    ωij                 P
                                           i    j                          i ln Ai − ln A

where ωij are spatial weights. Define the spatial weight matrix
                                                                                     
                                                         ω0          ω1 ω2 ω1
                                                                             
                                                        ω1          ω0 ω1 ω2 
                                               {ωij } = 
                                                        ω
                                                                              .
                                                         2          ω1 ω0 ω1 
                                                                              
                                                         ω1          ω2 ω1 ω0

Thus, there is a one-to-one mapping between ωij and τij . ω1 is the spatial weight associated with
trade cost d1 ; ω2 is the spatial weight associated with trade cost d2 .
                                                                             1
    The average log productivity is given by ln A =              ln ã. For the correlated state, ln Ac =
                                                                             2
                                                                          [
(ln ã, ln ã, 0, 0), so the demeaned log productivity vector is equal to ln Ac = ( 1 ln ã, 1 ln ã, − 1 ln ã, − 1 ln ã).
                                                                                                          2      2   2   2
For the uncorrelated state, ln Au = (ln ã, 0, ln ã, 0) and ln
                                                              [ Au = ( 12 ln ã, − 21 ln ã, 12 ln ã, − 12 ln ã).
    ln Ac is more spatially correlated than ln Au if and only if I(ln Ac , W ) > I(ln Au , W ) ⇐⇒
    [c            [c          [u           [u
P         P               P        P
  i ln Ai   j ωij ln Aj >  i ln Ai  j ωij ln Aj .
    The relevant terms are as follows:
                                                        (
                                                              1
                                   X
                                                              2   (ω0 − ω2 ) ln ã        for i = 1, 2
                                           [
                                       ωij ln Acj   =
                                   j
                                                            − 12   (ω0 − ω2 ) ln ã        for i = 3, 4
                    X              X
                          [
                          ln Aci           [
                                       ωij ln Acj = (ω0 − ω2 ) (ln ã)2
                      i            j
                                                        (
                                                              1
                                   X
                                                              2   (ω0 − 2ω1 + ω2 ) ln ã         for i = 1, 3
                                            [
                                       ωij ln Auj =
                                   j
                                                            − 12   (ω0 − 2ω1 + ω2 ) ln ã         for i = 2, 4
                    X              X
                           [
                          ln Aui            [
                                       ωij ln Auj = (ω0 − 2ω1 + ω2 ) (ln ã)2
                      i            j


I(ln Ac , W ) > I(ln Au , W ) ⇐⇒ ω0 − ω2 > ω0 − 2ω1 + ω2 ⇐⇒ ω1 > ω2 .

Equilibrium for the correlated state: Ac = (ã, ã, 1, 1)

By symmetry, the equilibrium incomes and market access of countries 1 and 2 are identical, Y1 = Y2
and Φ1 = Φ2 . Similarly, countries 3 and 4 have identical outcomes: Y3 = Y4 and Φ3 = Φ4 . As
                                                  PN
a result, the equilibrium incomes that solve Yi =   j=1 λij Yj can without loss of generality be
characterized by the scalar x ≡ Y1 /Y4 , the relative income levels.

                                                                                              λ13 + λ14
                          Y1 = λ11 Y1 + λ12 Y2 + λ13 Y3 + λ14 Y4 ⇒ x =
                                                                                            1 − λ11 − λ12


                                                                    52
       Equilibrium expenditure shares can be expressed as λij = Ai Yi− τij− /Φj . Thus λij A−  
                                                                                               i Yi =
τij− /Φj and
                                                       −        −
                                                     τ13  /Φ3 + τ14 /Φ4
                                           x=     −       −        −     .
                                                ã Y1 − τ11 /Φ1 − τ12    /Φ2
Using the facts that Φ1 = Φ2 = Y1− ã (1 + d−      − −   −                  −  −
                                              1 ) + Y3 (d2 + d1 ) and Φ3 = Φ4 = Y1 ã (d2 +
d−      −     −
 1 ) + Y3 (1 + d1 ), it can be shown that the equilibrium value of x is the solution to the equation

                                              d−   −
                                               2 + d1
                                    x2+1 +               +1
                                                               − x − ã2 = 0.
                                                                   
                                                   − ã x                                              (A.2)
                                               1+d
                                              | {z 1 }
                                                  ≡rc


Equilibrium for the uncorrelated state: Au = (ã, 1, ã, 1)

Analogous to the correlated state, this case can be solved by exploiting the facts that countries
1 and 3 have identical outcomes, Y1 = Y3 and Φ1 = Φ3 , and countries 2 and 4 have identical
outcomes: Y2 = Y4 and Φ2 = Φ4 . The equation that characterizes equilibrium relative income x is

                                              d−   −
                                               1 + d1
                                    x2+1 +               +1
                                                               − x − ã2 = 0.
                                                                   
                                                   − ã x                                              (A.3)
                                               1+d
                                              | {z 2 }
                                                  ≡ru


Note that 0 < rc < ru < 1 since d21 > d2 > d1 > 0.

Comparing equilibria

Equations (A.2) and (A.3) show that relative income in each equilibrium is given by the zeros of
the following generalized polynomial

                                      R(x; r) = x2+1 + rã x+1 − x − ã2
                                                                      


when r > 0 is evaluated at rc and ru , respectively. By Descartes’ rule of signs, R(x; r) has exactly
one real positive zero (for a given value of r) (Jameson, 2006).35 Denote this zero of R(x; r) by
x∗ (r).
       We prove that x∗ (r) is decreasing by contradiction. Let r1 < r2 and denote by x∗1 and x∗2
their respective unique positive zeros. Suppose that x∗1 < x∗2 . Consider the function F (x) =
R(x; r2 ) − R(x; r1 ) = (r2 − r1 )ã x (x − 1). It is evident that F (0) = F (1) = 0, F (x) < 0 ∀x ∈ (0, 1),
and F (x) > 0 ∀x > 1. When evaluated at x∗1 , F (x∗1 ) = R(x∗1 ; r2 ) − R(x∗1 ; r1 ) = R(x∗1 ; r2 ), since x∗1
is a zero of R(x; r1 ).
       Note that R(x; r) is continuous in x and that R(0; r) < 0. Therefore, R(x; r2 ) < 0 ∀x ∈ (0, x∗2 ).
Since x∗1 ∈ (0, x∗2 ) by assumption, F (x∗1 ) = R(x∗1 ; r2 ) < 0. Since F (x) > 0 ∀x > 1, we conclude that
x∗1 ∈ (0, 1). We also know that ∀x > x∗1 , R(x; r1 ) > 0 since R(x∗1 ; r1 ) = 0 and limx→+∞ R(x; r1 ) =
  35
       It also has either 0 or 2 negative zeros that are obviously not of interest.



                                                             53
+∞. Together, these results imply that R(1; r1 ) > 0. Yet, R(1; r1 ) = 1 − ã2 < 0 as ã > 1. Thus,
we have a contradiction. We conclude that r1 < r2 ⇒ x∗1 > x∗2 .
       Denote the equilibrium relative incomes by xc and xu . Since ru > rc , xu < xc . The ratio of
equilibrium incomes is greater in the correlated case. Since the countries are of equal size, the ratio
of equilibrium incomes x is also the more productive economy’s “double-factoral terms of trade”.
Thus, the more productive economies’ double-factoral terms of trade are greater in the correlated
case.

cov(ln Ai , ln λii ) is lower in the spatially correlated case

Proof. Equilibrium domestic shares of expenditure can be expressed as λii = Ai Yi− /Φi . For the
correlated state Ac , Φ1 = Φ2 = Y1− ã (1 + d−      − −   −                  −  −
                                               1 ) + Y3 (d2 + d1 ) and Φ3 = Φ4 = Y1 ã (d2 +
d−      −     −
 1 ) + Y3 (1 + d1 ), so

                                                                1                   1
             λc11 = λc22 = A1 Y1− /Φ1 =                                          =
                                            1+      d−
                                                    +1      ã− xc (d−
                                                                 +     2    d−
                                                                         (1 +1 )             d−
                                                                                     + ã− xc rc )
                                                                                              1 )(1
                                                          1                         1
             λc33 = λc44   = A3 Y3− /Φ3 =      −       −  −   −  =
                                            1 + d1 + ã xc (d2 + d1 )   (1 + d1 )(1 + ã x−
                                                                               −
                                                                                            c r )
                                                                                                 c


       For the uncorrelated state Au , Φ1 = Φ3 = Y1− ã (1 + d−       − −               −
                                                                2 ) + 2Y2 d1 and Φ2 = Φ4 = Y2 (1 +
d−       −  −
 2 ) + 2Y1 ã d1 , so

                                                         1                         1
                 λu11 = λu33 = A1 Y1− /Φ1 =                      − =
                                                1+      d−  −  
                                                        + 2ã xu d1
                                                         2
                                                                              −
                                                                        (1 + d2 )(1 + ã− xu ru )
                                                         1                         1
                 λu22 = λu44   = A2 Y2− /Φ2 =      −         − − =
                                                             
                                                1 + d2 + 2ã xu d1      (1 + d2 )(1 + ã x−
                                                                              −               u
                                                                                           u r )

       Thus, we obtain the following demeaned values of the log domestic shares of expenditure

                                  \
                                  ln λ11 = − 21 [ln (1 + x ã− r) − ln (1 + ã x− r)]
                                  \
                                  ln λ44 = −ln
                                            \    λ11

when evaluated at (rc , xc ) and (ru , xu ) for the two respective equilibria.
       The covariance of productivity and the domestic share of expenditure is therefore

                                                  −1
                                                     ln ã ln 1 + x ã− r − ln 1 + ã x− r
                                                                                             
                         cov(ln Ai , ln λii ) =
                                                  4

Recall that  and ã are fixed parameters while x is a function of r. This covariance is positive
because ã > x.36
  36
       ã > x because x is the largest positive zero of R(x; r), R(x0 ; r) < 0 ∀x0 ∈ (0, x), and R(ã; r) = (1+r)(ã−1)ã2 > 0.




                                                               54
       It can be shown that cov(ln Ai , ln λii ) is increasing in r.
                                                           
                                              1+x ã− r
        dcov(ln Ai , ln λii )      d ln       1+ã x− r
                                                                       
                                                                      ã    x  r                          dx
                              ∝−                                ∝        −       −    2 + x ã− + x− ã        >0
               dr                              dr                     x     ã     |x         {z            }  dr
                                                                                                              |{z}
                                                                    |    {z    }
                                                                           >0                    >0               <0


Since ru > rc , the covariance of productivity and the domestic share of expenditure is lower
for Ac than Au . Thus, the covariance of productivity and the equilibrium gains from trade,
cov(ln Ai , −1                           c      u
              ln λii ), is greater for A than A .




var(ln(Ci /L)) is greater in the spatially correlated case

Proof. In both equilibria,
                                                                                        2
                                                          42
                                                                 
                        2  \ 2 2  \ 2  \ 2                               1
         var(ln λii ) =    ln λ11 +   ln λ44 = ln λ11 =           cov(ln Ai , − ln λii ) .
                        4           4                   (ln ã)2               

Therefore

                                                      −1            1
           var(ln(Ci /L)) = var(Ai ) + 2cov(ln Ai ,      ln λii ) + 2 var(ln λii )
                                                                   
                                                                                                    2
                                                      −1               4                   1
                            = var(Ai ) + 2cov(ln Ai ,    ln λii ) +           cov(ln Ai , − ln λii )
                                                                   (ln ã)2               

This is increasing in cov(ln Ai , −1
                                    ln λii ) if and only if

                                                                                              1 + ã x− r
                                                                                                             
                          8                  1                       1
                    2+          cov(ln Ai , − ln λii ) > 0 ⇐⇒ ln ã > ln
                       (ln ã)2                                                             1 + x ã− r

This inequality is true. The triangle inequality for trade costs, d2 < d21 , implies that ru < 1. If
                          √                             √
r < 1 and  ≥ 1, then R( ã; r) ≤ 0.37 Thus, x∗ (r) ≥ ã ∀r ∈ (0, 1). That implies the following
inequality:
                                                                            2 
                            1 + ã x− r   ã x− (1 + r)                        ã 2
                                                                                        
                                                                            ã
                                          ≤                 =                   ≤ √       = ã
                            1 + x ã− r   x ã− (1 + r)                 x        ã
Thus, var(ln(Ci /L)) is increasing in cov(ln Ai , −1
                                                    ln λii ).


  37

                         √           2+1             +1     
                                                                            1             1
                                                                                                         
                       R( ã; r) = ã 2 + rã (ã 2 − ã 2 ) − ã2 = ã ã 2 + rã 2 (ã 2 − 1) − ã
                                       1             1
                                                                                  1
                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                 ≤ ã ã 2 + ã 2 (ã 2 − 1) − ã = −ã ã 2 − ã 2    1 + ã 2 ≤ 0




                                                                      55
E(ln(Ci /L)) is lower in the spatially correlated case

Proof. By equation (2), the difference in average welfare between the uncorrelated and correlated
states is
                                                             4                              4
                                                                                                                               !
                                                          1 X                         1     Y λcii
             E(ln(Ciu /L))    −   E(ln(Cic /L))        =−      [ln λuii − ln λcii ] =    ln                                        .
                                                          4                          4      λuii
                                                                    i=1                                               i=1

Due to the symmetry of the problem,           λc11     =   λc22 ,   λc33   =   λc44 ,   λu11   =    λu33   and     λu22   = λu44 . Consequently,

                                                                                                   λc11 λc44
                                                                                                              
                                                                                 1
                              E(ln(Ciu /L))        −     E(ln(Cic /L))         =    ln
                                                                                 2                λu11 λu44

   The following results were obtained in proving that cov(ln Ai , ln λii ) is lower in the spatially
correlated case:
                                                   xu  u                                                      xu − u
                            1 + d−                                             1 + d−
                                                                                                                  
                     λc11        2 1+               ã  r               λc44        2 1+                       ã   r
                          =                        xc  c                     =
                       u
                     λ11    1 + d−                                        u
                                                                         λ44    1 + d−                        xc − c
                                                                                                                   
                                 1 1+               ã   r                           1 1+                       ã   r

                   d−
                    1 +d2
                         −
                                           d−
                                            1 +d1
                                                 −
                                                                                         1+rc          1+d−
Recall that rc =       −
                    1+d1
                              and ru =         − .
                                            1+d2
                                                            It follows that              1+ru      =      2
                                                                                                       1+d−
                                                                                                                   and therefore
                                                                                                          1


                                                   xu  u                                                  xu − u
                                                                                                              
                      λc11   1 + rc 1 +             ã  r               λc44   1 + rc 1 +                  ã   r
                           =                       xc  c                     =                            xc − c
                      λu11   1 + ru 1 +                                  λu44   1 + ru 1 +
                                                                                                               
                                                    ã   r                                                  ã   r

   Combining the above expressions yields
                                                            2                          xu 
                                                                    1 + ru V                       + (ru )2
                                                                                           
                               λc11 λc44          1 + rc
                                             
                                                                                         ã  
                                         =                                              xc 
                               λu11 λu44          1 + ru            1 + rc V             ã        + (rc )2

where V (·) denotes the function V (x) = x + x−1 , which for x ∈ (0, 1) is greater than 2 and
decreasing. From proofs above, we know that 1 > ru > rc > 0 and ã > xc > xu > 1. Therefore
1 > (xc /ã) > (xu /ã) > 0 and V ((xu /ã) ) > V ((xc /ã) ) > 2. Now consider the ratio
                                                   
                                         x∗ (r)
                                    
                         1 + rV            ã            + r2               r
                                                                                          ∗  
                                                                                            x (r)
                                                                                                      
                Q(r) =                                          =1+                      V          −2 .
                                       (1 + r)2                            1+r                ã

                                 r u      r   c
Since ru > rc > 0, we have 1+r      u > 1+r c . Combining this result with the fact that
                           
V xãu       − 2 > V xãc       − 2 > 0 leads to Q(ru ) > Q(rc ). As a consequence:
                           


              λc11 λc44   Q(ru )                       λc11 λc44
                                                                   
                        =        > 1 ⇒ ln                               > 0 ⇒ E(ln(Ciu /L)) > E(ln(Cic /L))
              λu11 λu44   Q(rc )                       λu11 λu44




                                                                    56
A.2.3       Circular geography

Figures 4 and 5 present an illustrative example in which we parameterize Ai and τij on a circular
geography. As stated in the main text, N = 50,  = 1, and Li = 1 ∀i. Countries have locations
                       π
given by li =          N   (2i − 1 − N ) for i = 1, . . . , N . Productivity ln Ai has a mean value of 10 and
follows a sine wave with amplitude 1 and frequency θ.38 Bilateral trade costs are given by ln τij =
.8 ln(1 + kli − lj k), where kli − lj k is the distance between locations i and j on the circle. Moran’s
                                                       1
I is computed using spatial weight ωij =           1+kli −lj k   for i 6= j.
       Figures 4 and 5 depict demeaned distributions. Table A.1 reports the means and variances of
countries’ welfare per capita under autarky and trade.

                               Table A.1: Outcomes for one-sector sine-wave economy

       Frequency of ln A sine wave (θ)                                 1          2          3            4
       Autarky welfare (ln A) mean                                   10           10         10         10
       Autarky welfare (ln A) variance                            0.510204     0.510204   0.510204   0.510204
       Trading-equilbrium welfare (ln C/L) mean                   12.2654       12.2769    12.2807    12.2836
       Trading-equilbrium welfare (ln C/L) variance               0.298203     0.226274   0.203006   0.184882



       Figure 6 introduces heterogeneous sizes to the parameterization used in Figures 4 and 5. Size
ln Li is the sum of a sine wave with mean value 10, amplitude 1, and frequency θL = 1 and Gaussian
noise ∼ N (0, 1).
       Figure A.1 depicts the expenditure-productivity relationship in a circular geography with equal-
sized countries for three selected productivity vectors. These otherwise arbitrary productivity
distributions differ only in their spatial correlation. They were generated by shuffling a vector
ln A0 that was drawn from N (0, 1).

A.2.4       Randomly generated geography

In Figure A.2, we examine how the relationship between productivity and domestic share of ex-
penditure depends on the spatial correlation of productivity in a randomly generated geography.
We draw N = 50 locations’ coordinates on a plane lj ∈ R2 from a standard normal distribu-
tion. We generate bilateral, distance-related trade costs using ln τij = τ ln (1 + dij ), where distance
dij = kli − lj k is the Euclidean norm on R2 and τ is a positive scaling factor. Countries are of
equal size, Lj = 1 ∀j. The trade elasticity is  = 8.59. Moran’s I is computed using spatial weight
             1
ωij =    1+kli −lj k   for i 6= j.
       To construct M productivity distributions that have identical first and second moments and
different spatial covariances, we employ a procedure that makes use of the eigenvectors of a trans-
formation of the spatial weight matrix. Let I denote the identity matrix and consider J = ee| ,
  38
     The standard deviation of a sine wave is proportional to its amplitude and independent of its frequency. This is
true for both the function and our N -point discretization.


                                                           57
      Figure A.1: Circular geography with equal-sized countries and arbitrary productivities


                                0.8

                                0.6

                                0.4
            ln λii (demeaned)




                                0.2

                                0.0

                                -0.2

                                -0.4

                                -0.6

                                -0.8

                                -1.0


                                       -2.5   -2.0   -1.5     -1.0     -0.5      0.0      0.5     1.0      1.5   2.0
                                                                     ln Ai (demeaned)

                                                            I = 0.00           I = 0.09         I = 0.17
Notes: This figure depicts the λii -Ai relationship in an economy with a circular geography for three randomly
generated productivity distributions. Geography, equal-sized locations, and trade costs are the same as in Figure 4.



where e is the constant vector of ones. The object of interest is the matrix Π = CW C where C cor-
responds to the centering matrix: C = I − N1 J and W is our spatial weight matrix. It can be shown
                                                                  N           N
that the upper and lower bounds of Moran’s I are given by: λmax W  0
                                                                     and λmin W0
                                                                                 where λmax and
                                                                                 PN PN
λmin denote the largest and the smallest eigenvalues of Π respectively and W0 = i=1 j=1 Wij .
                                              N
More generally, Moran’s I will be equal to λi W0
                                                 when evaluated at the ith eigenvector. It can also
be shown that the non-constant eigenvectors of Π are centered and have identical second moments.
    With these eigenvectors in hand, we apply a translation Tc : v → v + c with c ∈ R2+ to the non-
constant eigenvectors of Π. We employ linear combinations of the strictly positive vectors produced
by this transformation to produce a set of M productivity distributions denoted (A1 , . . . , AM ). By
construction, these productivity distributions have identical first and second moments but vary in
their spatial covariance as measured by Moran’s I.

A.3     Multiple-sector case
This appendix section provides details of the multi-sector economic environment summarized in
Section 2.3.
    Preferences. Individuals in country i have preferences that are Cobb-Douglas over sectors
s = 1, . . . , S and constant elasticity of substitution (CES) within sectors. Thus, the relevant price




                                                                          58
                                                  Figure A.2: Random-geography economy




                              .9
                              .85
                    Elasticity lambda-A
                       .75    .7
                              .65 .8




                                          -.05                       0                         .05                            .1
                                                                     Moran's I, I(ln(A),distance)

Notes: This figure depicts how cov(ln λii , ln Ai ) varies with the spatial correlation of productivity, as measured by
Moran’s I, over a randomly generated geography. We vary the spatial distribution of productivity while holding the
first and second moments fixed. The elasticity of λii with respect to Ai is β̂t estimated from ln λiit = βt ln Ait + πiI +
πtT + it , as described in the text. See Appendix A.2.4 for parameterization details.



indices are
                                                  S
                                                  Y                          Z                              1/(1−σs )
                                           Pi =         Pisαis   and Pis =           pi (ωs )   1−σs
                                                                                                       dωs                ,
                                                  s=1                           ωs

where αis ≥ 0 are expenditure shares ( Ss=1 αis = 1) and σs are sectoral elasticities of substitution
                                      P

across varieties.
    Production. Productivity in country j in sector s is Ais .
    Trade costs. Selling one unit to j from i in sector s requires producing τijs ≥ 1 units, with
τiis = 1.
   Gravity equation. Denote sales from i to j in sector s by Xijs and j’s total expenditure by
Xj ≡ N
     P PS
       i=1  s=1 Xijs . Across sectors, Cobb-Douglas preferences cause optimizing consumers to
spend αjs of their total expenditure in sector s, Xjs = αjs Xj . Within each sector, CES preferences
result in the share of expenditure by j on goods from i in sector s taking the form of a gravity
equation:
                                                     Xijs     χis (τijs wi )−s      χis (τijs wi )−s
                                            λijs =        = PN                 −s
                                                                                   =                   .
                                                     Xjs     l=1 χls (τljs wl )
                                                                                           Φjs
    Equilibrium. In a competitive equilibrium, labor-market clearing, goods-market clearing, and
budget constraints are satisfied such that total income Yi = wi Li and sectoral income Yis = wi Lis
satisfy Yis = N
             P                 PS
               j=1 Xijs , Yi =   s=1 Yis , and Xis = αis Yi for all countries. The equilibrium system



                                                                             59
of equations is
                                                              N
                                                              X                S
                                                                               X
                                                    Yis =           λijs αjs           Yjs0 .
                                                              j=1              s0 =1

   In this environment, real consumption per capita is
                                                      S                             
                                           Ci           X                      1
                                  ln                =         αis ln Ais + γs − ln λiis .
                                           Li                                  s
                                                        s=1


The first two terms, Ss=1 αis (ln Ais + γs ), are per capita welfare in autarky, and the final term,
                        P

− Ss=1 αis
 P
          s
            ln λiis , summarizes the gains from trade.
   Dispersion in per capita welfare across countries thus depends on the exogenous variation in
productivities Ais and the endogenous variation in domestic shares of expenditure λiis . For the sake
of expositional brevity, assume that expenditures shares are common across countries, αis = αs ∀i
In that case, the variance of per capita welfare is

                S                  S                 S XS
                        !                   !
       Ci       X                  X αis             X    αs αs0
var ln    = var   αis ln Ais + var       ln λiis − 2             cov (ln Ais , ln λiis0 )
       Li                            s                0
                                                           s 0
                                s=1                                  s=1                        s=1 s =1

   To examine the role of spatial correlation, consider two productivity distributions – a correlated
state c and an uncorrelated state u. Assume    that 
                                                      unconditional variance
                                                                             of the productivity
                               PS            c
                                                        PS           u
distributions is the same, var   s=1 αis ln Ais = var    s=1 αis ln Ais . The difference in welfare
dispersion then depends on the covariance of productivities and domestic shares of expenditure,
both within and across sectors, and between domestic shares of expenditure.


                                                       S XS
                                                       X    αs αs0 n                                                        o
var (ln (Cic /Li ))   −   var (ln (Ciu /Li ))       =2              cov (ln Auis , ln λuiis0 ) − cov (ln Acis , ln λciis0 )
                                                         0
                                                             s 0
                                                            s=1 s =1
                                                             S X  S
                                                            X           αs αs0 n                                                          o
                                                        −                       cov (ln λuiis , ln λuiis0 ) − cov (ln λciis , ln λciis0 )
                                                                        s s 0
                                                            s=1 s0 =1
                                                                                                                                       (A.4)

                                                                                                                              αs αs0
   Just as in the single-sector case, for typical values of the sectoral trade elasticities, 2                                 s0     is an
                                           αs αs0
order of magnitude larger than             s s0 .     Thus, the difference in welfare dispersion is governed by the
cov (ln Ais , ln λiis0 ) terms, provided that the block of cov (ln Ais , ln λiis0 ) terms is the same order of
magnitude as the block of cov (ln λiis , ln λiis0 ) terms.
   Under what circumstances is studying differences in cov (ln Ais , ln λiis ) in one sector alone in-
formative about welfare dispersion? For simplicity, consider the two-sector case and three possible
relationships between the two sectors: perfectly correlated productivities, perfectly anti-correlated
productivities, and orthogonal productivities.
   In the perfectly correlated case, there is little scope for adjustment across sectors, and thus


                                                                        60
                      Table A.2: Outcomes for two-sector sine-wave economy

    Frequency of ln A1 sine wave (θ1 )                      1           2           3          4
    Autarky welfare ( 12 ln A1 + 21 ln A2 ) mean            10         10          10          10
    Autarky welfare ( 12 ln A1 + 21 ln A2 ) variance    0.255102    0.255102    0.255102   0.255102
    Trading-equilbrium welfare (ln C/L) mean             12.3610     12.3699     12.3721    12.3736
    Trading-equilbrium welfare (ln C/L) variance        0.114255    0.097649    0.092189   0.087935



outcomes are similar to those obtained in the one-sector environment. In fact, if all sectors have
perfectly correlated productivities (Ais ∝ Ai ∀s), perfectly correlated spatial linkages (τijs ∝ τij ∀s),
and equal trade elasticities (s =  ∀s), then expenditure shares are equal across sectors, λijs = λij ,
and the difference in welfare dispersion in equation (A.4) is exactly proportionate to the single-
sector expression in equation (4).
   If sectoral productivities are perfectly anti-correlated, then outcomes in one sector may be
exactly offset by outcomes in another, leaving welfare unchanged. That is, it is possible to construct
circumstances in which the sum of covariances of productivities and domestic shares of expenditure
within sectors is exactly the opposite of the sum of cross-sector covariances. Consider the two-sector
                                                  1
case with equal expenditure shares α1 = α2 =      2   ∀j and equal trade elasticities 1 = 2 = . If the
two sectors’ productivities are perfectly anti-correlated, such that ln Ai1 + ln Ai2 is a constant, then
                                    α α
it can be shown that Ss=1 Ss0 =1 s 0s0 cov (ln Ais , ln λiis0 ) = 0. Thus, our predictions about trade
                      P      P
                                       s
flows are valid, but the welfare consequences of these changes are fully offset by the non-agricultural
sector’s anti-correlated changes.
   What about the orthogonal case? Figure A.3 depicts a two-sector sine-wave economy with two
symmetric sectors that differ only in their sine-wave frequency. Table A.2 reports the means and
variances of countries’ welfare per capita under autarky and trade. Compared to Table A.1, the
variance of autarky welfare is lower because autarky welfare is the simple average of two sectors’ (or-
thogonal) productivities with the same mean and variance. The mean trading-equilibrium welfare
is higher (the gains from trade are larger) in the multi-sector case due to gains from specialization
according to comparative advantage. This additional margin of adjustment also dampens the de-
gree to which greater spatial correlation of productivity in one of the two sectors affects the variance
of welfare in the trading equilibrium, but our main prediction still holds in this multi-sector setting
with orthogonal productivities.

A.4    Spatial correlation of comparative advantage
This appendix section addresses how the spatial correlation of comparative advantage interacts
with the spatial correlation of absolute advantage.
   To consider the role of spatially correlated patterns of comparative advantage, we extend the
Eaton and Kortum (2002) model, in which comparative advantage is symmetric across countries, to


                                                   61
                                         Figure A.3: Two-sector sine-wave economy: cov(ln λii1 , ln Ai1 )


                                         0.6


                                         0.4


                                         0.2
                    ln λii1 (demeaned)


                                         0.0


                                         -0.2


                                         -0.4


                                         -0.6


                                         -0.8


                                         -1.0

                                                -1.0   -0.8    -0.6   -0.4      -0.2        0.0          0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8   1.0
                                                                                ln Ai1 (demeaned)

                                                         θ1 = 1         θ1 = 4
Notes: This figure depicts the λiis –Ais relationship for s = 1 in a two-sector economy in which sectoral productivity
follows a sine wave with frequency θs . The two series depicted are frequencies θ1 = 1 and θ1 = 4 for the first sector.
The second sector has frequency θ2 = 10 in both cases. The two sectors have identical trade costs τijs , expenditure
shares αi1 = αi2 = 12 , and trade elasticities 1 = 2 . The two lines are the line of best fit for each series. When
productivity is more spatially correlated (when θ1 is lower), cov(ln λii1 , ln Ai1 ) is lower. See Table A.2 in Appendix A.3
for details of this example.



have “continents” of countries with correlated relative productivities. The world economy consists
of N countries partitioned across k = 1, . . . , K continents. Country i belongs to continent k(i) and
its productivity in good ω is zi (ω). We depart from Eaton and Kortum (2002) by assuming that
the vector of productivities (Z1 , . . . , ZN ) is drawn from a multivariate nested Fréchet distribution:
                                                                                               ρk 
                                                                             K
                                                                           X    X             1     
                                                F (z1 , . . . , zn ) = exp −      (Ti zi−ϑ ) ρk      ,
                                                                                                    
                                                                                   k=1            i:k(i)=k


where the location parameter Ti governs the absolute advantage of country i and the dispersion pa-
rameter ϑ is common across countries. Parameters (ρ1 , . . . , ρk ) govern the degree of within-continent
correlation in productivities, which is decreasing in ρk . When ρk = 1 ∀k, these productivities are
independent, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002).
    After considerable algebraic manipulations, it can be shown that the gravity equation for this
generalized productivity distribution is
                                                                                                     1
                                                                          (Ti (wi τij )−ϑ ) ρk(i)                      Φk(i)j
                                                       λij =                                                     1            ,
                                                                                                               ρk(i)    Φj
                                                                               (Tm (wm τmj )−ϑ )
                                                                      P
                                                               m:k(m)=k(i)




                                                                                       62
                   Table A.3: Estimates of β1 and within-continent correlation 1 − ρ

                                             Within-continent correlation 1 − ρ
      K        0          0.1         0.2       0.3     0.4      0.5      0.6                      0.7     0.8      0.9
       2    -0.112      -0.111      -0.108      -0.101       -0.090    -0.073   -0.049        -0.022      0.002    0.014
       3    -0.112      -0.110      -0.106      -0.099       -0.088    -0.071   -0.048        -0.021      0.005    0.018
       4    -0.112      -0.108      -0.103      -0.094       -0.082    -0.064   -0.041        -0.013      0.013    0.029
  Notes: This table reports estimates of β1 obtained from the regression ln λiit = β0 ln Ait + β1 ln Ait It + πiI +
  πtT + µit on equilibrium outcomes from a simulated global economy with 50 countries as described in the text
                                                                                         1
  of Appendix A.4. Moran’s I is computed using spatial weight ωij =                  1+kli −lj k
                                                                                                   for i 6= j. The correlation
  parameter ρk = ρ ∀k, the dispersion parameter is ϑ = 8.28 (Eaton and Kortum, 2002), and the level parameter
  ln Ti follows a sine wave, as in Section 2.2.3, with θ = 1, . . . , 8. In the standard model, 1 − ρ = 0.


               P                                1    ρk              PK
where Φkj =                                 −ϑ ) ρk
                     i:k(i)=k (Ti (wi τij )                 and Φj =     k=1 Φkj .
   To study the interaction of the spatial correlation of comparative advantage and the spatial
correlation of absolute advantage, we simulate a world economy with a symmetric geography and
a sine-wave productivity distribution, as in Section 2.2.3. We divide the 50 countries into two,
three, or four continents with ρk = ρ ∀k. As we increase within-continent correlation in com-
parative advantage by lowering ρ from 1.0 to 0.1 in steps of size 0.1, we find that the effect of
spatial correlation in absolute advantage is initially dampened and then reversed. As reported in
Table A.3, for the highest values of 1 − ρ, the estimated β1 is positive. That is, for sufficiently high
within-continent correlation of comparative advantage, the cov(ln λii , ln Ai ) relationship depicted
in Figure 5 becomes steeper with greater spatial correlation of Ai , not flatter.
   Thus, our empirical estimate of β1 in equation (8) captures the effect of spatial correlation
in absolute advantage as mediated by the existing spatial correlation in comparative advantage.
Standard quantitative trade models have symmetric patterns of comparative advantage, in which
case β1 should be negative. If patterns of comparative advantage within cereals are very spatially
correlated, β1 could be positive.

A.5    Mobile labor
In an economic-geography model in which welfare differences are arbitraged away by mobile factors
of production (e.g., Allen and Arkolakis 2014), greater spatial correlation of productivity makes
population density, rather than welfare per capita, more unequal across locations. We demon-
strate this using a symmetric geography with four locations, akin to the first stylized example of
Section 2.2.2, in which the population of each location is endogenously determined. Locations’
productivities vary exogenously, and their amenities are identical.
   Given four locations with trade costs given by equation (6), total population L, and an elas-
ticity of substitution σ, the endogenous populations {Li }4i=1 and welfare level W must satisfy two



                                                                63
equations:
                                               4                                                            4
                             σ̃(σ−1)                         (1−σ̃)(σ−1) σ̃
                                               X                                                            X
                                                      1−σ
                  Lσ̃i = Ai            W 1−σ         τji  Aj            Lj                  and        L=         Lj ,
                                               j=1                                                          j=1

               σ−1
where σ̃ ≡    2σ−1 .   Let L denote the vector containing L1 , . . . , L4 , let T denote the (symmetric)
                                                                                 1
matrix of trade costs raised (element-wise) to the power                        1−σ ,   and let A denote the 4-by-4 diagonal
matrix with {A1 , . . . , A4 } on the diagonal.
   The equilibrium equation of interest can then be written as
                                                                                       
                                               1         σ̃(σ−1)        (1−σ̃)(σ−1)
                                    I−               A             TA                       Lσ̃ = 0.
                                          W σ−1

W σ−1 is the eigenvalue and Lσ̃ is the eigenvector of the matrix Aσ̃(σ−1) TA(1−σ̃)(σ−1) .
    Let Ac and Au denote diagonal matrices whose diagonal elements are (ã, ã, 1, 1) and (ã, 1, ã, 1),
respectively, with ã > 1. Also, let ā ≡ ãσ−1 > 1, d¯1 ≡ d1−σ , and d¯2 ≡ d1−σ .
                                                                            1                          2
                                                                                                              σ̃(σ−1)      (1−σ̃)(σ−1)
   Consider the eigenvalue λc = Wcσ−1 and eigenvector Lσ̃c associated with Ac                                            TAc             .
We can verify that the eigenvector         Lσ̃c    = (xc , xc , 1, 1) and the eigenvalue λc =               ā1−σ̃ (d1−σ
                                                                                                                     1   +d1−σ
                                                                                                                           2   )xc +
d1−σ
 1     + 1 satisfy the equation of interest. This implies that the equilibrium value of xc is given by

                        ā1−σ̃ (d¯1 + d¯2 )x21 − (ā − d¯1 − 1 + ād¯1 )x1 − (d¯1 + d¯2 )āσ̃ = 0.                              (A.5)

   Similarly, in the case of Au , consider the eigenvalue λu = Wuσ−1 and the eigenvector Lσ̃u as-
                   σ̃(σ−1)      (1−σ̃)(σ−1)
sociated with Au             TAu      . We can verify that the eigenvector Lσ̃u = (xu , 1, xu , 1) and
the eigenvalue λu = 2ā1−σ̃ d¯1 x2 + d¯2 + 1 satisfy the equation of interest. This implies that the
equilibrium value of xu is given by

                               2ā1−σ̃ d¯1 x2u − (ā − d¯2 − 1 + ād¯2 )xu − 2āσ̃ d¯1 = 0.                                     (A.6)

   The quadratic equations (A.5) and (A.6) each have one positive and one negative root. Re-
stricting attention to the positive roots, we can compare the relative sizes of xc and xu . It can be
shown that xc > xu .
   The equilibrium values of Lc and Lc are
                                             1                       1
                                               σ̃                        σ̃
                                             x
                                             c1                     xu 
                                       L     σ̃                L    1
                                            xc 
                               Lc =                 and L   =          1.
                                                                       
                                      1                 u     1
                                                              2xu + 2 xuσ̃ 
                                      σ̃    1                 σ̃
                                    2xc + 2  
                                                                       
                                              1                         1

It can then be shown that cov(ln Ai , ln Li ) is greater for Ac than Au because xc > xu . Thus, with
welfare equalized across locations, the productivity-population relationship is more positive when
productivity is more spatially correlated.



                                                                   64
B        Data sources and construction
Agricultural data Our cereal data cover barley, maize, millet, oats, rice, rye, sorghum, and
wheat. We use cereal-level measures of output (in metric tons, 1961-2013), yield (in metric tons
per harvested hectare, 1961-2013), trade quantity (in metric tons, 1961-2013), trade value (in
nominal USD, 1961-2013), producer prices (in nominal local currency, 1966-2013), and change in
storage (in metric tons, 1961-2013) for each country and year obtained from the FAO.39
       Domestic share of expenditure aggregated across cereals c = 1, . . . , C for country i in year t is
                                                          PC
                                                               c=1 Xciit
                                   λiit = PC                       P          PC
                                                 c=1 Xciit    +        j6=i    c=1 Xcjit

where Xcjit is the value of cereal c sold to i by j in year t. We observe Xcjit for j 6= i. We
must construct Xciit using data on output quantities, export quantities, and prices. Xciit = (qcit −
exportscit ) · pcit , where qcit is domestic output quantity, exportscit is export quantity, and pcit is
domestic price.
       There are two potential data
                                P sources for price pcit , neither of which are ideal. The first data
                                    j6=i Xcijt
source is export unit values,     exportscit ,   which are observed when a country exports a cereal. Un-
fortunately, only 53% of the cereal-country-year observations in our sample with positive output
quantities have positive export quantities. The second price measure, producer prices in nominal
local currency, presents two challenges. First, producer prices are available for only 59% of the
cereal-country-year observations with positive cereal output. Second, due to resource constraints
at the time, the FAO did not standardize the collection of 1966-1990 producer prices as it did for
prices since 1991. As such, the FAO warns against the combined use of the full 1966-2013 panel
and notes that it is “not in a position to give any explanation for the existing differences” between
1966-1990 and 1991-2013 producer prices.40 Thus, despite extensive efforts to convert 1966-1990
FAO producer prices into nominal US dollars, use of producer prices raises concerns.
    In light of these limitations and to ensure sufficient statistical power in our estimation, we elect
                                           PC
to approximate domestic expenditure              Xciit by domestic quantity times average export unit
        P                            PC Pc=1 X 
                                      
            C                            c=1 j6=i cijt
value,      c=1 (qcit − exportscit )    PC             . This measure is available for every year that
                                                 exportscit
                                           c=1
a country exports at least one cereal, yielding a sizable estimation sample. This approximation
of domestic expenditure C
                        P
                           c=1 Xciit makes our outcome variable a noisy measure of the domestic
share of expenditure. Table F.9 shows results for alternative approximations of the domestic share
of expenditure. Our country-year measure of aggregate cereal yield is harvested area-weighted
cereal-level yield.
       For several robustness checks, we use bilateral trade data from the U.N. Comtrade database.41
Comtrade data has the disadvantage of using cereal codes that differ from that used by the FAO.
  39
     Available at http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data.
  40
     See here: http://fenixservices.fao.org/faostat/static/documents/PA/PA_e.pdf
  41
     Available at https://comtrade.un.org




                                                              65
As such, despite careful matching of cereal categories across the two datasets, we prefer to use
production and trade data that is consistently reported by the FAO. However, trade data at the
bilateral level is available from Comtrade starting in 1962, whereas it is only available from the
FAO starting in 1986. Thus, for the gravity equations estimated in Table C.1, we use Comtrade
bilateral trade data. As a robustness check, we show in column 5 of Table F.9 that our main result
is unaffected when we alternatively construct domestic expenditure share using Comtrade data.
       We also use bilateral trade data from Comtrade to construct a measures of the change in a
country’s terms of trade each year. With many commodities, a country is better off if its initial
net export vector is more expensive at new prices than at old prices (Dixit and Norman, 1980,
p.132). Define the normalized net export vector for country i in year t − 1 by a vector whose
2 × C × N elements are exportscijt−1 and −exportscjit−1 for j 6= i multiplied by a scalar so that its
norm is one.42,43 Define the accompanying price-change vector for country i in year t by a vector
whose 2 × C × N elements are ∆pcijt and ∆pcjit for j 6= i, where ∆ denotes the time difference
operator. The change in the terms of trade is the inner product of these two vectors, which we
denote ∆ToTit , with ∆ToTit > 0 indicating an improvement in country i’s terms of trade. Our
measure is imperfect because the price-change element ∆pcijt is not observed if exportscijt = 0.
Absent further information, we impose ∆pcijt = 0 for these elements.

ENSO index          Annual ENSO variations can be detected using different indices, with the most
commonly used being equatorial Pacific sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies. We primarily
utilize 1960-2013 values of the monthly Kaplan NINO4 index which averages SST over the area
5◦ S-5◦ N, 160◦ E-150◦ W. For robustness checks in Table F.7, we also use the NINO3 (5◦ S-5◦ N,
150◦ W-90◦ W), NINO34 (5◦ S-5◦ N, 170◦ W - 120◦ W), and NINO12 (10◦ S-0◦ , 90◦ W-80◦ W) indices
(Kaplan et al., 1998).44

Historical temperature and precipitation                    Global temperature (in degrees centigrade) and
precipitation (in mm/month) variables constructed from monthly gridded global weather data at
a 0.5◦ latitude by 0.5◦ longitude resolution were obtained from the Center for Climatic Research
at the University of Delaware (Legates and Willmott, 1990a,b). 1960-2013 monthly data was first
spatially aggregated from pixel to country-level using cross-sectional crop-area weights in 2000 from
Ramankutty et al. (2008). For robustness checks in Table F.7, we also aggregate temperature from
pixel to country-level using total country area. Annual values are then constructed by averaging
January-December monthly values.

Projected temperature under climate change                        Global multi-model ensemble mean temper-
ature (in degrees centigrade) from monthly gridded global data at the 2.5◦ latitude by 2.5◦ longi-
  42                                1
      The scalar is P |exports                           . Absent the normalization, larger economies would mechanically
                     c,j       cijt−1 |+|exportscjit−1 |
exhibit larger terms-of-trade changes.
  43
      Note that exportscijt−1 and −exportscjit−1 are distinct elements in this net export vector, so that the same
cereal imported and exported by the same country is not assumed to be a homogeneous good.
  44
     Available at http://iridl.ldeo.columbia.edu/SOURCES/.Indices/.nino/.EXTENDED/


                                                          66
tude resolution from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5).45 2014-2099
monthly data was first spatially aggregated from pixel to country-level using cross-sectional crop-
area weights in 2000 from Ramankutty et al. (2008). Annual values are then constructed by
averaging January-December monthly values.

Geography            Country latitude and longitude are defined as crop area-weighted average using the
global cross-sectional distribution of crop area in 2000 from Ramankutty et al. (2008). Great-circle
distances between these country centroids are computed using the haversine formula.

Global oil prices Monthly West Texas Intermediate crude oil spot price obtained from the St.
Louis Federal Reserve for 1961-2013.46 Annual values are then constructed by averaging January-
December monthly values.

Export restrictions Export restrictions come from the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development’s (UNCTAD) TRAINS database.47 To construct the dummy variable used in
column 6 of Table F.4, we employ all export-related measures (Chapter P of the International
Classification of Non-Tariff Measures), excluding export subsidies. The indicator equals one for
country-year observations in which a new restriction on exporting any cereal to any trading partner
was introduced.

Variables in Figure 1 and Table F.1               Country-level real GDP per capita, TFP, capital stock,
and human capital index in 2013 from Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015). Country-level po-
litical stability, rule of law, and corruption indices in 2013 from World Bank’s World Governance
Indicators.48 Time-invariant country-level distance to nearest coastline or river and soil suitability
for agriculture from Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999).


C     Additional empirical results
C.1    Gravity estimates for cereals trade
The theoretical model of Section 2 assumes that trade in cereals follows a gravity specification for
exporter i, importer j, and year t:
                                                                                          
                                                                  χit                  Xjt
                                   ln Xijt = − ln τij + ln                + ln                  (C.1)
                                                                  wit                  Φjt

Estimating this log-linear equation using bilateral trade flows in cereals results in patterns similar
to those found in aggregate trade flows (e.g., Head and Mayer 2014). Bilateral cereal trade flows are
 45
    Available   at   https://climexp.knmi.nl/selectfield_cmip5.cgi
 46
    Available   at   https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/WTISPLC
 47
    Available   at   http://trains.unctad.org
 48
    Available   at   http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/#home



                                                        67
available from Comtrade starting in 1962. We estimate a standard panel data model using bilateral
distance as a (time-invariant) source of variation in bilateral trade costs (τij ) while employing
exporter-year (it) and importer-year (jt) fixed effects. As in our main model, standard errors are
clustered by year. Table C.1 reports the results. While the estimated distance coefficient of -1.5
shown in column 1 differs from the coefficient of -1.0 typically estimated for aggregate trade flows,
the regression exhibits the typical explanatory power, accounting for the majority of the variation
in cereal trade flows. In addition, 63% of countries that trade cereals in a given year both import
and export cereals that year. At the level of importer-exporter pairs, 19% of trading pairs sell cereal
in both directions. Thus, cereals are far from homogeneous commodities, and international trade in
cereals is well described by the gravity specification. In column 2, we examine whether ENSO affects
the trade elasticity  by examining its effect on the distance elasticity.49 Specifically, we include
an interaction between bilateral distance and a quadratic function of the sum of contemporaneous
and lagged ENSO (i.e., ENSOt + ENSOt−1 ), the functional form for ENSO used for our main IV
results in Table 2. ENSO does not alter the distance elasticity.

                     Table C.1: Gravity regression for international trade in cereals

                                          Outcome is log import value
                                                                             (1)         (2)


                       ln distanceij                                        -1.460      -1.477
                                                                           (0.046)     (0.066)
                                                                           [0.000]     [0.000]
                       ln distanceij × (EN SOt + EN SOt−1 )                             0.037
                                                                                       (0.037)
                                                                                       [0.324]
                       ln distanceij × (EN SOt + EN SOt−1 )2                            0.004
                                                                                       (0.029)
                                                                                       [0.878]

                       Observations                                       102,787     102,787
                       R-squared                                           0.556       0.557
                       Country-level intra-industry trade share            0.628       0.628
                       Bilateral intra-industry trade share                0.185       0.185
                      Notes: The dependent variable is log annual bilateral (importer-
                      reported) cereal trade value from Comtrade. The data cover 1962-2013.
                      All models include importer-year and exporter-year fixed effects. Intrain-
                      dustry trade shares are fraction of country-year and country-pair-year
                      observations with positive exports and imports, conditional on positive
                      exports or imports. Standard errors, clustered by year, in parentheses;
                      p-values in brackets.



  49
     This is informative about the trade elasticity per se to the extent that the distance elasticity of trade costs is
invariant to ENSO.


                                                          68
C.2    Terms of trade
In this appendix section, we estimate how a country’s terms of trade change in response to changes
in its cereal productivity and changes in the interaction of its productivity and spatial correlation.
   Appendix B introduces a measure of changes in the terms of trade, ∆ToTit , constructed using
changes in unit values of bilateral trade flows. It is imperfect because these unit values are only
observed when exports are non-zero and are a noisy measure of prices. Its distribution is very
fat-tailed. For our full sample, the unconditional kurtosis for ∆ToTit is 3214, much higher than our
sample unconditional kurtosis for ln λiit of 18 or the kurtosis of a standard normal distribution of 3.
To address this, we drop observations in the tails of this distribution from some of our regressions.
   This measure of changes in the terms of trade has strengths and weaknesses. It relies on a
revealed-preference argument, a much weaker assumption than the CES preferences assumed in
the theoretical framework in Section 2. On the other hand, use of ∆ToTit limits any inference
about the welfare consequences of trade to noting the sign of ∆ToTit . We therefore cannot make
quantitative statements about welfare inequality using this measure.
   Our instrumental-variables model for the change in the terms of trade has the following second-
stage equation:
                 ∆ToTit = ς0 (ln Ait − ln Ait−1 ) + ς1 (ln Ait It − ln Ait−1 It−1 ) + $i + ξit   (C.2)

where $i is a country fixed effect and ξit is an error term. The terms-of-trade interpretation of our
main empirical results implies that ς0 < 0 and ς1 > 0. Our two first-stage equations are:
       ln Ait − ln Ait−1 = %011 (f (Tit ) − f (Tit−1 ))
                           + %012 (f (Tit )g(EN SOt + EN SOt−1 ) − f (Tit−1 )g(EN SOt−1 + EN SOt−2 ))
                           + $1i + ϕ1it                                                          (C.3)
ln Ait It − ln Ait−1 It−1 = %021 (f (Tit ) − f (Tit−t ))
                           + %022 (f (Tit )g(EN SOt + EN SOt−1 ) − f (Tit−1 )g(EN SOt−1 + EN SOt−2 ))
                           + $2i + ϕ2it                                                          (C.4)

where ϕ1it and ϕ2it are error terms. This specification estimates how a country’s terms of trade
change in response to changes in its cereal productivity and changes in the interaction of its pro-
ductivity and spatial correlation. The $i fixed effects absorb country-specific common time trends
in productivity and terms of trade. f () is a restricted cubic spline function with four terms. g() is
a quadratic function.
   Table C.2 reports estimates of this regression. The full-sample estimates in column 1 are
statistically indistinguishable from zero and have the wrong sign. Dropping observations in which
the dependent variable is in the top 1% or bottom 1% of values yields estimated coefficients that
have signs consistent with the results of Section 4. An increase in productivity worsens a country’s
terms of trade (ς0 < 0), but this effect is dampened when productivity is more spatially correlated
(ς1 > 0). When we drop the observations in the top 2.5% and bottom 2.5% tails of the dependent


                                                           69
variable’s distribution, these effects are estimated with much greater precision.

                                      Table C.2: Terms of Trade
                                  Outcome is change in terms of trade
                                                            (1)                     (2)                 (3)

       ∆ ln Ait (ς0 )                                         25,450.215          -209.251         -411.298
                                                             (26,548.512)        (232.135)        (181.614)
                                                                [0.342]            [0.372]          [0.028]
       ∆ ln Ait × It (ς1 )                                    -45,796.848          935.580         965.897
                                                             (55,317.531)        (633.897)        (581.000)
                                                                [0.412]            [0.146]          [0.103]

       Outliers adjustment                                       None            Drop 1%         Drop 2.5%
       Cragg-Donald F-stat                                       9.207            9.317            8.606
       Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max LIML size                 3.580            3.580            3.580
       Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                                    3.142            3.831            3.737
       Observations                                              4182             4100             3982
       Notes: This table reports LIML estimates of ς0 and ς1 from equation (C.2). Column 2 drops
       observations for which the dependent variable is in the top 1% and bottom 1% of values. Column 3
       drops observations for which the dependent variable is in the top 2.5% and bottom 2.5% of values.
       Standard errors, clustered by year, in parentheses; p-values in brackets.




D     Welfare calculations
This section details the welfare calculations in the main text.

D.1    Calculating historical variance of welfare effect
This section details the within-sample welfare calculation discussed in Section 4.2 and shown in
Table 2. Recall the expression for the variance of welfare in equation (3):
                                                                                                     
                                                               −1                            1
              var (ln (Ci /Li )) = var (ln Ai ) + 2cov ln Ai ,    ln λii         + var         ln λii
                                                                                            

We employ this expression to quantify the magnitude of our reduced-form results in welfare terms.
Consider the following thought experiment: suppose the spatial correlation of productivity increases
from the 1961-2013 historical mean, I¯ = .214, by one standard deviation, σI = .0191. What is the
resulting percentage change in the cross-sectional variance of welfare, holding everything else fixed?
We denote these two hypothetical states as uncorrelated state u and correlated state c.
    For the uncorrelated state, we define variance productivity as the average cross-sectional pro-
ductivity variance during 1961-2013:

                                      var(ln Aui ) ≡ Et [vari (ln Ait |t)]                                    (D.1)


                                                      70
Next, we define covariance between productivity and domestic share of expenditure during the
uncorrelated state as the average cross-sectional covariance during 1961-2013:

                                cov(ln Aui , ln λuii ) ≡ Et [covi (ln Ait , ln λiit |t)]                 (D.2)

We further define the variance of domestic share of expenditure during the uncorrelated states as
the average variance during 1961-2013:

                                       var(ln λiiu ) ≡ Et [vari (ln λiit |t)]                            (D.3)

Note that the values in definitions (D.1), (D.2), (D.3) can be directly computed from data since
ln Ait and ln λiit are observed.
   For the correlated state c, var(ln Aci ) is also given by definitions (D.1) since we assume pro-
ductivity variance is unaltered by changes in spatial correlation. cov(ln Aci , ln λcii ) and var(λcii ),
however, have to be calculated as one does not directly observe data from a year in which only
It = I¯ + σI while everything else is fixed at the historical mean. To do this, first recall our
reduced-form expression for ln λit from equation (8):

                               ln λiit = β0 ln Ait + β1 ln Ait It + Π0 Zit + µit

Our estimates of this equation can be employed to construct each component of equation (3) for the
correlated state. The covariance between productivity and domestic share of expenditure during
the correlated state is:

                  cov(ln Aci , ln λcii ) ≡ (βb0 + βb1 (I¯ + σI ))Et [vari (ln Ait |t)]
                                                            b 0 Zit |t)] + Et [covi (ln Ait , µ
                                       + Et [covi (ln Ait , Π                                 bit |t)]   (D.4)

The variance of domestic share of expenditure during the correlated state is:

                 var(ln λcii ) ≡ (βb02 + 2βb0 βb1 (I¯ + σI ) + βb12 (I¯ + σI )2 )Et [vari (ln Ait |t)]
                                           b 0 Zit |t)] + Et [vari (b
                               + Et [vari (Π                        µit |t)]
                                                                           b 0 Zit |t)]
                               + 2(βb0 + βb1 (I¯ + σI ))Et [covi (ln Ait , Π
                               + 2(βb0 + βb1 (I¯ + σI ))Et [covi (ln Ait , µ
                                                                           bit |t)]
                                            b 0 Zit , µ
                               + 2Et [covi (Π         bit |t)]                                           (D.5)

Each term in equations (D.4) and (D.5) is either directly observable or can be obtained by estimating
equation (8). For example, for the model estimated in column 4, panel B of Table 2, with βb0 = 2.114
and βb1 = −4.144, we have:




                                                          71
                                             Et [vari (ln Ait |t)] = .453
                                                       b 0 Zit |t)] = 1.04
                                             Et [vari (Π
                                                          µit |t)] = .083
                                                Et [vari (b
                                                      b 0 Zit |t)] = −.497
                                   Et [covi (ln Ait , Π
                                                          bit |t)] = −.026
                                       Et [covi (ln Ait , µ
                                                   b 0 Zit , µ
                                         Et [covi (Π         bit |t)] = −.001

Applying equation (3), the percentage change in the variance of welfare in the correlated state,
relative to the uncorrelated state, is

             Cc           Cu
                           
      var ln Lii − var ln Lii            var (ln Aci ) − 2 cov (ln Aci , ln λcii ) +
                                                                                    1
                                                                                       var (ln λcii )
                                                                                    2
                                   =                                                                    −1   (D.6)
            var(ln(Ciu /Li ))          var (ln Aui ) −    2          u       u       1           u
                                                           cov (ln Ai , ln λii ) + 2 var (ln λii )

To complete the calculation, let the agricultural trade elasticity be  = 8.59 (Caliendo and Parro,
2015, Table A2). Values from equation (D.6) are shown in Table 2, with standard errors calculated
using the delta method.

D.2    Calculating change in variance of welfare under climate change
In Section 5.2, we calculate the percentage change in the variance of welfare between the end of our
estimation period, t̄ = 2013, and the end of our projection period, T = 2099, under climate change,
holding everything else fixed. Compared with the welfare calculation described in Appendix D.1
and reported in Table 2, there is an added complication: climate change also changes the variance
of productivity.
   To begin, recall equation (11) for ln Ait during the estimation period, t ∈ [1961, 2013]:

                                       ln Ait = k(Tit ) + Ψ0 Xit + νit

Column 1 of Table F.10 shows coefficients for b
                                              k() from our benchmark specification, which is also
plotted in Figure 14. Using estimates from equation (11) and our business-as-usual CMIP5 ensemble
mean projected temperatures under climate change, Tbit , we first compute country-year agricultural
productivity under climate change during the projection period t ∈ [2014, 2099], holding everything
but temperature fixed to estimated t̄ = 2013 values:


                                       ln
                                        d Ait = b          b 0 Xit̄ + νbit̄
                                                k(Tbit ) + Ψ                                                 (D.7)

In the left panel of Figure 15, the black line shows var(ln
                                                          d Ait ) while the blue line shows Moran’s I,
Ibt computed using lnd Ait , for each projection year.
   To compute the change in variance of welfare from the end of the estimation period, t̄ = 2013,
to any year during the projection period, t ∈ [2014, 2099], we difference equation (3):



                                                        72
        var (ln(Cit /Lit )) − var (ln(Cit̄ /Lit̄ )) = [var(ln
                                                            d Ait ) − var(ln Ait̄ )]
                                                    − (2/)[cov(ln
                                                                 d Ait ), ln
                                                                          d  λiit ) − cov(ln Ait̄ , ln λiit̄ )]
                                                    + (1/2 )[var(ln
                                                                  d  λiit ) − var(ln λiit̄ )]                      (D.8)

We consider two scenarios for obtaining future domestic share of expenditure, ln
                                                                              d  λiit . In the first
scenario, the projection omits changes in the spatial structure in the sense that the spatial corre-
lation of productivities is fixed at its value at the end of the estimation period, It̄ , throughout the
projection period. In the second projection, we allow climate change to alter the spatial correlation
of productivity.

Variance projection omitting changes in spatial structure Holding the spatial correla-
tion of productivity fixed, the domestic share of expenditure during the projection period, t ∈
[2014, 2099], is computed using our benchmark estimate of equation (8) from column 4, panel B of
Table 2:
                                      n
                                  ln
                                  d  λiit = (βb0 + βb1 It̄ )ln
                                                             d       b 0 Xit̄ + µ
                                                               Ait + Ψ          bit̄                               (D.9)
                                                                       n                           n
Equations (D.7) and (D.9) allow construction of var(ln
                                                    d  λiit ) and cov(ln
                                                                       d Ait , ln
                                                                               d  λiit ) for each year
in the projection period. These then enter into equation (D.8) to compute the change in welfare
variance since 2013 over the 21st century for the projection that omits changes in spatial structure.
That projected welfare variance is shown as the solid gray line in the right panel of Figure 15.

Variance projection including changes in spatial structure Allowing the spatial correla-
tion of productivity to vary under climate change, the domestic share of expenditure during the
projection period, t ∈ [2014, 2099], is computed using our benchmark estimate of equation (8) from
column 4, panel B of Table 2:

                                      s
                                  ln
                                  d  λiit = (βb0 + βb1 Ibt )ln
                                                             d       b 0 Xit̄ + µ
                                                               Ait + Ψ          bit̄                              (D.10)

                                                         s                          s
Equations (D.7) and (D.10) allow construction of var(ln
                                                     d  λiit ) and cov(ln
                                                                        d Ait , ln
                                                                                d  λiit ) for each year
in the projection period. These then enter into equation (D.8) to compute the change in welfare
variance since 2013 over the 21st century for the projection that includes changes in spatial structure.
That projected welfare variance is shown as the solid red line in the right panel of Figure 15.

Difference across projections            For the period from t̄ = 2013 to T = 2099, we calculate the
percentage difference in the change in welfare variance between projections that include and omit
changes in spatial structure:
                                       s /Ls )) − var (ln (C /L ))
                             var (ln (CiT  iT              it̄    it̄
                                       n /Ln
                                                                            −1                                    (D.11)
                            var ln CiT     iT    − var (ln (C it̄ /L it̄ ))


When using baseline estimated parameters, and an agricultural trade elasticity of  = 8.59 (Caliendo
and Parro, 2015, Table A2), we find that allowing climate change to alter the spatial correlation of

                                                         73
productivities predicts a 20% greater increase in welfare variance than when spatial correlation is
held fixed.

D.3     Calculating change in country-level welfare under climate change
From equation (2), the expression for welfare of country i in year t is

                                                                             1
                                          ln (Cit /Lit ) = ln Ait + γ −        ln λiit .
                                                                             

For the projection period, the productivity of country i in year t, ln
                                                                     d Ait is given by equation (D.7).
Next, we calculate the difference in welfare projections for individual countries between projections
that include and omit changes in spatial structure.

Country welfare projection omitting changes in spatial structure                                  Holding the spatial
correlation of productivity fixed, the other component of welfare during the projection period,
t ∈ [2014, 2099], is:
                                        n
                                    ln
                                    d  λiit = (βb0 + βb1 It̄ )ln
                                                               d Ait + κ      b 0 Zi,t̄ + µ
                                                                       bIt̄ + Π           bit̄                  (D.12)

where spatial correlation affects both the average domestic share of expenditure (κ) and its re-
lationship to domestic productivity (β1 ).50 The difference in country i welfare from t̄ = 2013 to
T = 2099 is:
                                                                         h                                 i
           n
       ln(CiT   /LniT   ) − ln(Cit̄ /Lit̄ ) = [ln AiT − ln Ait̄ ] − (1/) (β0 + β1 It̄ )(ln AiT − ln Ait̄ )
                                                d                          b    b         d                     (D.13)

Country welfare projection including changes in spatial structure                                Allowing the spatial
correlation of productivity to vary under climate change, the other component of welfare during
the projection period, t ∈ [2014, 2099] is:

                                       s
                                   ln
                                   d  λiit = (βb0 + βb1 Ibt )ln
                                                              d Ait + κ      b 0 Zi,t̄ + µ
                                                                      bIbt + Π           bi,t̄

Similarly, the difference in country i welfare from t̄ = 2013 to T = 2099 is:
                                                         h                                                                  i
    s
ln(CiT /LsiT )−ln(Cit̄ /Lit̄ ) = [ln
                                   d AiT −ln Ait̄ ]−(1/) (βb0 + βb1 IbT )ln
                                                                           d AiT − (βb0 + βb1 It̄ ) ln Ait̄ + κ
                                                                                                              b(IbT − It̄ )

Difference across projections                  The difference in country welfare between projections that in-
clude and omit changes in spatial structure is:

      s
 [ln(CiT /LsiT ) − ln(Cit̄ /Lit̄ )] − [ln(CiT
                                           n
                                              /LniT ) − ln(Cit̄ /Lit̄ )] = −(1/)[(βb1 ln
                                                                                        d       b)(IbT − It̄ )] (D.14)
                                                                                          AiT + κ

Figure 16 shows the country-level difference across projections.
  50
     To obtain κ, we first recover year fixed effects from equation (8). κ
                                                                         b = 2.45 is the coefficient from a linear
regression of year fixed effects on It and a linear time trend.



                                                               74
E     Appendix figures
             Figure E.1: Welfare per capita, model vs approximation by linear regression




                                        .438
                     Welfare per capita variance (model)
                       .432         .434.43     .436




                                                           .43    .432           .434            .436          .438     .44
                                                                 Predicted welfare per capita variance (reduced form)

Notes: For each equilibrium depicted in Figure 7, we compute equilibrium welfare per capita in the model (vertical
axis) and welfare per capita predicted by an estimated linear regression (horizontal axis). The regression specification
is akin to the line of best fit depicted in Figure 7, see equation (8). Predicted welfare per capita is computed by
plugging in predicted
                         values of ln λii into equation (3). The R2 of the bivariate relationship
                                                                                                  is .93. cov (ln Ai , ln λii )−
cov ln Āi , ln λ̄ii is at least the same order of magnitude as var (ln λii ) − var ln λ̄ii in 99% of swaps; it is an order
of magnitude larger in 16%.




                                                                                      75
                             Figure E.2: Location of ENSO sea-surface temperature measurements




Notes: ENSO indices defined as average sea surface temperature over a region minus the long-term mean sea surface
temperature for that region. Spatial definitions for standard ENSO indices: NINO4 (5◦ S-5◦ N, 160◦ E-150◦ W),
NINO3 (5◦ S-5◦ N, 150◦ W-90◦ W), NINO34 (5◦ S-5◦ N, 170◦ W - 120◦ W), and NINO12 (10◦ S-0◦ , 90◦ W-80◦ W).



                                                       Figure E.3: Monthly ENSO index for top 10 positive events
                                  1.5
               Monthly ENSO index (degrees Celsius)
              -1.5    -1   -.5     0
                                  -2     .5      1




                                                      -12    -9      -6       -3         0         3         6   9   12
                                                                          Months relative to Dec in year t
Notes: Time evolution of monthly ENSO index 12 months before and after the 10 most positive ENSO events over
1961-2013. ENSO events occur during the winters of 1965, 1972, 1982, 1986, 1991, 1994, 1997, 2002, 2006, and 2009.




                                                                                     76
                                                     Figure E.4: Observed log cereal yields and temperature in 2013




                                                                   2
                                                  Demeaned log cereal yield in 2013
                                                  -2      -1        0
                                                                   -3           1




                                                                                      -5                0                       5               10        15                      20             25              30
                                                                                                                                               Temperature (C)
Notes: Observed country-level log cereal yields in 2013 with cross-sectional mean removed plotted against temper-
ature in 2013. From equation (11), observed log cereal yield is sum of the nonlinear temperature relationship k(Tit ),
controls Ψ0 Xit , and the residual term νit . Vertical line shows the predicted log yield maximizing temperature from
Figure 14.

Figure E.5: Differences in welfare projections due to change in spatial correlation and projected
yield changes

                                                                                                                                                           ARE
                                            Spatial structure                                                                                                                                                    Spatial structure
                          .01




                                            reduces loss                                                                                             KWT                                                         amplifies gain
                                                                                                                                                            OMN

                                                                                                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                          NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                NZL             IRL
         Difference in welfare projection




                                                                                                                                                                                             DEU
                                   .005




                                                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                                                           USA EGYCHL FRA                          DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                        AUT LUX      CHE
                                                                                                                                                                  JPN                                      SWE
                                                                                                                                         KOR                                               CZE
                                                                                                                                                                        VNM
                                                                                                                                      CHN                                   IDN
                                                                                                                                                                              PNG                                CAN
                                                                                                                                                                    GUYBRA
                                                                                                                                                      HUN             SUR                    POL
                                                                                                                                                                                            PRK               FIN
                                                                                                               ITA                                                     BGD
                                                                                                                                                                      LAO DOMSLB
                                                                                                                  ALB
                                                                                                                 ARG            BGR                    SAU        VEN     MYSLKA                             NOR
                                                                               BIH                                        URY                      ROU         PRY MMR  BLZ PHL
                                                                                                         PER                                                   ECU
                                                                                             GRC
                                                                                           PRT   ESP                      ISR
                                                                                                                                                                MEX THA  COL CRI
                                                                                                                                                                 CIV KHM CUB
                                                                                                                                                            BTN IND        PAN TLS                     FSU
                                                                                        ZAF                         TUR                                                 SLV
                                                                                      LBN                                                                 PAK        NPL    MDG
                                                                                                                                               ZMB     ERI
                         0




                                                                                                                                                            BOL      NIC
                                                                                                                                                                       GTM
                                                                                                                                                 IRQ        MWIDJI     UGA
                                                                                                                                       RWA
                                                                                                                                                                      SLE
                                                                                                                                                               CAF
                                                                                                                                                                 GHA
                                                                                                                                                                   CMR  GAB
                                                                                                                                                                      HNDKEN     TTO
                                                                                               AFG            AUS                                                                                                MNG
                                                                                                                                                        MLI     GIN
                                                                                         MAR                          CYP                                          TZAGNB
                                                                                                                                                                 BEN
                                            IRN                      DZA                          TUN   JOR              PSE
                                                                                                                                                              NGA LBR            JAM
                                                                                               SYR
                                                                                                               SWZ                                         MRT
                                                                                                                                                           BFA     SEN
                                                                                                                                        BDI                                 HTI
                                                                                                                                                                           BRN
                                                                                                                                                                YEM GMB
                                                                                                                                                                      SOM
                                                                                                                                                            TCD       COG
            -.005




                                                                                                                                                                TGO
                                                                                                                                                                 AGO
                                                                                                                                                LBY               COD
                                                                                                                    LSO                                  ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                 MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                 SDN



                                                                                                                                                             NER


                                                                                                                                                     NAM
                          -.01




                                            Spatial structure                                                                                                                                                    Spatial structure
                                            amplifies loss                                                                                           BWA                                                         reduces gain

                                                                -.5                                     -.4                           -.3          -.2       -.1                                             0               .1
                                                                                                                                      Projected yield change

Notes: Scatter shows the difference in projected country-level welfare change between projections that include and
omit changes in spatial correlation (from Figure 16) plotted against change in log cereal yields over 2013-2099 under
climate change. Countries labeled by ISO3 identifier.
                                                                                                                                                   77
F   Appendix tables


                      Table F.1: Spatial correlation of economic determinants
                                                                   Moran’s I
                       Income
                       log real GDP per capita† (Figure 1)            .246

                       Determinants
                       log TFP†                                                  .214
                       log capital stock†                                        .261
                       Human capital index†                                      .346

                       Political stability index‡                                .176
                       Rule of law index‡                                        .215
                       Corruption index‡                                         .194

                       Temperature§                                              .404
                       log distance to nearest coastline or river∗∗              .188
                       Soil suitability for agriculture∗∗                        .175
                      Notes: Spatial correlation for income per capita and various deter-
                      minants. Moran’s I lies within [−1, +1], with 1 indicating perfect
                      positive spatial correlation and 0 indicating no spatial correlation.
                      †
                        denotes cross-country variables in 2013 from Feenstra, Inklaar
                      and Timmer (2015). ‡ denotes cross-country variables in 2013
                      from World Bank’s World Governance Indicators. § denotes cross-
                      country variable in 2013 from Legates and Willmott (1990a). ∗∗
                      denotes time-invariant cross-country variables from Gallup, Sachs
                      and Mellinger (1999).




                     Table F.2: Statistical significance of first-stage coefficients

                                                             (1)     (2)       (3)       (4)     (5)
        0
       α11   joint   F-stat   p-value                       0.022   0.007     0.011     0.011   0.008
        0
       α12   joint   F-stat   p-value                       0.006   0.038     0.097     0.178   0.218
        0
       α21   joint   F-stat   p-value                       0.071   0.004     0.007     0.006   0.003
        0
       α22   joint   F-stat   p-value                       0.041   0.062     0.028     0.041   0.071

       Number of temperature splines in f ()                  2      3         4          5      6
       Observations                                         5452    5452      5452      5452    5452
      Notes: Shows p-values from joint significance F-tests across the elements of each vector
                                    0       0                      0       0
      of first-stage coefficients, α11 and α12 from equation (9), α21 and α22 from equation (10).
      Columns 1-5 correspond to the IV specifications in columns 2-6 of Table 2.




                                                       78
                                 Table F.3: Alternative error structures
                               Outcome is log domestic share of expenditure
                                   (1)             (2)                  (3)                             (4)

      ln Ait (β0 )                  2.114               2.114                     2.114                 2.114
                                   (0.604)             (0.581)                  (0.830)               (0.698)
                                   [0.001]             [0.001]                  [0.014]               [0.004]
      ln Ait × It (β1 )             -4.144              -4.144                   -4.144                -4.144
                                   (1.834)             (1.659)                  (2.157)               (1.939)
                                   [0.028]             [0.016]                  [0.060]               [0.037]

      Clustering                year cluster       year cluster             year cluster            year cluster
                                                 and 20 year HAC          and cntry cluster
      Bekker adjustment              No                 No                       No                    Yes
      Observations                  5452               5452                     5452                   5452
     Notes: Estimates of β0 and β1 from equation (8). Column 1 reproduces benchmark estimates from
     column 4, panel B of Table 2 with year-level clustered standard errors. Column 2 allows year-level
     clustering and common serial correlation across countries within a 20-year window. Column 3 allows year
     and country-level clustering. Column 4 allows year-level clustering with a Bekker (1994) adjustment.
     Standard errors in parentheses; p-values in brackets.




                            Table F.4: Controlling for time-varying trade costs
                                   Outcome is log domestic share of expenditure
                                                 (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)

ln Ait (β0 )                                      2.114       2.178    2.163     2.492      2.297      2.115      2.270
                                                 (0.604)    (0.612)   (0.593)   (0.737)   (0.641)     (0.604)   (0.796)
                                                 [0.001]    [0.001]   [0.001]   [0.001]   [0.001]     [0.001]   [0.006]
ln Ait × It (β1 )                                 -4.144     -4.254    -4.189    -4.748    -4.227      -4.145    -4.281
                                                 (1.834)    (1.865)   (1.825)   (2.095)   (1.844)     (1.833)   (1.985)
                                                 [0.028]    [0.027]   [0.026]   [0.028]   [0.026]     [0.028]   [0.036]

 ln oil price × average ln λii                                Yes
 ln oil price × centrality                                              Yes
 Year FE × average ln λii                                                         Yes
 Year FE × centrality                                                                       Yes
 Export restrictions                                                                                  Yes
 Precipitation                                                                                                  Yes
 Cragg-Donald F-stat                               5.174     5.249     5.077     4.875     4.042    5.163      3.932
 Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max LIML size         3.580     3.580     3.580     3.580     3.580    3.580      3.580
 Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                            3.963     3.911     3.903     4.146     3.523    3.967      3.497
 Observations                                      5452      5452      5452      5452      5452      5452      5452
Notes: Estimates of β0 and β1 from equation (8). Column 1 replicates benchmark model from column 4, panel
B, of Table 2. Column 2 (3) controls for the interaction of global log oil price and cross-sectional average log
domestic share of expenditure (output-weighted inverse distance averaged across all other countries). Column 4
(5) controls for the interaction of year fixed effects and cross-sectional average log domestic share of expenditure
(output-weighted inverse distance averaged across all other countries). Column 6 controls for introductions of export
restrictions. Column 7 controls for quadratic precipitation terms. Standard errors, clustered by year, in parentheses;
p-values in brackets.




                                                           79
                               Table F.5: Sample splits
                        Outcome is log domestic share of expenditure
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)

 ln Ait (β0 )                                     2.114       2.152        1.845     1.692
                                                (0.604)     (0.595)      (2.807)    (0.511)
                                                [0.001]     [0.001]      [0.517]    [0.003]
 ln Ait × It (β1 )                               -4.144      -4.226       -4.639     -2.708
                                                (1.834)     (1.925)     (12.564)    (1.627)
                                                [0.028]     [0.033]      [0.715]    [0.108]

 Include large producers?                         No          Yes         No          No
 Sample period                                 1961-2013   1961-2013   1961-1987   1988-2013
 Cragg-Donald F-stat                             5.174       5.020       1.628       3.810
 Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max LIML size       3.580       3.580       3.580       3.580
 Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                          3.963       4.473       1.137       4.052
 Anderson-Rubin weak-id robust joint p-value     0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
 Observations                                    5452        4952        2655        2793
Notes: Estimates of β0 and β1 from equation (8). Column 1 reproduces benchmark esti-
mates from column 4, panel B of Table 2. Column 2 excludes the following ten countries,
which together account for more than half of world cereal output in each year: China,
United States, India, Former Soviet Union, France, Indonesia, Canada, Brazil, Germany,
and Bangladesh. Column 3 restricts sample to 1961-1987. Column 4 restricts sample to
1988-2013. Standard errors, clustered by year, in parentheses; p-values in brackets.

                             Table F.6: Dynamic effects
                        Outcome is log domestic share of expenditure
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)

 ln Ait                                          2.217                                1.326
                                                (0.651)                             (0.634)
                                                [0.001]                             [0.041]
 ln Ait × It                                     -4.152                              -3.233
                                                (1.874)                             (1.590)
                                                [0.031]                             [0.047]
 ln Ait+1                                                     0.724
                                                            (0.503)
                                                            [0.156]
 ln Ait+1 × It+1                                             -0.830
                                                            (1.642)
                                                            [0.615]
 ln Ait−1                                                                 0.851
                                                                        (0.526)
                                                                        [0.112]
 ln Ait−1 × It−1                                                         -2.039
                                                                        (1.354)
                                                                        [0.138]

 2nd stage sample period                       1962-2012   1962-2012   1962-2012   1961-2013
 Include stored cereals?                          No          No          No          Yes
 Cragg-Donald F-stat                             4.480       5.688       5.293       5.345
 Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max LIML size       3.580       3.580       3.580       3.580
 Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                          3.632       2.592       3.532       3.622
 Observations                                    5237        5236        5235        5191
Notes: Estimates of β0 and β1 from equation (8). Column 1 reproduces benchmark
model using log yields in year t instrumented by December ENSO in years t and t − 1
and local temperature in year t. Column 2 uses log yields in year t + 1, instrumented
by December ENSO conditions in years t + 1 and t and local temperature in year t + 1.
Column 3 uses log yields in year t − 1, instrumented by December ENSO conditions in
years t − 1 and t − 2 and local temperature in year t − 1. Column 4 uses log yields in year
t to examine effects on a measure of domestic share of expenditure that includes stored
cereals. Sample period for 2nd stage equation is 1962-2012 for columns 1-3 and 1961-2013
for column 4. Standard errors clustered by year in parentheses; p-values in brackets.
                                               80
                    Table F.7: ENSO and local temperature definitions
                      Outcome is log domestic share of expenditure
                                                   (1)      (2)       (3)               (4)
                    Panel A: Crop-area-weighted country temperature

ln Ait (β0 )                                           2.114     2.108      2.084     2.722
                                                     (0.604)    (0.715)   (0.706)    (0.987)
                                                     [0.001]    [0.005]   [0.005]    [0.008]
ln Ait × It (β1 )                                     -4.144     -4.064    -4.465     -6.026
                                                     (1.834)    (2.414)   (2.406)    (3.127)
                                                     [0.028]    [0.098]   [0.069]    [0.059]

ENSO index                                      4        3        34                   12
Cragg-Donald F-stat                           5.174    5.013    5.195                 3.781
Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max LIML size 3.580        3.580    3.580                 3.580
Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                        3.963    2.897    3.993                 2.333
Observations                                  5452     5452     5452                  5452
               Panel B: Total-area-weighted country temperature

ln Ait (β0 )                                           1.632     1.722      1.562     1.871
                                                     (0.500)    (0.626)   (0.597)    (0.729)
                                                     [0.002]    [0.008]   [0.012]    [0.013]
ln Ait × It (β1 )                                     -3.960     -4.125    -4.155     -4.517
                                                     (1.617)    (2.155)   (2.071)    (2.331)
                                                     [0.018]    [0.061]   [0.050]    [0.058]

ENSO index                                              4          3         34        12
Cragg-Donald F-stat                                   4.423      3.928     4.186      3.103
Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max LIML size             3.580      3.580     3.580      3.580
Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                                3.490      2.653     3.344      1.957
Observations                                          5605       5605      5605       5605
Notes: Estimates of β0 and β1 from equation (8). Panel A uses crop-area-weighted country-level
temperatures. Panel B uses total-area-weighted country-level temperatures. Columns 1 to 4 use
NINO4, NINO3, NINO34, and NINO12 as ENSO index. Standard errors, clustered by year, in
parentheses; p-values in brackets.




                                             81
                Table F.8: Using spatial correlation of temperature instead of ENSO
                                  Outcome is log domestic share of expenditure
                                                        (1)         (2)       (3)             (4)           (5)

     ln Ait (β0 )                                       2.486       2.540      1.918         1.647         1.686
                                                       (1.310)     (1.182)    (0.600)       (0.618)       (0.624)
                                                       [0.063]     [0.036]    [0.002]       [0.010]       [0.009]
     ln Ait × It (β1 )                                  -5.044      -5.135     -3.092        -2.348        -2.394
                                                       (4.173)     (4.011)    (1.884)       (1.943)       (2.021)
                                                       [0.232]     [0.206]    [0.107]       [0.232]       [0.241]

      Number of temperature splines in f                     2           3         4           5           6
      Temperature Moran’s I polynomial order in g            1           1         1          1           1
      Number of instruments                                  4           6         8          10          12
      Cragg-Donald F-stat                                  6.407       5.267     6.161      5.428       4.846
      Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max 2SLS bias           7.560        9.480    10.220     10.580      10.780
      Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max 2SLS size           16.870      21.680    25.640     29.320      32.880
      Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max LIML size            4.720       4.060     3.780      3.640       3.580
      Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                               2.813       2.217     2.145      2.389       2.061
      BIC for first stage equations                     -30779.0 -30789.6 -30873.7 -30862.6 -30845.5
      Observations                                         5452        5452      5452       5452        5452
     Notes: LIML estimates of β0 and β1 from equation (8) with g(EN SOt + EN SOt−1 ) in first-stage equa-
     tions (9) and (10) replaced with the annual global spatial correlation of temperature, It (Tit ). Columns
     show estimates that vary by the number of temperature spline terms in f (). All models include country
     fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific linear trends as included instruments. Standard
     errors, clustered by year, in parentheses; p-values in brackets.


                    Table F.9: Alternative domestic expenditure share constructions

                                Outcome is log domestic share of expenditure
                                                 (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)

ln Ait (β0 )                                       2.114       1.365     1.825     1.568          1.249         1.867
                                                  (0.604)    (0.397)    (0.559)   (0.432)       (0.430)       (0.536)
                                                  [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.002]   [0.001]       [0.005]       [0.001]
ln Ait × It (β1 )                                  -4.144     -3.068     -3.622    -2.835        -2.452        -3.520
                                                  (1.834)    (1.423)    (1.585)   (1.337)       (1.152)       (1.549)
                                                  [0.028]    [0.036]    [0.026]   [0.039]       [0.038]       [0.027]

Price data                                        FAO          FAO       FAO       FAO        Comtrade         FAO
Price imputation                                 average     export+    lowest    highest      average        average
                                                 export      producer   export    export       export         export
Drop outliers?                                     No           No        No        No           No             1%
Cragg-Donald F-stat                               5.174        8.049     5.174     5.174        5.346          5.259
Stock-Yogo crit. value: 10% max LIML size         3.580        3.580     3.580     3.580        3.580          3.580
Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                            3.963        3.864     3.963     3.963        2.406          3.832
Observations                                      5452         2918      5452      5452         4148           5366
Notes: Estimates of β0 and β1 from equation (8). Column 1 reproduces benchmark estimates from column 4,
panel B of Table 2 with average export-volume-weighted cereal export unit value used for imputing cereal-level
prices in constructing domestic expenditure share. Column 2 uses cereal-level export unit values with missing
observations imputed using producer prices to construct domestic expenditure. Columns 3 and 4 use cereal-level
export unit values with missing observations imputed using the lowest and highest observed export unit value for
a given country and year, respectively. Column 5 replicates column 1 but constructs domestic expenditure share
using Comtrade bilateral trade data instead of FAO trade data. FAO trade data available for 1961-2013. Comtrade
data available for 1962-2013. Column 6 replicates column 1 but drops observations with outcome variable being in
the bottom and top 1% of distribution. Standard errors, clustered by year, in parentheses; p-values in brackets.

                                                        82
                      Table F.10: Log cereal yield and local temperature
                                 Outcome is log cereal yields
                                      (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)                (5)        (6)

Temperature 1st term                     0.004     0.004      0.005        0.005     0.007       0.005
                                       (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.011)
                                       [0.686]    [0.677]    [0.629]     [0.631]    [0.519]    [0.623]
Temperature 2nd term                    -0.183     -0.165     -0.222      -0.203     -0.126     -0.100
                                       (0.041)    (0.040)    (0.071)     (0.071)    (0.060)    (0.059)
                                       [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.003]     [0.006]    [0.041]    [0.093]
Temperature 3rd term                     0.650     0.599      0.418        0.393     0.020      -0.031
                                       (0.160)    (0.159)    (0.196)     (0.196)    (0.212)    (0.205)
                                       [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.038]     [0.050]    [0.924]    [0.882]
Temperature 4th term                    -1.162     -1.100     0.356        0.248      1.320      1.394
                                       (0.533)    (0.539)    (0.649)     (0.644)    (0.674)    (0.658)
                                       [0.034]    [0.047]    [0.586]     [0.702]    [0.056]    [0.039]
Temperature 5th term                                          -2.204      -1.801     -2.895     -3.370
                                                             (1.775)     (1.760)    (1.880)    (1.864)
                                                             [0.220]     [0.311]    [0.130]    [0.076]
Temperature 6th term                                                                 1.830       3.213
                                                                                    (3.814)    (3.791)
                                                                                    [0.633]    [0.401]
Precipitation                                      0.003                  0.003                  0.003
                                                  (0.001)                (0.001)               (0.001)
                                                  [0.000]                [0.000]               [0.000]
Precipitation squared                              -0.000                 -0.000                -0.000
                                                  (0.000)                (0.000)               (0.000)
                                                  [0.000]                [0.000]               [0.000]

Number of temperature splines              4          4          5          5          6          6
Precipitation                             No        Yes         No        Yes         No        Yes
Temp. joint p-value                     0.0004     0.0014     0.0009     0.0030     0.0015     0.0049
Optimal temp.                            8.81       8.91       8.87       8.94       7.80       7.70
Observations                             7226       7226       7226       7226       7226       7226
Notes: Estimates of cubic spline terms for h() in equation (11) during 1961-2013. The number of knots
placed along the temperature support according to Harrell (2001) varies across columns. Odd (even)
numbered columns exclude (include) quadratic precipitation terms. P-value from a joint significance test
of temperature terms shown. Standard errors, clustered by year, in parentheses; p-values in brackets.




                                                  83
