                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CORPORATE DEBT, FIRM SIZE AND FINANCIAL FRAGILITY IN EMERGING
                                MARKETS

                                         Laura Alfaro
                                         Gonzalo Asis
                                         Anusha Chari
                                         Ugo Panizza

                                      Working Paper 25459
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25459


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019




We thank the editor and two referees for insightful comments and suggestions. We also thank
participants at NBER conference Capital Flows and Debt in Emerging Markets, CEPAL
conference on Debt and Economic Growth, and Luis Servén and Ramón Piñeda for helpful
discussions, Carmen Reinhart, Hyun Song Shin, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Nicholas Magud,
Alberto Martin and Sergio Schmukler for thoughtful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Laura Alfaro, Gonzalo Asis, Anusha Chari, and Ugo Panizza. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Debt, Firm Size and Financial Fragility in Emerging Markets
Laura Alfaro, Gonzalo Asis, Anusha Chari, and Ugo Panizza
NBER Working Paper No. 25459
January 2019
JEL No. F34,G01,G15,G32

                                          ABSTRACT

The post-Global Financial Crisis period shows a surge in corporate leverage in emerging markets
and a number of countries with deteriorated corporate financial fragility indicators (Altman’s Z-
score). Firm size plays a critical role in the relationship between leverage, firm fragility and
exchange rate movements in emerging markets. While the relationship between firm-leverage and
distress scores varies over time, the relationship between firm size and corporate vulnerability is
relatively time-invariant. All else equal, large firms in emerging markets are more financially
vulnerable and also systemically important. Consistent with the granular origins of aggregate
fluctuations in Gabaix (2011), idiosyncratic shocks to the sales growth of large firms are
positively and significantly correlated with GDP growth in our emerging markets sample.
Relatedly, the negative impact of exchange rate shocks has a more acute impact on the sales
growth of the more highly levered large firms.

Laura Alfaro                                     Anusha Chari
Harvard Business School                          301 Gardner Hall
Morgan Hall 263                                  CB#3305, Department of Economics
Soldiers Field                                   University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Boston, MA 02163                                 Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER                                         and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu                                  achari@unc.edu

Gonzalo Asis                                     Ugo Panizza
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill      The Graduate Institute, Geneva
gonzaloasis7@gmail.com                           Department of International Economics
                                                 PO Box 36, 1211 Geneva 21
                                                 Switzerland
                                                 ugo.panizza@graduateinstitute.ch
1. Introduction

        There was a rapid credit expansion in emerging-market countries in the aftermath of the
Global Financial Crisis (GFC). A surge in foreign borrowing and deterioration in net external
debt positions accompanied the increase in domestic credit (BIS, 2014; IMF, 2015). The non-
financial corporate sector accounts for the lion’s share of this surge in leverage including
significant increases in international bond issuance (Figure 1). The total domestic and foreign
debt of emerging market-based non-financial firms rose from $2.4 trillion to $3.7 trillion, and
outstanding international bonds grew from $360 billion to $1.1 trillion between 2007 and 2015
(BIS, 2016).
        Monetary policy normalization in advanced economies, rising emerging-market sovereign
debt premia, low corporate profitability and market valuations all together have the potential to
cause severe liquidity problems for emerging market firms.1 In fact, following taper talk and the
lift-off from the zero lower bound in the United States, tight dollar funding conditions have led to
sharp reversals in capital flows to emerging markets.2,3 Rising fears, notably Turkey, are that
normalizing monetary policy conditions in the US could trigger waves of corporate failures in a
number of emerging economies. Understanding the potential vulnerabilities, however, requires
that we know more about the state of emerging market corporate balance sheets and their hitherto
unexplored impact on the macroeconomy. Our paper aims to do so.
        The paper’s main contribution is to investigate the role of large firms in the emerging
market economies and whether their vulnerabilities portend adverse macroeconomic
consequences. Gabaix (2011) notes that the largest firms dominate economic activity in advanced
countries and shocks to the largest firms can affect aggregate output as these shocks do not get
diversified in the aggregate data.4



1
  The growth in corporate profits has slowed considerably, and the return on invested capital in emerging-market
firms has significantly declined since the financial crisis. As evidence, emerging markets usually trade at lower
valuations than their advanced-economy counterparts, and while these relative valuations increased in the aftermath
of the GFC, emerging markets are trading at a discount again.
2
  See for example, Bloomberg. “Emerging Markets in May Saw Biggest Outflows in 18 Months”, June 5, 2018;
Reuters, “Emerging markets set for $448 billion outflows this year -IIF,” January 26, 2016.
3
  A number of direct and indirect channels can transmit shocks to highly leveraged non-financial corporates to the
domestic economy. For example, a deterioration of credit quality of corporate borrowers or a sudden withdrawal of
funds from the domestic financial system by firms that are unable to roll-over their international obligations can
impair the domestic banking system (Acharya et al., 2015).
4
  See also Acemoglu et al. (2016) and Acemoglu et al. (2017).

                                                                                                                      1
         We start by showing that firm size plays a critical role in the relationship between
leverage, firm fragility and exchange rate movements in emerging markets. We also show that
while the relationship between leverage and distress scores varies over time, the relationship
between firm size and corporate vulnerability is relatively time-invariant. To our knowledge this
result is new. Next, we carefully examine whether the most leveraged and financially fragile
firms in emerging markets are also the most systemically important. We believe that this is the
first paper to formally test Gabaix’s (2011) granular origins of aggregate fluctuations hypothesis
using emerging market data. The details of the analysis follow below.
         We use detailed financial statement information from Worldscope and Orbis for a broad
cross-section of emerging markets over a twenty-year period to study the relationship between
firm characteristics such as size, leverage and corporate financial fragility over time. As a
summary measure of corporate fragility, we use the widely used Altman’s Z-score measure
adapted to the emerging market context (Altman, 2005).5
         We begin by documenting the cross-country patterns in the Altman's Z-score for the
emerging markets in our sample. Next, using detailed firm-level information, we investigate the
relationship between leverage and corporate financial fragility with particular emphasis on the
role of firm size. We also examine the impact of macroeconomic and institutional factors such as
exchange rates, economic growth, and financial globalization interacted with leverage on
corporate distress scores.
         We find that in the post-GFC period, many countries have higher leverage and are close
to or in the Altman Z-score “grey zone” implying a higher risk of financial distress. Turkey now
in distress territory is perhaps a good example. Regression estimates show that leverage has a
negative correlation with the Z score, i.e., scores for firms with high leverage are closer to the
distressed range. Further, large firms and highly levered firms are more financially vulnerable.
Interestingly, the magnitude of the coefficient on firm size almost quadruples with the
introduction of country-year fixed effects to control for unobserved heterogeneity across
countries and is eight times larger with firm-fixed effects. Moreover, across alternative
definitions of firm size, the relationship with financial vulnerability remains negative and highly


5
  The original Altman’s Z-score is a linear combination of five corporate income and balance sheet values to measure
the financial health of a company: the ratios of working capital, retained earnings, and operating income to total
assets, the book value of assets to total liabilities and the sales to total assets. By combining various aspects of firm
operations, it paints an overall picture of corporate health (Altman, 1968).

                                                                                                                       2
statistically significant. Large firms, therefore, appear to be a principal source of corporate
financial vulnerability in emerging markets.
        We also find that while the relationship between leverage and fragility varies over time,
the firm characteristic that is consistently significant and robust is firm size. To explain the
observed country-year heterogeneity we conjecture is that if firms borrow in foreign currency,
leverage will likely have a particularly adverse impact on corporate financial fragility in times of
currency depreciation. The data suggest that indeed the interaction effect between leverage and
currency depreciation is negative and statistically significant. The inclusion of country-year fixed
effects rules out any concern of direct reverse causality, i.e., the possibility that an increase in
firm fragility leads to currency depreciation.
        We undertake a number of tests and explore alternative explanations to ensure the
robustness of our results. The relationship between firm size and financial fragility is robust to
economic recessions and tighter financial conditions. Also, the effect of firm size and leverage
conditional on changes in the bilateral exchange rate vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar are robust to
leverage interactions with inflation, financial development, and the updated Lane and Milesi-
Ferretti (2007) index of financial globalization. Importantly, the size variable remains negative,
highly statistically significant with a remarkably stable coefficient magnitude across all the
specifications.
        Additional tests reveal that the relationship between firm size and corporate financial
fragility is robust to the survivorship bias of firms, excluding China from the specifications and
the use of a constant sample. We also find a differential interaction effect of leverage and
exchange rate changes on corporate financial fragility that depends on whether emerging market
currencies are strengthening or weakening the interaction effect of leverage and change in the
exchange rate on Z-scores conditional on currency depreciation is negative and statistically
significant. Concerning sector-specificity, the estimations show a larger and statistically
significant interaction effect between leverage and exchange rates for non-tradable industries and
a smaller and insignificant coefficient for the tradable sector.
        A potential concern is that for variables measured with error, our results may suffer from
attenuation bias that is amplified by the presence of firm and country-year fixed effects. To
address attenuation bias, as well as other remaining endogeneity concerns, we use two
instruments for the exchange rate. One based on world capital flows data (Bussière, et al., 2015,


                                                                                                       3
and Alfaro et. al., 2018) interacted with the time-varying country-specific values of the Chinn-Ito
index for financial openness and a second instrument that uses currency weights computed by
Benetrix et al. (2015) to build an exogenous shock to the financially weighted exchange rate. The
instrumental variables specifications confirm that the interaction effect between leverage and the
exchange rate and firm size on corporate distress scores is negative and statistically significant.
Importantly, the coefficient magnitudes in the instrumental variable regressions are much larger
alleviating concerns about attenuation bias.
       Next, we turn to the second main contribution of the paper. A fundamental question is
whether the findings about firm size and leverage documented above can have adverse
macroeconomic consequences especially with monetary policy normalization in advanced
economies. To answer this question, we explore the role of large firms and their importance for
the overall economic performance in emerging markets. Consistent with Gabaix (2011) we find
that large firms are systemically important—idiosyncratic shocks to large firms significantly
correlate with GDP growth in our sample of emerging markets. We see that while large firms are
less levered than small firms, they may have a more risky type of leverage as large firm
performance in terms of sales growth deteriorates more significantly in response to exchange rate
depreciation. While this result holds for the average country in our sample, we also find that there
is substantial cross-country heterogeneity. In conjunction with the contributions that large firms
make to the overall economic performance in emerging markets, the leverage vulnerabilities of
these firms may, therefore, warrant particular attention from policymakers.
       Note again that there is considerable concern about the recent increase in dollar borrowing
by emerging market firms (BIS, 2015, Avdjiev et al., 2014, and Acharya et al., 2015). Our paper
is the first to provide evidence of the macroeconomic consequences of the links between
leverage, currency movements, and firm size. Given that disaggregate data on the liability
composition (currency, maturity, type of lender) of non-financial firms are not available our tests
are a valuable and novel contribution to the literature. Implicitly, there is an intimate link between
the vulnerabilities of systemically large firms, bailout guarantees, and moral hazard issues in
emerging market lending where widespread corporate debt vulnerabilities can turn into full-
blown financial crises. Once again, Turkey is a case in point.
        Our paper is related to several strands of literature. First, the paper contributes to the
literature on the recent evolution of corporate debt in the aftermath of the GFC. IMF (2015)


                                                                                                      4
documents the main trends and shows that global factors drive the increase in corporate leverage
following the GFC. This finding is in line with Shin’s (2013) view that the response to the crisis
led to a sudden increase in global liquidity. Acharya et al. (2015) present several case studies and
evaluate vulnerabilities and potential policy responses. More generally, this paper relates to the
literature documenting the association between rapid credit growth and the building of corporate
leverage and financial crises (Mendoza and Terrones 2008, and Schularick and Taylor, 2012).
The paper is also related to the literature on the origins of the Asian Financial Crisis also credited
with corporate financial roots.6 Our paper is also related to the growing literature on the financial
channel of exchange rate changes (Bruno and Shin, 2015c).7
         The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the firm-level data. Section 3 provides
detailed stylized facts about leverage and corporate vulnerabilities in emerging markets including
the build-up of corporate debt and our methodology for measuring corporate financial fragility.
Section 4 presents firm-level regression results that explore factors that drive corporate fragility
in emerging markets. Section 5 analyzes the relationship between firm size, corporate fragility
and the macroeconomy. Section 6 concludes.


2. The Data


         This paper uses firm-level data from Worldscope (gathered through Datastream) and
Osiris that provide information going back to the 1990s.8 The data provide a long time series that
allows us to exploit the variation in the relationship between leverage, firm-size and corporate
financial fragility in emerging markets over two decades and spanning a number of crises. Both
sources provide detailed historical information for listed and unlisted firms for a wide sample of


6
  Pomerleano (1998) uses firm-level data and finds that excessive leverage and poor financial performance in the
corporate sector caused the Asian financial crisis. Ghosh et al. (2002) also show that in 1995–96 several East Asian
countries had debt ratios and shares of short-term debt which were significantly higher than debt ratios and short-
term debt shares in OECD countries. Claessens et al. (2000) suggest that corporate financial risk factors may have
been an amplifying factor in the crisis. Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1999) also explore the root causes of the Asian
Financial crisis.
7
  Other papers in this literature include but are not limited to Bruno and Shin (2015b), Claessens et al., 2015,
Eichengreen and Tong, 2015, Du and Schreger, 2016, Niepmann and Schmidt-Eisenlohr, 2017, Druck et al., 2017,
and Avdjiev et al., 2018.
8
  The Worldscope database provides detailed historical financial statement information for the world’s leading public
and private companies. Osiris, published by Bureau van Dijk, has information as well on listed, and major
unlisted/delisted, companies around the world. All data for tangible fixed assets is also from Osiris. While extracting
data from Osiris, we restricted the sample to include sales information.

                                                                                                                     5
countries.9 We compared Worldscope and Osiris’ coverage for emerging markets and chose the
data source with the most data availability for each country. Osiris had better coverage for China
and India, while Worldscope dominated for all other countries.
         The sample consists of data on non-financial firms from 1992–2014 for the main
countries classified as emerging markets from the MSCI’s emerging market index.10 These are
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jordan,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and Vietnam. Since coverage of Eastern
European countries is extremely sparse, we group together firms from Czech Republic, Hungary,
Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia into ‘Eastern Europe’.
         Our final sample includes all companies that have data for each indicator of firm
performance described below. The number of companies with data for every variable and year of
interest is too small to create a balanced sample. Nonetheless, we have performed the analysis
maintaining a balanced sample during different periods, obtaining similar results
         We exclude outliers and all noticeable errors in the data. The sample varies from a
maximum of 7,972 firms with data on leverage totaling 45,104 firm-year observations to a
minimum of 2,926 firms (13,653 firm-year observations) with enough data to compute Altman’s
Emerging Market Z-score, our main measure of corporate fragility. The countries with most firms
in the database are China, India, and South Korea, and with the least Eastern Europe.
         Column 1 of Table A1 in the Appendix shows total sales of firms in our database by
country as a percentage of the country’s total market capitalization, as computed by the World
Bank. We find this a better measure of sample coverage than Sales/GDP because the large
majority of the firms in our database are publicly listed, and the size of the listed market relative
to GDP varies significantly by country, as Column 2 shows.




9
  Alternative sources, such as Orbis data, do not provide consistent historical data for private and public firms for
emerging markets. For example, Di Giovanni and Levchenko’s (2013) show that between 2006 and 2008 there were
only 44 countries (mostly OECD and Eastern European countries) for which Orbis had firm-level data on sales for at
least 1000 firms.
10
   We supplement these countries with Argentina, Jordan, Morocco, Slovakia, Slovenia and Vietnam. Egypt, Qatar
and UAE are not in our sample due to data availability. Also, we do not include Greece as an emerging market.

                                                                                                                    6
3. Stylized Facts: Leverage and Corporate Vulnerabilities in Emerging Markets.


3.1 The Build-up of Corporate Debt

         The surge in borrowing by non-financial corporations was a key driver of the increased
leverage in emerging markets in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.11 Over 2001-2007
average credit to the non-financial sector in emerging market countries remained close to 120%
of GDP. While the GFC caused a sudden reduction in credit, credit started expanding rapidly in
2009 and reached 175% of GDP in 2015, a 67-percentage point increase with respect to the 2008
trough (Figure 1). Corporate debt went from 57% to 101% of GDP over 2008-15.
         Domestic credit expansion in emerging markets was accompanied by a surge in foreign
borrowing.12 Non-financial corporations also played a key role in international bond issuances.
Over 2008-2015, outstanding international bonds issued by non-financial corporations grew from
$360 billion (approximately 30% of total outstanding bonds) to $1.1 trillion (more than 40% of
total outstanding bonds). The increase in leverage was particularly important in non-tradable
cyclical sectors such as construction. Further, the increase in leverage and foreign currency debt
documented above took place in an environment of ample global liquidity and record low policy
rates in advanced economies.13


11
   Total cross-border claims on EMs by BIS reporting banks increased from $2.4 trillion in 2008 to a peak of $3.7
trillion on 2014. Data for 2015 indicates a $200 billion retreat, with total cross-border claims standing just below
$3.5 trillion. In 2007 foreign currency bonds represented 16 percent of international debt by emerging market-based
non-financial corporations and by 2014 the foreign currency share had grown to 22 percent (IMF, 2015). The share
of dollar-denominated bonds issued by non-financial corporations is higher than the overall share of dollar-
denominated bonds. In 2015, borrowing by non-financial corporations accounted for about 25 percent of emerging
market cross-border borrowing from BIS reporting banks. Total credit denominated in US dollars to non-bank
borrowers, resident in emerging markets increased from 1.6 trillion in 2008 to 3 trillion at the end of 2014. Over the
same period of time total credit denominated to non-bank borrowers, resident in emerging markets denominated in
euro and Japanese yen also increased but at a much smaller rate 9and starting from a smaller base) than dollar credit
(data on foreign currency credit to non-financial corporations are available the BIS Global Liquidity Indicators,
Tables E2.1 E2.2, E2.3. We would like to thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this data source.
12
   Total cross-border claims on EMs by BIS reporting banks increased from $2.4 trillion in 2008 to a peak of $3.7
trillion on 2014. Data for 2015 indicates a $200 billion retreat, with total cross-border claims standing just below
$3.5 trillion. In 2007 foreign currency bonds represented 16 percent of international debt by emerging market-based
non-financial corporations and by 2014 the foreign currency share had grown to 22 percent (IMF, 2015). The share
of dollar-denominated bonds issued by non-financial corporations is higher than the overall share of dollar-
denominated bonds. In 2015, borrowing by non-financial corporations accounted for about 25 percent of emerging
market cross-border borrowing from BIS reporting banks. Also, see Borio et al., 2011, Avdjiev et al., 2012, Lane and
McQuade, 2014.
13
   Emerging market-based corporates have therefore borrowed at longer maturities and lower yields. Maturity went
from the pre-crisis average of 5 years to more than 6 years and average yields decreased from 8 to 6 percent (IMF,
2015).

                                                                                                                    7
         For our sample of emerging markets firms, we use as a main indicator of leverage the debt
to equity ratio (a firm’s total debt divided by its common equity), which indicates how much debt
a company is using to finance its assets relative to its common equity. Average leverage in the
full sample is 66%, with a median value of 43% and ranges between 0 and 255%. Leverage is
slightly higher for the subsample of firms for which we have enough information to compute
Altman’s Z score (in this case the average value of leverage is 69% with a median value of 48%,
compare the first two rows of Table 1). Table A2 in the Appendix presents a heat map for
corporate leverage as the sales-weighted debt to equity ratios across the emerging markets
countries in our sample.
         The heat map shows that average leverage increase from 72.8% in the run up to the GFC
(2003-2007) to 95.3% in the post-GFC period (2008-2014)—a 22 percentage point increase in
average leverage.14 On a country-by-country basis, post-GFC leverage is higher than its pre-crisis
average for every country in our sample. A t-test of means confirms that the increase in leverage
is statistically significant at the 5% level across the two sub-periods.
         Here a point about the weighting strategy used in the heat map is worth noting. We focus
on sales-weighted leverage because to measure the overall riskiness of corporate debt for the
financial system in a country, we would like to assess the upper bound of the risk.15 If a few large
firms are also the ones with the highest leverage, it is desirable to give a larger weight to these
observations since arguably these firms have the greatest potential to generate systemic risk—we
focus on these large firms in Section 5.




14
   The averages of the heat map do not perfectly match those in the summary statistics of Table 1 because the heat
map shows sales-weighted averages while Table presents simple averages.
15
   In general, the weighted median measure attenuates the distributional consequences of observations in the tails of a
distribution. In many circumstances, this adjustment is warranted to ensure that outliers do not drive the results. In
other words, if a few observations skew the weighted mean, the weighted median that adjusts for non-uniform
statistical weights and gives the 50% weighted percentile measure is the more appropriate statistic. 14 out of 19
countries have a higher post-GFC weighted median (results available upon request).

                                                                                                                     8
3.2 Measuring Vulnerability: The Altman Z-Score

         Altman (1968) developed the first multivariate bankruptcy prediction model and the index
remains widespread in finance, accounting, and macroeconomics research.16 While many
alternative failure-prediction models exist, the use of the Z-Score model continues as a main or
supporting tool for bankruptcy or financial distress prediction. Initial tests revealed that the
Altman Z-Score had a 72% accuracy rate in predicting bankruptcy two years before the event,
with a Type II error that classifies the firm as bankrupt when it does not go bankrupt of 6%
(Altman, 1968). Subsequent testing over three decades showed that the model was approximately
80%–90% accurate in predicting bankruptcy one year before the event, with a Type II error of
approximately 15%–20% (Altman, 2000).
         The Z-score is a linear combination of five corporate income and balance sheet values to
measure the financial health of a company: the ratios of working capital, retained earnings, and
operating income to total assets, the book value of assets to total liabilities and the sales to total
assets. By combining various aspects of firm operations, it paints an overall picture of corporate
health. The advantage of the approach is that the different ranges of “safe”, “grey” and “distress”
can be correlated with corporate ratings letter grades used by credit rating agencies. The Z-score
statistics correspond to AAA to BBB for the safe zone, BBB- to B- for the grey zone and CCC+
and below for the distress zone.
         The original coefficient estimates compared publicly listed firms in the manufacturing
sector that had declared bankruptcy and those that had survived, matched by various
characteristics namely industry and size (assets).17 The measure was subsequent modified to
consider larger sample of firms, including non-manufacturing (Altman Z’’-Score) firms and
private firms (Altman Z’-Score).
         Altman (2005) also proposed a version of the original Z-Score to account for different
structural characteristics of emerging market firms; e.g. he replaces the market value of assets to

16
   Examples of papers in macroeconomics that have used Altman’s measure include Bernanke and Campbell (1988),
Corbae and D’Erasmo (2017), in international economics Agca and Celasun (2010), in finance Fazzari, Hubbard,
Petersen (1988), Graham, Li, Qui (2008), Van Binsbergen, Graham, Yang (2010), Acharya, Davydenko, Strebulaev
(2011), Jacobson and Von Schedvin (2015), Ben-David, Franzoni, Moussawi, Sedunov (2016), De Angelo, Goncalvez,
Stulz (2016), Bonaccorsi di Patti, Kashyap (2017).
17
   The original Z-score, Z = 1.2X1 + 1.4X2 + 3.3X3 + 0.6X4 + 1.0X5, where X1 = working capital / total assets, measuring
liquid assets relative to the size of the company; X2 = retained earnings / total assets, capturing earning ability; X3 =
earnings before interest and taxes / total assets, capturing operating efficiency relative to assets; X4 = market value of
equity / book value of total liabilities; X5 = sales / total assets capturing total asset turnover.

                                                                                                                        9
the book value to adjust for the relative trading illiquidity in emerging markets compared to
advanced economies.
         Accordingly, as a summary measure of corporate fragility, we calculate the Altman
(2005) Emerging Market Z-score that is best suited to assess the relative vulnerability of the
sample of countries we consider in this paper. The measure weighs four ratios constructed using
the firms’ financial statements (working capital to total assets, retained earnings to total assets,
operating income to total assets, and book value of equity to total liabilities):18


                  EM Z-score =6.56X1 + 3.26X2 + 6.72X3 + 1.05X4 + 3.25


where X1= working capital/ total assets, X2=retained earnings /total assets, X3=operating income
/total assets, X4=book value of equity /total liabilities. The constant term (derived from the
median Z`` score for bankrupt US entities) standardizes the analysis so “that a default equivalent
(D) is consistent with a score below zero.”
         Lower Z-scores are associated with greater vulnerability and likelihood of bankruptcy.
Companies with EM Z-scores greater than 5.85 are considered to be in the “safe zone”, scores
between 5.85 and 3.75 indicate vulnerability, and scores below 3.75 indicate that the firm is in
state of distress. Table 2 from Altman (2005) compares Z-scores with bond ratings.
         For the firms in our sample, Table A2 in the Appendix presents a heat map for EM Z-
score statistics for the countries in our sample. The table presents cross-firm averages by country
for the full sample (as for Leverage, we report weighted means), in the years leading up to the
GFC, and in the post-GFC period. Countries with higher Z-scores in the post-GFC period are
Colombia, Eastern Europe, Malaysia, South Korea, and Indonesia. Note that South Korea was in
the distress zone during the Asian Financial crisis. However, nine countries in the sample are in
the grey or vulnerable zone. These countries include some of the largest emerging markets in
Asia (China, India and Turkey) and Latin America (Argentina, Brazil and Mexico). In addition,
thirteen countries in the sample have lower average Z-scores in the post-GFC period compared to



18
   The use of book value of equity, not market value, was motivated by a concern that equity markets may be less liquid
than in developed markets. Altman (2005) adjusts the measure to consider currency devaluation vulnerability, industry
adjustments (relative to U.S.); competitiveness position adjustment (dominant firms in the industry due to size, political
influence, etc.); special debt issue figure (collateral or bona fide, high-quality guarantor); sovereign spread (comparison
to US corporate bond of the same rating).

                                                                                                                       10
pre-crisis. Although there are no countries in the distress zone post-GFC, in addition to the
countries in the grey zone, some of the countries are also barely in the safe zone.
       If the Altman Z-score provides a leading indicator of the potential for distress, the data
show that a broad set of emerging markets in the post-GFC period face heightened corporate
vulnerability. The average winsorized emerging market Z-score in our sample is 7.50 and
corresponds to a AA rating in the safe zone. The Z-score ranges from 0.18 in the distress zone to
16.55 in the safe zone (Table 1). We also build a modified Z-score that does not include the book
value of equity /total liabilities. The modified Z-score has an average value of 25.63 and ranges
between 20 and 33.
       To further validate our use of Altman’s EM Z-score as a proxy for the inverse of
corporate financial fragility, we test its ability to predict exit from the sample. We find that firms
with low Z-scores are more likely to exit the sample the next period. Specifically, we estimate the
following linear probability model (we obtain similar results if we use a probit model):


                                  !"# = 25.18∗∗∗ − 0.14∗∗ × /",#12
                                        (0.65)        (0.05)                               (1)


where !",# is an indicator variable that takes a value of 100 if firm i is in the sample in period t-1
but is not in the sample in period t and takes value 0 if the firm is in the sample in both periods,
and /",#12 is the Z score in period t-1. The point estimates suggest that in any given year there is
25% probability that a firm will drop out of the sample, but that this probability is lower for firms
with a high Z score. Specifically, a one standard deviation decrease, corresponding to a 4.4%
decrease in the Z-score is associated with a 0.7 percentage points increase in the probability that
the firm will not be in the sample in the following year (this corresponds to a 3 percent increase
in the unconditional probability of exiting the sample). This outcome suggests that also in our
sample of firms the Z-score is a good proxy for distance to default.
       We also find that the Z-score is correlated with default in the expected direction: A higher
Z-score is associated with a lower probability of default. We perform this exercise using Orbis
data for 15 emerging market countries (Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, South Africa, and South
Korea) and 22 years (1996-2017), containing a total of 735,426 firm-years. We construct a

                                                                                                       11
default dummy that equals one on the year in which a firm’s status changes from “Active” to
“Bankruptcy”, “Dissolved”, or “Dissolved (liquidation)”. There are 896 such cases. We find the
correlation between Altman’s Emerging Market Z-score and the default dummy is -0.0199,
statistically significant at the 1% level. The correlation with the modified Z-score with no
leverage term is -0.0212, also significant at the 1% level.
          Summary: While there is substantial cross-country heterogeneity in the post-GFC period,
our data suggest that a number of countries have higher leverage and close to or in the “grey
zone” post-GFC implying a higher risk of financial distress. Note also that while warning lights
are flashing regarding these vulnerabilities, no emerging market country was actually in crisis or
in the red “distress” zone by the end of our sample period. It is, however, worth noting that the Z-
score signaled an increased vulnerability in Turkey, a fact consistent with the recent crisis in
Turkey.
          Table 1 also presents some basic summary statistics for other variables of interest. For
example, the average asset size of the firms in our sample is US$ 287 million with a median
value of US$ 9 million. The firms in the 25th percentile for size have assets of US$ 1.3 million
while the firms in the 75th percentile have assets of US$ 226 million with the largest firm with
assets that amount to US$ 1,652 million. Average real investment measured by the change in
property, plant and equipment is 9% with firms in the 25th percentile with -7% investment and
firms in the 75th percentile with 18% real investment rates.


4. Corporate Fragility in Emerging Markets: Firm Level Evidence


4.1 Firm-Observables and Corporate Fragility

          In the previous section we found that in the post-GFC period more countries are in
Altman's grey zone for corporate fragility or barely above the threshold. In this section we delve
further into the firm-level data and run regressions to examine the link between corporate
financial fragility and leverage as well as the role of firm-characteristics—in particular firm size.
We also examine the impact of macroeconomic and institutional factors such as exchange rates,
economic growth, and financial globalization interacted with leverage on the corporate distress
scores.



                                                                                                     12
         As a first step, we examine the relationship between leverage, firm-size and other firm-
characteristics and the Z-score by estimating the following model:19


        /",7,# = 8" + :7,# + ;2 <=>=?@A=",7,# + ;B CD/E",7,# + ;F G",7,# + H",7,#                        (2)


where /",7,# is the Z-score for firm i, country c, year t; <=>=?@A=",7,# is leverage for firm i,
country c, year t; G",7,# are measures of other firm characteristics; 8" are firm fixed effects; :7,# are
country-year fixed effects; ;2 , ;B , ;F are the coefficients on leverage, size and other firm-
characteristics. The standard errors are clustered at the firm and country-year level.
         We begin by examining the unconditional correlation between leverage and the Altman’s
Z-score, i.e., with a specification that does not include compositional controls. In other words,
we start by estimating specification (1), but without firm and country-year fixed effects. Unless
otherwise noted our measure of size is log assets. Column 1 of Table 3 examines the impact of
leverage, size and real investment (measured as the change in property, plant and equipment) on
the Altman’s Z-score. It shows that leverage is inversely correlated with the Z score, i.e., scores
for firms with high leverage are closer to the distress range. The effect is statistically significant
at the 1% level. Firm size is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level. Real investment
is positively correlated with the Z-score but the coefficient is not statistically significant. The
results suggest that the large firms and highly levered firms are more financially vulnerable.
         Column 2 introduces compositional controls in the form of country-year fixed effects as it
may be the case that unobserved heterogeneity across country-years may drive both the firm-
characteristics such as leverage and Z-scores over time. The pattern of results remains
qualitatively similar with negative and statistically significant coefficients on leverage and firm
size and positive and but not significant coefficient on real investment. While the magnitude of
the coefficient on leverage remains relatively stable, it is interesting to note that the coefficient on
firm size doubles when the country-year fixed effects are included in the specification.
         A potential concern with the econometric specifications in Column 1 and 2, however, is
that the ratio of Book-Value-of-Equity to Total Liabilities, a component of the Altman’s Z-score,


19
  In the regressions, the variables are Winsorized at 5%. The results are robust to using 1% Winsorization as well as
no Winsorization.


                                                                                                                  13
is by construction negatively correlated with our measure of leverage. Therefore, one might argue
that the relationship between leverage and the Z-score is mechanically hard-wired. This subtle
point is worth emphasizing as, at first pass, it may appear that “leverage is regressed on
leverage.”
         To circumvent this concern, we construct a modified Z-score that does not include the
leverage term and only includes the ratios of working capital, retained earnings and operating
income to total assets. Higher values of these components drive up the Z-score and are a sign of
improving corporate health (the correlation between the original Z-score and the modified Z-
score is 0.76). Column 3 examines the relationship between leverage, firm size, real investment
and the modified Altman’s Z-score. The regression specification is the same as in Column 1 with
the modified Z-score as the dependent variable. The coefficient on leverage is no longer
statistically significant. Firm size, however, remains inversely correlated with the modified Z-
score, suggesting that, for a given level of leverage, larger firms are more financially fragile. Real
investment is positively correlated with firm financial health and in this case the coefficient is
statistically significant.
         Column 4 introduces country-year fixed effects to control for unobserved heterogeneity
across countries over time. The pattern of results remains qualitatively similar for firm size and
investment, but the leverage coefficient is now positive and statistically significant. Interestingly,
comparing the results in Columns 3 and 4, the magnitude on the coefficient on firm size almost
quadruples when country-year fixed effects are introduced. Since the results in Columns 1-4 do
not control for time-invariant unobservable heterogeneity at the firm level we go on to include
firm fixed effects. The results are qualitatively similar to those in Column 4, but the effect of firm
size is now eight times larger than that of the estimations without firm-fixed effects.20 Column 6
introduces country-year and firm fixed effects jointly into the specification. The magnitude of the
coefficient on firm size is very similar to that in Column 5.
         Column 7 and 8 introduce a time-invariant dummy for firm size where a firm is defined as
large if its total assets are larger than the country-year average of total assets in each country-
year. While the inclusion of this time invariant dummy does not allow us to control for firm fixed
effects, the results with and without country-year fixed effects corroborate our previous finding

20
  We also estimated a specification with a control for the return on assets. The coefficient on firm size remains
inversely correlated with the modified Z-score while the return on assets, a measure of profitability, is positively
correlated with the modified Z-score.

                                                                                                                       14
that large firms tend to have lower Z-scores. In Column 9 we used an alternative measure of
time-invariant firm size. Specifically, we define firms as large on the basis of sales ranking by
applying the same methodology used in the granularity regressions that examine the importance
of large firms for the macroeconomy in emerging markets (see Section 5 below).21 Across these
alternative definitions of firm size, the relationship with financial vulnerability remains negative
and highly statistically significant. Large firms therefore appear to be a key source of corporate
financial vulnerability in emerging markets.
         The inverse relationship between firm-size and financial vulnerability is of interest as the
financial vulnerability of large firms is of particular concern to regulators. For example, the
IMF’s World Economic Outlook (October 2015) report explicitly states that it is “important to
closely monitor sectors and systemically important firms most exposed to risks and the sectors
and large firms closely connected to them, including across the financial system, and to prepare
for contingencies.”

4.2 The Impact of Leverage Varies Over Time while Size Effect is Time-Invariant

         The previous subsection documents that firm size appears to be a key driver of financial
fragility. In this section we examine whether the relationship between firm observables (leverage
and firm size) and fragility varies over time and whether any one variable has a more consistent
impact on fragility. We find that while the relationship between leverage and fragility varies over
time, the firm characteristic that is consistently significant and robust to the inclusion of fixed
effects is firm size.
         As a first pass, we estimate regressions that allow the coefficients of leverage and firm
size to vary over five different sub-periods (1993-1995, 1996-2002, 2003-2006, 2007-2010,
2011-2014). The rationale for delineating the sub-periods is as follows. The first period, 1993-
1995 relates to the opening of up financial markets in emerging market countries (see Chari and
Henry, 2004) ending with the Tequila Crisis of Mexico in 1994-95. The second period 1996-2002
corresponds to a wave of emerging market crises including the Asian financial crisis, and the
Argentine and Russian crises. The third period, 2003-2007, was characterized by robust and


21
   We use these time-invariant and discrete measures of firm size to make sure that the negative correlation between
firm size and the Z-score is not purely driven by within-firm shocks to the value of total assets (such shocks would
create an automatic correlation between the log of total assets –our measure of firm size- and the denominator of the
various components of the Z score).

                                                                                                                   15
stable growth in most emerging markets. The fourth period, 2007-2010, coincides with the most
virulent phase of the Global Financial Crisis and Great Recession. Finally, we identify 2011-2014
as the post-Global Financial Crisis period. These periods were also characterized by important
institutional changes within emerging market countries.
         In the aftermath of the GFC, advanced economies were characterized by increases in
government borrowing and household and corporate deleveraging.22 Emerging markets stand in
stark contrast. Over 2001-2007 average credit to the non-financial sector in emerging market
countries remained close to 120% of GDP. The GFC caused a sudden reduction in credit, which
went from 122% of GDP in 2007 to 109% in 2008. Credit started expanding rapidly in 2009 and
reached 175% of GDP in 2015, a 67-percentage point increase with respect to the 2008 trough
(Figure 1). Borrowing by non-financial corporations was a key driver of this surge in leverage—
corporate debt went from 57% to 101% of GDP over 2008-15.23
         We estimate the following regression specification across the five sub-periods (indexed
by d):


      /",7,# = 8" + :7,# + ∑KJL2 ;2,J <=>=?@A=",7,# + ∑KJL2 ;B,J CD/E",7,# + H",7,#                          (3)


         The sub period regressions include firm and country-year fixed effects (8" and :7,# ,
respectively). Figure 2 reports the results that show that the coefficient on leverage is positive and
significant between 2003-2006, and not statistically significant in other sub-periods. The pattern
of coefficients suggests that the relationship between leverage and fragility varies over time. In
contrast, the coefficient on firm size remains negative and statistically significant across all five
sub-periods. The magnitude of the coefficient also remains remarkably stable. These simple
regressions indicate that the relationship between firm size and corporate fragility is very
consistent and robust.




22
   Low global interest rates notwithstanding, the higher leverage led to a rapid increase in the debt service ratios of
emerging market borrowers. In a period when the average debt service ratio of Advanced Economies decreased from
21 to 18 percent, the average debt service ratio of emerging markets increased from 10 to 12.5 percent. In a subset of
emerging economies characterized by rapid credit expansion, debt service ratios surpassed the advanced economy
average (BIS credit statistics).
23
   Over the same period, household debt increased by 12 percentage points and government debt increased by 9
percentage points.

                                                                                                                    16
        Next, we show that the results described above are not driven by a particular choice of
time period and explore the heterogeneity in the relationship between firm size, leverage and
corporate fragility in detail. First, we focus on time heterogeneity and estimate the following
specification.


        /",7,# = ∑Q# :# MN# × <EO",7,# P + ∑Q# R# MN# × CD/E",7,# P + 8" + S7,# + H",7,#             (4)


where N# are year fixed effects, 8" are firm fixed effects, and S7,# are country-year fixed effects,
and :# and R# are parameter estimates. Figure 3 plots the values of :# and R# with 95% confidence
interval. The figure confirms that the estimated effect of firm size (right panel) remains quite
stable and that of leverage (left panel) varies over time (albeit is never statistically significant).
        Next, we focus on country heterogeneity and estimate:


        /",7,# = ∑U7 :7 MT7 × <=>=?@A=",7,# P + ∑U7 R7 MT7 × CD/E",7,# P + 8" + S7,# + H",7,#        (5)


where T7 is a country fixed effect and all other variables are defined as above. Again, we see
considerable heterogeneity for :7 , the coefficient on leverage (left panel) and limited
heterogeneity in the magnitude of the coefficient for firm size, R7 (Figure 4).
        Finally, we allow the coefficients on leverage and size to vary across country-years and
estimate:


        /",7,# = ∑UQ                                  UQ
                  7,# :7,# MS7,# × <=>=?@A=",7,# P + ∑7,# R7,# MS7,# × CVW=",7,# P + S7,# + H",7,#   (6)


The figures once again display a lot of heterogeneity for :7# on leverage and limited
heterogeneity for R7# or firm size (Figure 5).




                                                                                                           17
4.3 Leverage, the Macroeconomy and Firm Size

       A natural question arises. Can we explain the observed country-year heterogeneity? One
conjecture is that if firms borrow in foreign currency, leverage will likely have a particularly
adverse impact on corporate financial fragility in times when the currency depreciates. We test
this hypothesis by interacting leverage with changes in the bilateral exchange rate vis-à-vis the
U.S. dollar (an increase is a depreciation). While we do not have data on the currency
composition of firm-level debt, the finding that currency movements amplify the correlation
between leverage and corporate financial fragility would be consistent with the presence of
currency mismatches. We test this hypothesis by estimating the following specification:


          /",7,# = 8" + :7,# + ;<",7,# + RM<",7,# × ∆EG7,#12 P + YCD/E",7,# + H",7,#      (7)


       In this set up, ; measures the correlation between leverage and firm fragility when there
are no exchange rate movements and R measures how the correlation between leverage and firm
fragility varies with currency depreciations (∆EG7,#12 is the percentage change in the nominal
exchange rate, where ∆EG > 0 represents a currency depreciation). Note that the main effect of
the exchange rate is captured by the country-year fixed effects.
       Table 4 presents the results. Column 1 shows that the interaction effect of leverage and
currency depreciation is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level (we discuss the
economic significance of this effect in sub section 4.5 below). Note that the inclusion of country-
year fixed effects rules out any concern of direct reverse causality, i.e., the possibility that an
increase in firm fragility leads to currency depreciation. We also explore whether our baseline
results (which use bilateral exchange rates vis-à-vis the US dollar) are robust to replacing the
bilateral exchange rate with the financial liabilities weighted effective exchange rate computed by
Benetrix, Lane, and Shambaugh (2015). Column 2 of Table 4 shows that this is the case.
       However, in emerging markets, currency depreciations are often accompanied by
economic recessions and tighter financial conditions. Our earlier results on the impact of
exchange rates could thus be driven by the fact that highly leveraged firms suffer more during
recessions or, in the presence of maturity mismatches, are particularly affected by sudden
increases in the interest rate. In column 3 we control for this possibility by interacting leverage


                                                                                                      18
with lagged GDP growth. We find that the interaction between leverage and economic growth is
not statistically significant while the interaction between leverage and currency depreciations
remains negative and statistically significant.
       Many emerging market countries reacted to the crises of the late 1990s with reforms
aimed at improving their institutional and macroeconomic framework. Fourteen of the twenty-
five countries included in our sample moved to an inflation-targeting framework between 1997
and 2009. Many countries and also implemented reforms aimed at improving their domestic
capital markets (the Asian Bond market Initiative was a specific outcome of the Asian Financial
crisis) and promoting financial deepening. In our sample of countries average financial depth
went from 50% in 1995 to 72% in 2014. The period we study was also characterized by different
phases of financial globalization with an increase of cross-border capital flows over 2002-2007, a
collapse over 2007-2009 and a rapid increase in flows to emerging markets after 2010 (Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti, 2017). Next, we test whether our results are driven by these factors by examining
the effects of leverage conditional on changes in the exchange rate are robust to the inclusion of
the interaction of leverage with (i) lagged inflation, (ii) an index of financial development, and
(iii) the updated Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) index of financial globalization.
       Columns 4-6 show that, inflation, financial depth and international financial integration
measured by the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti index interacted with leverage do not have a
statistically significant impact on Z-scores, while the interaction between leverage and currency
depreciation remains negative and statistically significant. Column 7 presents a full-blown
estimation with all the explanatory variables from Columns 2-5 and shows that the exchange rate
and leverage effect remain robust. A second salient finding is that the size variable remains
negative, statistically significant at the 1% level with a remarkably stable coefficient magnitude
across all the specifications in Table 4. The pattern once again corroborates the role of firm size
in explaining corporate fragility.
       To examine whether there is a differential interaction effect of leverage and exchange rate
changes on corporate financial fragility depends on whether emerging market currencies are
strengthening or weakening, we estimate the regression specification in Column 6 separately for
periods of currency appreciation and depreciations. Columns 8 and 9 in Table 4 report the results.
Column 7 shows that effect of leverage and change in the exchange rate on Z-scores conditional
on currency depreciation is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level. In contrast,


                                                                                                     19
Column 8 shows that the coefficient on the interaction effect and the exchange rate change
conditional on currency appreciation is not statistically significant. This pattern corroborates the
hypothesis that leverage interacted with currency depreciation has a statistically significant
adverse impact on Z-scores.
         We conducted a few additional tests to ensure the robustness of the patterns the data
reveal. First, an important concern is whether survivorship bias drives the observed pattern of
results. To address this, in Appendix Table A3 we re-estimate the specification in Column 1 of
Table 4 with firms that survive or are present in the data for different lengths of time. We limit
the sample to firms that are present for at least five years (column 2), for at least ten years
(column 3) and for at least fifteen years (column 4). Interestingly, the coefficient estimates for
both the leverage and exchange rate interaction effect and that on firm size rise in magnitude as
we proceed from a sample with a fewer number of years in Column 2 to a sample with firms with
data for fifteen years in Column 4. Second, we re-estimate the specifications in Table 4 by
dropping China from the sample (Appendix Table A4). The pattern of results remains robust.
Finally, we show that our results are robust to estimating all the models of Table 4 on a constant
sample (Appendix Table A5).

4.4 Leverage, Exchange Rates and Tradability

         Unhedged currency exposures for firms in non-tradable industries such as construction
and utilities that access international capital markets may be particularly adverse. However,
currency mismatches may be less damaging for firms that, by operating in the tradable sector,
may have natural hedges through foreign currency revenues. Pooling tradable and non-tradable
firms into a single specification obscures such heterogeneity.
         To focus on the sector-specific dimension, we estimate Equation (2) separately for firms
that operate in tradable sectors and firms that operate in non-tradable sectors. 24 Columns 1 and 2
of Table 5 show that a larger and statistically significant interaction effect between leverage and


24
   We start by classifying as non-tradable all firms that have a SIC2 code above 39, but then we also classify as non-
tradable firms with SIC2 codes 7 (Agricultural Services), 9 (Fishing, Hunting and Trapping), 15 (Construction -
General Contractors & Operative Builders), 16 (Heavy Construction, Except Building Construction, Contractor), 17
(Construction - Special Trade Contractors), 25 (Furniture and Fixtures), 27 (Printing, Publishing and Allied
Industries), and 32 (Stone, Clay, Glass, and Concrete Products). This classification yields 5,888 observations in the
tradable sector and 4,000 in the non-tradable sector. Our results are robust to using the simpler above 39 and below
split.

                                                                                                                    20
exchange rates for non-tradable industries and a smaller and insignificant coefficient for the
tradable sector. In columns 3 and 4 we also include the interaction effects between leverage and
the percentage change in the exchange rate (ΔEG), real GDP growth (GR_GDP), inflation
(Inflation), private credit over GDP (FINDEV), and the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti index of
financial globalization (LMF). The results show that, again the effect is only present for firms
that operate in non-tradable sectors-the coefficient on the interaction effect between leverage and
the exchange rate remains negative and statistically significant. Interestingly, the interaction
effect between leverage and inflation is also negative and statistically significant for the non-
tradable sector. In all regressions of Table 5, firm size continues to be inversely correlated with
the Z-score for both tradable and non-tradable sectors.

4.5 Attenuation Bias and an Instrumental Variable Approach

       A point to note is that the magnitude of the interaction effect between leverage and
currency depreciations documented in Table 4 is small. For instance, consider how a currency
depreciation of 30% may affect a firm whose leverage is one standard deviation above average.
Given that the standard deviation of leverage is about 70%, a currency depreciation of 30%
implies a Z-score reduction of 0.315 points—we use the interaction effect coefficient from
Column 6 of Table 4 (-1.5*0.30*0.7=0.315). This is a very small effect, less than 10% of the
standard deviation of the modified Z score. Note that the effect remains small even when we
focus on non-tradable industries. If our variables are measured with error, our results may suffer
from attenuation bias that is amplified by the presence of firm and country-year fixed effects.
Instrumental variable estimates could address this problem, as well other remaining endogenity
concerns.
       Our instrument is based on world capital flows (Bussière, et al. (2015) and Alfaro et. al.,
2018). To instrument for the exchange rate, we interact world capital flows (total foreign
liabilities summed across countries from the IMF, IFS) with a country’s sensitivity to capital
flows measured by lagged values of de jure financial openness. We proxy the financial openness
measure by the Chinn-Ito (2006) index, which is based on the IMF Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. The rationale for this instrument is that world gross
financial flows ought to be independent of local economic conditions in a given destination



                                                                                                      21
country and act as a push factor. Country-specific financial openness measures provide the cross-
country variation in the instrument.
           In particular, we compute world capital flows as the sum of equity (FDI and portfolio)
and debt inflows across countries (IMF, IFS). We then interact this variable that varies over time,
with the lagged country-specific value of the Chinn-Ito index for financial openness. We
normalize the measure by world GDP. We tried alternative measures that exclude reserves
accumulation from total capital flows. We also used total foreign liabilities capital flows from
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti. In addition, we tried pre-sample measures of the Chinn-Ito index for
financial openness (1993, 1995, 2000).
           Table 6 documents the relationship between corporate vulnerability and leverage, firm
size, and exchange rates. Column 1 shows that the coefficients on the interaction effect between
leverage and the exchange rate and on firm size are negative and statistically significant at the 5%
level. Column 2 reveals a similar pattern of results for a full-blown specification that includes the
full set of controls discussed in Table 4.
           The instrumental variables specification confirms the effects we document in earlier
sections about the drivers of corporate vulnerability. The high values of the Cragg-Donald F
statistics reported at the bottom of the table show that our results are not affected by a weak
instrument problem.25
           The magnitudes of the coefficients in the instrumental variable regressions are much
larger alleviating concerns about attenuation bias. Quantifying the interaction effect of leverage
and exchange rates for a 30% depreciation results in a Z-score fall of 4.8*0.3*0.7=1 point. This
means that if the currency depreciates by 30%, the Z score drops by 1 point or about one-third of
a standard deviation in the distribution of the modified Z-score.
           We estimated the specifications in Columns 1 and 2 using the alternative financially
weighted exchange rate measure of Benetrix et al. (2015). The results remain robust (Columns 3
and 4). One advantage of using the financially weighted exchange rate is that this effective
exchange rate allows us to use an additional instrument and thus assess the validity of our IV
strategy with an over-identification test.
           Specifically, we propose a second instrument that uses time-invariant currency weights
computed by Benetrix et al. (2015) to build an exogenous shock to the financially weighted

25
     Note that since we are instrumenting an interaction, the instrument is itself interacted with leverage.

                                                                                                               22
exchange rate. To fix the ideas, consider a world with three currencies: the peso, U.S. dollar, and
the euro. The financially-weighted effective exchange rate for the peso would be:


                                             E\ = ]E\/$ + (1 − ])E\/€                                       (8)


where E\/$ is pesos per dollar, E\/€ is pesos per euro, and w is the weight of the dollar in the
effective exchange rate for the peso. Also define E$/€ as dollars per euro which we assume is
exogenous to developments in the country that issues the peso. As E\/€ = E\/$ E\/€ , we can
therefore rewrite the effective exchange rate as:


                                             E\ = E\/$ a] + (1 − ])E$/€ b                                   (9)


         Given that currency weights tend to be relatively stable over time, the preceding analysis
implies that we can use (1 − ])E$/€ as an instrument for the effective exchange rate for the peso,
E\ . Given that we have more than three currencies, we instrument the financially weighted
exchange rate of country i in time t (E",# ) with (1 − ]" )Ecd,# , where ]" is the time-invariant
(computed as an average over 1990-2010) of the US dollar share in country i’s financially
weighted exchange rate and Ecd,# is the effective exchange rate for the US.26
         Columns 5 and 6 of Table 6 show that the results of columns 3 and 4 are robust to
including this instrument together with the world capital flows instrument of Alfaro et. al. (2018).
The interaction effect between leverage and the new instrument for the exchange rate is negative
and significant as is the unconditional effect on leverage. Size also continues to be inversely
correlated with corporate vulnerability. The coefficient on growth interacted with leverage is
positive and significant. The bottom rows of the table show that the instruments are not weak and
that the Sargan test does not reject the validity of our over-identifying assumptions.




26
  Note that we could have done this exercise with any other currency, but we picked the dollar as it is the currency
that tends to have the largest weight in the financially weighted exchange rate of most emerging market countries.

                                                                                                                   23
5. Corporate Fragility in Emerging Markets and the Macroeconomy


        A key question is whether the increase in corporate leverage documented above can have
large negative macroeconomic consequences with monetary policy normalization in advanced
economies. Acharya et al. (2015) suggest that this normalization could lead to capital outflows
from emerging markets and potential problems associated with the presence of currency
mismatches in firm balance sheets.
        Note that in all the specifications in Tables 3-5 that included firm size, size was a
significant predictor of financial vulnerability. Moreover, the coefficient was highly statistically
significant. The inverse correlation between firm size and the Altman’s Z-score (both the
standard and modified versions), suggest that in emerging markets firm size or the extent of
granularity in the firm-level data may be a novel and powerful indicator of financial
vulnerabilities.
        Hence, we study macroeconomic vulnerabilities by focusing on the behavior of large
firms. Specifically, we proceed in two steps. First, we follow Gabaix (2011) and show that
idiosyncratic shocks to large firms are significantly correlated with GDP growth in our sample of
emerging markets. Second, we test whether large firms are particularly vulnerable to exchange
rate movements. We find that large firms are, on average, less leveraged than smaller firms.
However, we also find that the more-leveraged large firms are more vulnerable to exchange rate
shocks compared to equally-leveraged smaller firms. This evidence is consistent with the idea
that large firms make a greater use of foreign currency borrowing and that they are not fully
hedged against exchange rate movements. While this result holds for the average country in our
sample, we also find that there is substantial cross-country heterogeneity.

5.1     Granularity in Emerging Markets

        Gabaix (2011) shows that if the distribution of firm size can be approximated with a fat-
tailed power law (formally e(C > f ) = @f 1g where S is firm size and h ≥ 1) idiosyncratic firm-
level shocks can play a key role in explaining aggregate fluctuations. He builds a “granularity”
index that captures idiosyncratic shocks for the largest 100 US firms and shows that this index is
closely correlated with overall US GDP growth (Table A6 in the Appendix shows that this
correlation is robust to including additional controls).

                                                                                                   24
       According to Gabaix, granularity effects are likely to be even more important in countries
that are less diversified than the United States. He mentions several emerging market countries
and suggests that “It would be interesting to transpose the present analysis to those countries”
(Gabaix, 2011 p. 737). We take this suggestion seriously and build a granularity index for our
sample of 26 emerging market countries.
       Gabaix (2011) measures granularity with the following index:


                                      d
                           Γ# = ∑q
                                 "L2 o
                                      k,lmn
                                            MA",# − A̅# P                                          (10)
                                          k,lmn




where C",#12 measures sales of firm V, r",#12 is GDP, A",# is the growth rate of firm V (defined as
the growth rate of the sales to employees ratio) and A̅# is the simple average of the growth rate of
the largest s firms in the economy (with s ≥ t, and where firm size is measured by sales).
Gabaix sets K=100 and experiments with Q=100 and Q=1000. When Q=100, the index is equal
to the weighted growth rate of the 100 largest firms minus the (simple) average growth rate of
these same firms. When Q=1000, the index is equal to the weighted growth rate of the 100 largest
firms minus the (simple) average growth rate of the largest 1000 firms. It should be noted that the
         d
weights (ok,lmn ) do not add up to one because the weights are computed for a subset of firms and
             k,lmn

the numerator is sales and the denominator is GDP.
       In order to build a granularity index for our sample of emerging markets we need to
address two issues. The first issue relates to data limitations. As mentioned above, Gabaix
measures firm growth as the growth rate of the sales-to-employees ratio. Unfortunately, we do
not have a good coverage of firms with data on total employment. Therefore, we measure firm
growth by focusing on the growth rate of total sales. Our measure is a good approximation of the
sales-to-employees growth rate as long as most of the variance in the ratio used by Gabaix arises
from variations in sales rather than in variations of employment.
       The second issue relates to the definition of “large” firms in an emerging market context.
While it is reasonable to assume that, in a large and diversified economy like the United States,
the largest 100 firms are indeed very large, this assumption is problematic in smaller and less
diversified emerging market countries.



                                                                                                      25
         One possible way to address this issue is to simply use a smaller number of firms for all
countries in our sample. In choosing this number however the number of firms needs to be large
enough to capture some variability in idiosyncratic shocks and cover a meaningful share of
overall GDP. Among the various possible thresholds, the largest number that allows us to include
all the countries in our sample is 25.
         An alternative strategy is to use a criterion based on the share of total sales over GDP. For
instance, we can rank firms in descending order of size and impose a cumulative sales-to-GDP
ratio threshold. Formally, let u2,7,# be total sales of the largest firm (by sales) in country c, year t,
uB,7,# , the sales of the second largest, and uv,7,# the sales of the nth largest firm. Let x be a threshold
in terms of cumulated sales of over GDP. Then firm are defined as large up to the point where:
                                                wk,x,l
                                         ∑|
                                          "L2            <f                                                        (11)
                                                yz{x,l



         We experimented, with different thresholds and found that most country-years in our
sample reach the level of 20% of the cumulative sales-to-GDP ratio.27 One issue is that in
countries with high degrees of concentration, a very small number of firms are sufficient to
breach the threshold.
         In the end, we adopt an intermediate strategy: we define as large, the largest firms for
whom cumulative sales are below 20 percent of GDP. However, if less than 25 firms are
sufficient to reach this threshold, our definition of large is the largest 25 firms. As we do not want
to include more firms than what Gabaix includes for the US, we limit the number of large firms
to 100. Summing up, we rank firms by sales and we define as large a firm u",7,# if V ≤ 25 or
       wk,x,l
∑|
 "L2            < 0.2, and V ≤ 100. In Table 7 we regress GDP growth over the granularity index
       yz{x,l

controlling for country and year fixed effects and confirm Gabaix’s intuition that granularity
would be positively correlated with GDP growth in emerging market countries.




27
   As before there are tradeoffs in the choice of the threshold x. If the threshold is too low there will be too few
“large” firms and if the threshold is too high there will be many countries in our sample with few listed firms that do
not reach a higher threshold.

                                                                                                                     26
5.2      Large Firms and Exchange Rate Vulnerabilities

         Having established that idiosyncratic shocks to large firms are correlated with GDP
growth, we now examine whether leveraged large firms are more vulnerable to currency
depreciations. As a first step, we check if there are differences in leverage and other potential
measures of fragility between large and smaller firms. Column 1 of Table 8 shows that compared
to smaller firms, lower levels of leverage characterize the large firms in the sample. Columns 2-4
show that there are no statistically significant differences in other measures of corporate financial
vulnerabilities such as solvency, liquidity, and the Z-score.
         While large firms have lower leverage with respect to smaller firms, it is possible that
they have an “unhealthier” type of leverage. Specifically, in the presence of fixed costs it is easier
for large firms to borrow abroad, and foreign borrowing tends to be in foreign currency. There is
evidence that large firms issue international bonds not only to finance investment projects but
also to engage into carry trade activities (Bruno and Shin, 2016, Caballero, Panizza, and Powell,
2015). Lack of data on the currency composition of firm liabilities prevents us from directly
testing if this is the case for our full sample of countries, but there is some evidence that (i) large
Brazilian firms are more likely to have foreign currency debt compared to smaller firms (Bonomo
et al., 2003); (ii) large firms in the U.S. use more foreign currency derivatives (Allayannis and
Weston, 2001); (iii) large firms in Finland are more likely to borrow in foreign currencies than
small firms (Keloharju and Niskanen, 2001); and (iv) larger firms hold a higher fraction of dollar
debt in a set of firms from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Mexico (Bleakley and Cowan,
2005).
         Given that we cannot test directly whether currency mismatches are potentially more
problematic for larger firms, we test whether sales growth (associated with GDP growth in the
granularity regressions of Table 7) responds more to exchange rate movements in large and
leveraged firms than in equally leveraged smaller firms. As a first step we estimate the following
model for our full sample of firms:


         Ä_C@Ç=É",7,# = <=>=?@A=",7,# (; + R∆EG7# ) + :<@?A=",7,# + S∆EG7# + 8" + H",7#,# (12)


where Ä_C@Ç=É",7,# is sales growth in firm V, country Ñ, year Ö, <EO",7,# is leverage, ∆EG7# is the
percentage change in the exchange rate in country Ñ, year Ö (positive values are depreciations),
                                                                                                     27
<ÜÄE",7,# is a dummy variable that takes a value of one for large firms (defined as above), and
8" are firm fixed effects. Since we have firm fixed effects, Large captures the effect of firms that
were small and become large.
        Column 1 of Table 9 shows that firm size (Large) is negatively correlated with sales
growth, but that the interaction between leverage and currency depreciation is not statistically
significant and neither are the main effects of depreciation and leverage. The lack of a significant
effect on the interaction between leverage and currency depreciations may be due to the fact that
for the average firm in our sample the negative effect of depreciation is not linked to the presence
of negative balance sheet effects brought about by the presence of foreign currency debt.
Alternatively, the lack of statistical significance may be due to the fact that firms that have
currency mismatches are less leveraged on average. As we saw earlier, large firms are less
leveraged and may have larger shares of foreign currency debt. When we augment the model
with country-year fixed effects (a specification that does not allow us to separately estimate the
effect of the exchange rate change, ∆EG), we find results that are essentially identical to those of
the model without country-year fixed effects (compare the first two columns of Table 9).
        Next, we estimate our model with country-year fixed effects separately for large and
small firms. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 9 show that the interaction between leverage and
exchange rate movements is statistically significant for large firms and are not statistically
significant for smaller firms.
        In column 3 of Table 9, we find that the interaction coefficient on leverage and the
exchange rate takes a value of -0.8. This means that, all else equal, a currency depreciation of
30% reduces sales for the large firm with average leverage (the average for large firms is 55% in
our sample) by approximately 13% (55*0.3*0.8=13.2%). Assume that these large firms have
sales that amount to 50% of GDP. The granularity regressions of Table 7 (column 1) suggest that
if there is a 1% shock to sales of the largest firms with total sales accounting for 50% of GDP,
GDP growth will decrease by 0.3 percentage points (0.591/2). These back-of-the-envelope
calculations imply that the GDP growth effects of a 30% depreciation will be a decrease in
growth of 4 percentage points (0.3*13.2=3.96).28

28
  Note that 30% is larger than our sample average of 7% and is about twice as large as the typical currency
depreciation but it is not an extreme event in emerging market countries. Note that the average depreciation,
conditional on having a depreciation in our sample is 15% and more than 10 percent of our observations have
depreciation greater than 30%. Currency crises are usually associated with monthly depreciation of 25%, which

                                                                                                          28
        In column 5 of Table 9, we pool all our observations but allow for the differential effect
of firm size by estimating the following model:


          Ä_C@Ç=É",7,# = <EO",7,# M; + R∆EG7# + á<@?A=",7,# + à<@?A=",7,# × ∆EG7# P +
                     +:<@?A=",7,# (: + â∆EG7# ) + 8" + ä7,# + H",7#,#                                        (13)


where ä7,# is a country-year fixed effect and all other variables are defined as above. In this case
our parameter of interest is à, which captures how firm size affects the impact on sales of the
interaction between depreciation and leverage. We find that à is negative, large in absolute value,
and statistically significant. This confirms that the interaction between leverage and currency
depreciations in absolute value is significantly larger for large firms.
        Given that our panel is highly unbalanced with some countries in the sample with more
than 400 listed firms while others with only 20 listed firms, we re-estimate our model by keeping
a maximum of 150 firms per country-year. The results remain near identical to what we obtain
for the full sample of firms (compare columns 5 and 6 of Table 9).
        Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that many large firms may have unhedged
foreign currency liabilities and are thus vulnerable to sudden currency depreciations. Given our
previous evidence that idiosyncratic shocks to large firms affect overall economic activity, one is
tempted to conclude that a sudden capital flows reversal could lead to very adverse effects on real
output in emerging markets.
        Such an adverse conclusion is however mitigated by the fact that, while the results of
Table 9 are valid for the average emerging market country, there is substantial heterogeneity
among the countries included in our sample. Figure 6 reports the point estimates of the parameter
à obtained by estimating Equation 13 (without the country-year fixed effects) separately for 14
countries in our sample. The point estimates range between -8 (Malaysia) and 15 (Philippines).
They are negative for 10 countries and positive for 4 countries. Thus, there is substantial cross-
country heterogeneity and one challenge for future research will be to identify the drivers of this
heterogeneity.


is well above the 30% annual depreciation that we consider. If we redo our back of the envelope estimations
using the average depreciation in our sample, i.e., 7%, we find that the average depreciation is associated with a
decrease in growth of approximately one percentage point (55*0.07*0.8=3.08% and 0.3*3.08=0.924).

                                                                                                               29
6. Conclusion


       Using a rich firm-level dataset, this paper examines the surge in corporate leverage in
emerging markets after the global financial crisis (GFC). The post-GFC period shows many
emerging market economies close to or in the Altman Z-score “grey zone” implying a higher risk
of corporate financial distress. We document a striking and robust empirical link between firm
size and financial fragility and that currency depreciations amplify the vulnerability of large firms
in our sample. A novel finding is that while the relationship between firm-leverage and distress
scores varies over time, the relationship between firm size and corporate vulnerability is
relatively time-invariant. In sum, all else equal, large firms in emerging markets are more
financially vulnerable.
       Given our findings about the relationship between firm size and financial fragility, a
natural question arises about whether large firms are also systemically important. Following
Gabaix (2011), we find that at a granular level, there is a positive and significant correlation
between idiosyncratic shocks to the sales growth of large firms and overall GDP growth in our
emerging markets sample. Large firms may therefore have the potential to transmit corporate
distress to other firms in the economy through network effects and other spillovers. Although the
large firms in our sample consistently have less leverage, the negative impact currency is more
acute for the sales growth of large firms compared to similarly levered smaller firms, albeit with
substantial cross-country heterogeneity in the observed impacts.
       To conclude, credit to emerging market firms has witnessed an unprecedented and rapid
increase since the GFC. Gaining a better understanding of the relationship among corporate
leverage, firm size and financial fragility in emerging market firms is of key policy relevance.
Given the systemic importance of large and highly levered firms, our results suggest that
policymakers ought to closely monitor this subset of emerging market firms.




                                                                                                   30
References

Acemoglu Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2017) “Microeconomic Origins of
Macroeconomic Tail Risks” American Economic Review, 107(1), pp. 54–108.

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2016) “Networks, Shocks, and
Systemic Risk” in Handbook of Network Economics. Edited by Yann Bramoullé, Andrea
Galeotti, and Brian Rogers, Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 2016.

Ağca, Şenay and Oya Celasun (2012) “Sovereign debt and corporate borrowing costs in
emerging markets,” Journal of International Economics 88: 198-208.

Acharya, Viral, Sergei A. Davydenko, Ilya A.Strebulaev (2011) “Cash Holdings and Credit
Risk,” NBER Working paper 16995.

Acharya, Viral, Stephen Cecchetti, Jose De Gregorio, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Philip Lane, and
Ugo Panizza (2015) “Corporate Debt in Emerging Economies: A Threat to Financial Stability,”
Committee on International Policy Reform, Brookings Institutions and CIGI.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Valentina Bruno, Catherine Koch and Hyun song Shin (2018): "The dollar
exchange rate as a global risk factor: evidence from investment", BIS Working Papers, no 695,
January.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Michael Chui and Hyun Song Shin (2014) “Nonfinancial Corporations
from Emerging Market Economies and Capital Flows,” BIS Quarterly Review (December): 67-
77.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Robert McCauley and Patrick McGuire (2012): "Rapid credit growth and
international credit: challenges for Asia", BIS Working Papers, no 377, April.

Alfaro, Laura, Anusha Chari and Fabio Kanczuk (2017) “The Real Effects of Capital Controls:
Firm-Level Evidence from a Policy Experiment.” Journal of International Economics 108: 191–
210.

Alfaro, Laura, Alejandro Cuñat, Harald Fadinger, and Yanping Liu (2018) “The Real Exchange
Rate, Innovation and Productivity: Regional Heterogeneity, Asymmetries and Hysteresis.” NBER
Working paper 24633.

Alfaro, Laura, and Fabio Kanczuk. (2013) “Debt Redemption and Reserve Accumulation.”
NBER Working Paper Series, No. 19098.

Allayannis, George and James Weston (2001) “The use of foreign currency derivatives and firm
market value”, Review of Financial Studies 14, 243-76.

Altman, Edward (2005) “An Emerging Market Credit Scoring System for Corporate Bonds,”
Emerging Market Review 6: 3011-323.


                                                                                                31
Altman, Edward (1993) Corporate Financial Distress and Bankruptcy. 2nd edition. John Wiley &
Sons, New York.

Bank of International Settlement (2014) “Buoyant Yet Fragile?” BIS Quarterly Review,
December 2014.

Bank of International Settlement (2016) Debt Securities Data Base.
http://www.bis.org/statistics/secstats.htm

Bank for International Settlements (2012) “Developments in Domestic Government Bond Markets
in EMEs and their Implications,” BIS Papers, no. 67.

Ben-David, Itzhak, Francesco Franzoni, Rabih Moussawi and John Sedunov (2016) “The
Granular Nature of Large Investors,” NBER Working Paper 22247.

Bénétrix, Agustin, Philip Lane and Jay Shambaugh (2015): "International currency exposures,
valuation effects and the global financial crisis", Journal of International Economics, vol 96, no
1, pp 98-109.

Berger, Bat-el (2016): "Debt weighted exchange rate indices", BIS Quarterly Review, December,
100-102.

Bernarke, Ben and John Y. Campbell (1988) “Is There a Corporate Debt Crisis?” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity (1): 83-137.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Kevin Cowan (2008) “Corporate Dollar Debt and Depreciations: Much Ado
about Nothing?”, Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (4), 612-626.

Bonaccorsi di Patti , Emilia and Anil Kashyap (2017) “Which Banks Recover From Large
Adverse Shocks?,” NBER Working Papers 23654.

Borio, C, Robert McCauley and Patrick McGuire (2011): "Global credit and domestic credit
booms", BIS Quarterly Review, September, pp 43-57.

Bussière, Matthieu, Claude López, and Cédric Tille (2015) “Do Real Exchange Rate
Appreciations Matter for Growth?,” Economic Policy 30(81), 5-45.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, (2015a) “Global Dollar Credit and Carry Trades: A Firm-
Level Analysis”, BIS Working Paper, No 510, August.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun song Shin (2015b). "Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of
monetary policy", Journal of Monetary Economics, 71, pp 119-32.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyunsong Shin (2015c). "Cross-border banking and global liquidity",
Review of Economic Studies, 82(2), pp 535-64.



                                                                                                 32
Caballero, Julian, Ugo Panizza and Andrew Powell (2015) “The Second Wave of Global
Liquidity: Why are Firms acting like Financial intermediaries?” CEPR Working Paper, 10926.

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry (2015) “Two Tales of Adjustment: East Asian Lessons for
European Growth” IMF Economic Review Vol. 63(1) pp. 164-196.

Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2006) “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
Controls, Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics 81: 163-192.

Claessens, S, Hui Tong and Igor Zuccardi (2015). "Saving the Euro: Mitigating Financial or
Trade Spillovers?", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 47(7), 1369-1402.

Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Lixin Colin Xu (2000) “Corporate Performance in the
East Asian Financial Crisis,” The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 15, no. 1: 23-46.

Corbae Dean and Pablo D’Erasmo (2017) “Reorganization or Liquidation: Bankruptcy Choice and
Firm Dynamics,” NBER Working Papers 23515.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti and Nouriel Roubini (1999) “What Caused the Asian Currency
and Financial Crisis?” Japan and the World Economy, Vol. 11: 305-373.

De Angelo, Harry, Andrei S. Goncalvez, René M,. Stulz (2016) “Corporate Deleveraging” NBER
Working Paper 22828.

Di Giovanni, Giovanni and Andrei Levchenko (2013) “Firm entry, trade, and welfare in Zipf's
world,” Journal of International Economics 89, 283–296.

Druck, Pablo, Nicholas Magud and Rodrigo Mariscal (2017). "Collateral Damage: Dollar
Strength and Emerging Markets' Growth", IMF Working Paper, WP/15/179.

Du, Wenjin and Jesse Schreger (2016). "Local Currency Sovereign Risk", Journal of Finance,
71(3), pp 1027-1070.

Eichengreen, Barry and Hui Tong (2015). "Effects of renminbi appreciation on foreign firms:
The role of processing exports", Journal of Development Economics, 116(C), pp 146-157.

Fazzari, Steven M, R. Glenn Hubbard, Bruce C. Petersen (1988) “Financing Constraints and
Corporate Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:141-206

Gabaix, Xavier (2011) “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations.” Econometrica 79,
733–72.

Galindo, Arturo, Ugo Panizza, and Fabio Schiantarelli (2003) “Debt Composition and Balance
Sheet Effects of Currency Depreciation: A Summary of the Micro Evidence,” Emerging Markets
Review, Elsevier, vol. 4(4): 330-339.



                                                                                              33
Ghosh, Atish, Timothy Lane, Marianne Schultze-Ghattas, Ales Bulir, Javier Hamann, and Alex
Mourmuras (2002) IMF-Supported Programs in Capital Account Crises. Occasional Paper 210.
Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Graham, John R., Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu (2008) “Corporate Misreporting and Bank Loan
Contracting,” Journal of Financial Economics 89-1, 44-61

IMF (2015) “Corporate Leverage in Emerging Markets—A Concern?” in Vulnerabilities,
Legacies, and Policy Challenges Risks Rotating to Emerging Markets, Global Financial Stability
Report, October. Washington D.C.

Jacobson Tor and Erik Von Schedvin (2015) “Trade Credit and the Propagation of Corporate
Failure: An Empirical Analysis” Econometrica 4: 1315-1371.

Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman (2000) “Corporate
Governance in the Asian Financial Crisis, 1997–8,” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 141-186.

Lane, Philip and Peter McQuade (2014): "Domestic credit growth and international capital
flows", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol 116, no 1, pp 218-52.

Niepmann, Friedrich and Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2017). "Foreign Currency Loans and Credit
Risk: Evidence from U.S. Banks", CESifo Working Paper, 67002017.

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2007) “The external wealth of nations mark II:
Revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970–2004,” Journal of
International Economics 73: 223-250.

Martínez-Solano, Pedro (2000) “Foreign exchange exposure in the Spanish stock market: Sources
of risk and hedging”, Working Paper, University of Murcia, Spain.

McCauley, Robert, Patrick McGuire, and Vladyslav Sushko (2015) “Dollar Credit in Emerging
Market Economies,” BIS Quarterly Review, December.

Mendoza, Enrique and Marco E. Terrones, E. (2008) “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence
from Macro Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER WP 14049.

Pomerlano, Michael (1998) “The East Asian Crisis and Corporate Finances: The Untold
Microeconomic Story,” Emerging Markets Quarterly, Winter: 14-27.

Powell, Andrew (2014) “Global Recovery and Monetary Normalization: Escaping a Chronicle
Foretold?” Latin American and Caribbean Macroeconomic Report, Inter-American Development
Bank.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff (2009) This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial
Follies. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.



                                                                                              34
Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor (2012) “Credit Books Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises: 1870-2008.” American Economic Review 102 (2): 1029-
61.

Shin, Hyun Song (2013) “The Second Phase of Global Liquidity and Its Impact on Emerging
Economies” Proceedings of the Asia Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco.

Van Binsbergen, Jules, John R. Graham, Jie Yang (2010) “The Cost of Debt”, Journal of Finance
65: 2089-2136.




                                                                                          35
Name and Description of Variables


 VARIABLE               DESCRIPTION                                      SOURCE
                        6.56X1 + 3.26X2 + 6.72X3 + 1.05X4 + 3.25
                        X1= working capital/ total assets,
 Altman’s EM Z-score    X2=retained earnings /total assets,              Worldscope, Osiris
                        X3=operating income/total assets,
                        X4=book value of equity /total liabilities.
 Debt-to-equity ratio   Total debt to common equity                      Worldscope, Osiris
 Leverage               Total debt to common equity                      Worldscope, Osiris
 Size                   Log(total assets)                                Worldscope, Osiris
 Investment             Δ property, plant & equipment                    Worldscope, Osiris
                        % change in nominal exch. rate (bilateral rate   World Bank, WDI
                        vs USD, >0 means appreciation)
 ΔEX
                        Financial liabilities weighted effective         Benetrix, Lane, and Shambaugh
                        exchange rate                                    (2015)
 GR                     Real GDP growth                                   World Bank, WDI
 Inflation              Inflation                                         World Bank, WDI
 FINDEV                 Private credit to GDP                             World Bank, WDI
                        Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) index of
 LMF                                                                     Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007)
                        financial globalization
 G                      Granularity index (see pp. 25-27)                Worldscope, Osiris
 Large (Tables 8, 9)    Dummy if firm large (see pp. 26-27)              Worldscope, Osiris
 Solvency               EBITDA to total liabilities                      Worldscope, Osiris
 Liquidity              Current to total liabilities                     Worldscope, Osiris
                        Total sales of firms in our sample to each
 Sales to market cap                                                     Worldscope, Osiris, World Bank
                        country’s total market cap
 Market cap to GDP      Each country’s total market cap to GDP           World Bank




                                                                                                           36
      Figure 1: Total Credit to the Non-financial Sector in Emerging Markets (% of GDP)

  200
  180
  160
  140
                                                                                                                      NFC
  120
                                                                                                                      HHs
  100
                                                                                                                      Govt
    80
                                                                                                                      Total
    60
    40                                                                                                                Total ex-China

    20
      0
                    2002
                           2003
                                  2004


                                                2006
                                                       2007
                                                              2008


                                                                            2010
                                                                                   2011
                                                                                          2012


                                                                                                        2014
                                                                                                               2015
             2001




                                         2005




                                                                     2009




                                                                                                 2013
Source: Authors’ calculations based on BIS total credit statistics. (Decomposition across sectors is only available after 2006)




                                                                                                                                       37
           Figure 2: Correlation between firm fragility and each of leverage and firm size

This figure plots the coefficients (with 90 and 95 percent confidence intervals) of the following firm-level regression: /",7,# = 8" + :7,# +
∑KJL2 ;2,J <EO",7,# + ∑KJL2 ;B,J CD/E",7,# + H",7,# where ;2,J and ;B,J are time varying coefficients, Z is the Z-score, LEV is leverage, SIZE is the log
of total assets and 8" and :7,# are firm and country-year fixed effects




                LEV 1992-1995

                LEV 1996-2002

                LEV 2003-2006

                LEV 2007-2010

                LEV 2011-2014

              SIZE 1992-1995

              SIZE 1996-2002

              SIZE 2003-2006

              SIZE 2007-2010

              SIZE 2011-2014

                                              -2           -1.5           -1           -.5            0            .5             1




                                                                                                                                                     38
        Figure 3: Time varying correlation between firm fragility, leverage, and firm size

This figure plots the coefficients (with 95 percent confidence intervals) of the following firm-level regression: /",7,# = ∑Q# :# MN# × <EO",7,# P +
∑Q# R# MN# × CD/E",7,# P + 8" + S7,# + H",7,# where :# and R# are time varying coefficients, N# are time dummies, Z is the Z-score, LEV is leverage, SIZE
is the log of total assets and 8" and S7,# are firm and country-year fixed effects.



                                        Leverage                                                          Size
                 2




                                                                               2
                 1.5




                                                                               1.5
                 1




                                                                               1
                 .5




                                                                               .5
                 0




                                                                               0
                 -.5




                                                                               -.5
                 -1




                                                                               -1
                 -1.5




                                                                               -1.5
                 -2




                                                                               -2
                        1996
                        1997
                        1998
                        1999
                        2000
                        2001
                        2002
                        2003
                        2004
                        2005
                        2006
                        2007
                        2008
                        2009
                        2010
                        2011
                        2012
                        2013
                        2014




                                                                                      1996
                                                                                      1997
                                                                                      1998
                                                                                      1999
                                                                                      2000
                                                                                      2001
                                                                                      2002
                                                                                      2003
                                                                                      2004
                                                                                      2005
                                                                                      2006
                                                                                      2007
                                                                                      2008
                                                                                      2009
                                                                                      2010
                                                                                      2011
                                                                                      2012
                                                                                      2013
                                                                                      2014




                                                                                                                                                     39
      Figure 4: Country-specific correlation between firm fragility, leverage, and firm size

This figure plots the coefficients (with 95 percent confidence intervals) of the following firm-level regression: /",7,# = ∑U7 :7 MT7 × <EO",7,# P +
∑U7 R7 MT7 × CD/E",7,# P + 8" + S7,# + H",7,# where :7 and R7 are country-specific coefficients T7 are country dummies, Z is the Z-score, LEV is
leverage, SIZE is the log of total assets and 8" and S7,# are firm and country-year fixed effects.



                                       Leverage                                                        Size
                3




                                                                            3
                2.5




                                                                            2.5
                2




                                                                            2
                1.5




                                                                            1.5
                1




                                                                            1
                .5




                                                                            .5
                0




                                                                            0
                -.5




                                                                            -.5
                -1




                                                                            -1
                -1.5




                                                                            -1.5
                -2




                                                                            -2
                -2.5




                                                                            -2.5
                -3




                                                                            -3
                       THA




                                                                                   THA
                       TUR




                                                                                   TUR
                                                                                   COL
                       BRA




                                                                                   BRA
                       ZAF




                                                                                   ZAF
                       CHN
                        IND
                        IDN




                       PER




                                                                                   CHN

                                                                                    IND
                                                                                    IDN




                                                                                   PER
                       PHL




                                                                                   PHL
                       ARG




                                                                                   ARG
                       KOR
                       CHL




                                                                                   CHL
                       MEX
                       PAK




                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                   PAK
                       MYS




                                                                                   MYS




                                                                                                                                                40
  Figure 5: Country-year specific correlation between firm fragility, leverage, and firm size

This figure plots the coefficients (with 95 percent confidence intervals) of the following firm-level regression: /",7,# = ∑UQ           7,# :7,# MS7,# × <EO",7,# P +
∑UQ
  7,# R7 ,# MS7,# × CVW=",7,# P + S7,# + H",7,# where :7.# and R7 ,# are country-year specific coefficients, Z is the Z-score, LEV is leverage, SIZE is the log of
total assets and S7,# are country-year fixed effects.



                                           Leverage                                                                Size
                  6




                                                                                      6
                  5




                                                                                      5
                  4




                                                                                      4
                  3




                                                                                      3
                  2




                                                                                      2
                  1




                                                                                      1
                  0




                                                                                      0
                  -1




                                                                                      -1
                  -2




                                                                                      -2
                  -3




                                                                                      -3
                  -4




                                                                                      -4
                  -5




                                                                                      -5
                  -6




                                                                                      -6




                        1    31    61    91 121 151 181 211 241 271                        1    31    61    91 121 151 181 211 241 271




                                                                                                                                                                 41
                                          Figure 6: Coefficient of the Parameter ã
This figure plots the equation the coefficient of the Parameter à of Equation 13 estimated one country at a time. (the model does not include country-
year fixed effects but includes with year fixed effects)




                          Brazil
                          China
                           India
                    Indonesia
                     Malaysia
                        Mexico
                      Pakistan
                        Russia
                 South Africa
                South Korea
                      Thailand
                        Turkey


                                    -10                 -5                 0                 5                 10                15




                                                                                                                                                  42
                                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

All variables are Winsorized at 5% (a) Only firms for which we have data on the Z-Score; (b) millions USD; (c) Investment is defined as percentage
change in fixed assets.
                                          Obs        Mean Std. Dev. Median P25        P75   Min  Max
                                                       Firm-level variables
 Leverage                               45,104       66.36    70.16      43.43 11.91 95.44 0.00 254.89
 Leveragea                              10,491       69.94    70.10      47.84 16.78 99.31 0.00 254.85
 Z Score                                13,653       7.49      4.39       6.86  4.38 10.31 0.18 16.55
 Modified Z-Score                       13,653       25.63     3.35      25.15 23.53 27.42 19.92 33.26
 Total Assetsa,b                        13,653       287.1    536.4       9.01  1.31 226.9 0.83 1,652
 Investmentc                            11.219       0.09      0.28       0.04 -0.07 0.18 -0.33  0.93
                                                      Country-level variables
 ∆EX                                      401        0.07      0.20       0.02 -0.03 0.09 -0.25  1.00
 GR_GDP                                   388        0.06      0.04       0.06  0.03 0.10 -0.06  0.12
 Inflation                                400        64.6      37.0       69.9  40.8 94.2 -1.4   143.6
 FINDEV                                   401        59.0      42.1       42.0  24.9 96.7   8.3  166.5
 LMF                                      334        1.15      0.56       1.03  0.78 1.36 0.38   3.86




                                                                                                                                              43
     Table 2: Altman’s EM Z-Score and Bond Rating
      Z' Score      Rating   Z' Score     Rating




                                                Grey Zone
            > 8.15 AAA       5.65 - 5.85 BBB-
      7.60 - 8.15 AA+        5.25 - 5.65 BB+
      7.30 - 7.60 AA         4.95 - 5.25 BB
      7.00 - 7.30 AA_        4.75 - 4.95 BB-
      6.85 - 7.00 A+         4.50 - 4.75 B+
      6.65 - 6.85 A
Safe Zone                    4.15 - 4.50 B
      6.40 - 6.65 A-         3.75 - 4.15 B-




                                                Distress Zone
      6.25 - 6.40 BBB+
      5.85 - 6.25 BBB        3.20 - 3.75 CCC+
                             2.50 - 3.20 CCC
                             1.75 - 2.50 CCC-
                                   < 1.75 D
            Source: Altman (2005)




                                                                44
                                   Table 3: Firm Fragility, Leverage, and Firm Size
This table shows the results of a set of firm-level regressions where the dependent variable is distance to default (the regular Z-score in columns 1-
2 and the modified Z-score in columns 3-8), and the explanatory variables are leverage, firm size and investment. The specifications of columns 2,
4, 7, and 8 include country-year fixed effects and the specification of column 5 includes country-year and firm fixed effects. In columns 1-6 firm
size is measured by taking the log of total assets. In columns 6 and 7 firm size is measured with a firm-specific dummy that takes a value of one for
firms that in each year of the sample have a value of total assets which is above the country-year specific average value for total assets and in column
8 is measured with a firm-specific dummy based on the ranking used in Tables 8 and 9 and described in Section 5.1. Robust standard errors clustered
at the firm and country-year level in parenthesis.
                         (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)
                        Dependent Variable                                                Dependent Variable
                              Z Score                                                      Modified Z Score
  Leverage           -1.496***     -1.447***          0.167          0.174       0.249**         0.211*          0.183*        0.238**        0.264**
                       (0.140)       (0.138)         (0.108)        (0.107)       (0.125)        (0.127)         (0.109)       (0.107)        (0.114)
  Firm Size           -0.063**      -0.112**       -0.055***      -0.204***     -1.591***      -1.621***       -0.329**      -0.408***       -0.328**
                       (0.026)      (0.0495)         (0.019)        (0.037)       (0.082)        (0.081)         (0.135)       (0.151)        (0.163)
  Investment            0.033         0.013         0.059***        0.049*       0.058***       0.056**         0.057**        0.051*        0.063***
                       (0.020)       (0.026)         (0.023)        (0.028)       (0.021)        (0.026)         (0.022)       (0.027)        (0.016)
  Constant            9.079***                      28.41***                                                   27.56***
                       (0.454)                       (0.341)                                                    (0.0713)
  Observations         11,445        11,425          11,445         11,425        10,496         10,475          11,445        11,425           9,966
  R-squared             0.023         0.071           0.003          0.057         0.389          0.414           0.002         0.052           0.055
  Fixed effects          No            CY              No             CY            Firm       CY & Firm           No            CY              CY
  Size is                                                 Time variant                                                     Time invariant




                                                                                                                                                    45
                                  Table 4: Firm Fragility, Leverage, and Firm Size, The role of macroeconomic shocks
This table shows the results of a set of firm-level regressions where the dependent variable is distance to default measured by the modified Z-score in columns 3-8, and the explanatory variables are leverage
and firm size (the results are robust to controlling for investment) and the interaction between leverage and each of percentage change in the exchange rate (Δ"#), real GDP growth (GR_GDP), inflation
(Inflation), private credit over GDP (FINDEV), and the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti index of financial globalization (LMF). All regressions include country-year and firm fixed effects. Robust standard errors
clustered at the firm and country-year level in parenthesis. In column 2 we use the financially weighted effective exchange rate computed by Benetrix, Lane and Shambaugh.
                                                  (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)                (8)                  (9)
  Leverage                                     0.236**           0.170            0.286            0.170             0.228          -0.0187          0.191              0.343                0.490
                                               (0.117)          (0.116)          (0.205)          (0.266)           (0.212)         (0.268)         (0.518)            (0.830)              (0.893)
  Firm Size                                  -1.586***        -1.627***        -1.552***        -1.587***         -1.586***       -1.604***       -1.575***          -1.582***            -1.615***
                                               (0.073)          (0.074)          (0.075)          (0.074)           (0.073)         (0.083)         (0.086)            (0.104)              (0.157)
  Leverage× Δ"#                               -1.046**          -0.994*         -1.181**         -1.040**          -1.041**        -1.106**       -1.496***           -1.459**               -0.436
                                               (0.487)          (0.545)          (0.539)          (0.485)           (0.496)         (0.480)         (0.545)            (0.705)              (3.685)
  Leverage× %&_%()                                                                0.884                                                              2.924              1.610                1.861
                                                                                 (2.632)                                                            (3.373)            (4.612)              (6.606)
  Leverage× Inflation                                                                              0.018                                             -0.051             -0.064               0.011
                                                                                                  (0.069)                                           (0.082)            (0.153)              (0.110)
  Leverage× FINDEV                                                                                                   0.001                           -0.001             -0.001               -0.005
                                                                                                                    (0.002)                         (0.003)            (0.004)              (0.006)
  Leverage× LMF                                                                                                                      0.242           0.210              0.181                0.334
                                                                                                                                    (0.208)         (0.233)            (0.349)              (0.434)
  Observations                                 13,104           13,374           12,226           13,104            13,104           11,045         10,278              5,583                3,949
  R-squared                                     0.428            0.431            0.426            0.428             0.428           0.444           0.443              0.461                0.518
  Firm and Country-Year FE                       Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes                  Yes
  Sample                                         All              All              All              All               All             All              All         Depreciations         Appreciations
  Exchange rate                               Bilateral       Financially       Bilateral        Bilateral         Bilateral       Bilateral       Bilateral          Bilateral            Bilateral
                                                               weighted




                                                                                                                                                                                                           46
Table 5: Firm Fragility, Leverage, and Firm Size, The role of the exchange rate in tradable
                               and non-tradable industries

This table shows the results of a set of firm-level regressions where the dependent variable is distance to default measured by the modified Z-score
in columns 3-8, and the explanatory variables are leverage and firm size (the results are robust to controlling for investment) and the interaction
between leverage and the percentage change in the exchange rate (Δ"#), real GDP growth (GR_GDP), inflation (Inflation), private credit over
GDP (FINDEV), and the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti index of financial globalization (LMF). Columns 1 and 3 only include firms that operate in non-
tradable sectors and columns 2 and 4 only include firms that operate in tradable sectors. All regressions include country-year and firm fixed effects.
Robust standard errors clustered at the firm and country-year level in parenthesis.
                                                           (1)                       (2)                      (3)                      (4)
 Leverage                                                 0.267                     0.131                  1.334*                    -0.745
                                                         (0.173)                   (0.164)                 (0.744)                   (0.688)
 Firm Size                                             -1.506***                 -1.681***               -1.431***                 -1.720***
                                                         (0.102)                  (0.0987)                 (0.121)                   (0.116)
 Leverage× Δ"#                                          -1.409**                   -0.682                  -1.524*                   -0.971
                                                         (0.653)                   (0.665)                 (0.830)                   (0.689)
 Leverage× %&_%()                                                                                           -0.681                    2.756
                                                                                                           (4.167)                   (5.011)
 Leverage× Inflation                                                                                      -0.306**                    0.149
                                                                                                           (0.127)                   (0.102)
 Leverage× FINDEV                                                                                         -0.00176                  0.00108
                                                                                                         (0.00457)                 (0.00437)
 Leverage× LMF                                                                                               0.280                    0.227
                                                                                                           (0.329)                   (0.289)
 Observations                                            5,273                    7,680                      4,142                    6,015
 R-squared                                               0.443                    0.449                      0.456                    0.464
 Firm and CY FE                                           Yes                      Yes                        Yes                      Yes
 Sample                                               Non-tradable               Tradable               Non-tradable                Tradable
                     Table 6: Firm Fragility, Leverage, and Firm Size, IV Regressions
This table shows the results of a set of firm-level regressions where the dependent variable is distance to default measured by the modified Z-score
in columns 3-8, and the explanatory variables are leverage and firm size (the results are robust to controlling for investment) and the interaction
between leverage and each of percentage change in the exchange rate (Δ"#), real GDP growth (GR_GDP), inflation (Inflation), private credit over
GDP (FINDEV), and the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti index of financial globalization (LMF). Columns 1 and 2 use the bilateral exchange rate with the
US$, columns 3-6 use the financially weighted effective exchange rate computed by Benetrix, Lane and Shambaugh. In columns 1-4 the exchange
rate is instrumented with world capital flows interacted with financial openness. Columns 5 and 6 estimate an overidentified model in which the
exchange rate is instrumented with world capital flows interacted with financial openness and a financially weighted index of the dollar exchange
rate of the main capital exporters. All regressions include country-year and firm fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the firm and
country-year level in parenthesis.
                                              (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
 Leverage                                  1.209**         -0.512      1.114***           -0.559         1.079**          -0.604
                                            (0.480)        (0.492)      (0.430)           (0.501)        (0.428)          (0.499)
 Firm Size                                -1.572***      -1.520***     -1.586***        -1.520***      -1.585***        -1.521***
                                            (0.098)        (0.074)      (0.098)           (0.074)        (0.097)          (0.074)
 Leverage× Δ"#                             -20.73**       -4.957**     -24.83***         -5.614**       -23.96**         -6.113**
                                            (8.241)        (2.169)      (9.563)           (2.458)        (9.501)          (2.412)
 Leverage× %&_%()                                        12.31***                       10.62***                        11.25***
                                                           (4.646)                        (4.064)                         (4.021)
 Leverage× Inflation                                       -0.109                         -0.110                          -0.113
                                                           (0.075)                        (0.075)                         (0.075)
 Leverage× FINDEV                                         -0.007**                      -0.009***                       -0.009***
                                                           (0.003)                        (0.003)                         (0.003)
 Leverage× LMF                                           0.898***                       1.069***                        1.121***
                                                           (0.281)                        (0.334)                         (0.330)
 Observations                              8,334            7,216        8,543             7,216          8,543            7,216
 R-squared                                 0.315            0.463        0.324             0.463          0.334            0.462
 Firm and CY FE                             Yes              Yes          Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes
 Sample                                     All              All           All              All            All              All
 Exchange rate is                         Bilateral rate with US$             Financially weighted effective exchange rate
 Instruments                             World Capital Flows×Financial Openness                               World Capital
                                                                                                      Flows×Financial Openness
                                                                                                       and liability weighted $XR
                                                                                                        of main financial partners
 Cragg-Donald F Statistics                   68              341           72               436             36              227
 P value of Sargan test                                                                                    0.22            0.25




                                                                        48
                                                Table 7: The Granularity Effect
This table reports a set of regression in which the dependent variable is per-capita GDP growth and the explanatory variables are granularity (G)
and its first two lag (L.G and L2.G). All the regressions control for country and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the country
level in parenthesis.

                                                      (1)                                 (2)                                   (3)
 G                                                 0.591**                             0.709***                              0.696**
                                                   (0.230)                              (0.255)                              (0.264)
 L.G                                                                                    0.463*                                0.428*
                                                                                        (0.240)                              (0.245)
 L2.G                                                                                                                         -0.129
                                                                                                                              (0.08)
 Observations                                       486                                  486                                   486
 Number of countries                                26                                   26                                     26
 Country fixed effects                              Yes                                  Yes                                   Yes
 Year fixed effects                                 Yes                                  Yes                                   Yes
 Sample                                          1994-2014                            1994-2014                             1994-2014




                                                                        49
                                                Table 8: Fragility and Firm Size
This table reports a set of regression in which the dependent variables are various measures of potential or realized fragility (leverage, solvency,
liquidity, and distance to default) and the explanatory variable is a dummy variable taking the value of 1 for large firms (Large). All the regressions
control for country and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the firm and country-year level in parenthesis.
                                          (1)                           (2)                           (3)                           (4)
                                       Leverage                      Solvency                      Liquidity                      Z-Score
 Large                                -15.82***                        1.737                         0.392                         0.124
                                        (2.606)                       (1.648)                       (0.944)                       (0.265)
 Observations                           44,104                        38,741                        39,271                        16,653
 Sample                                   All                           All                           All                           All
 Country FE                               Yes                           Yes                           Yes                           Yes
 Year FE                                  Yes                           Yes                           Yes                            Yes




                                                                         50
                                    Table 9: Leverage, Depreciation and Firm Size
This table reports a set of regression in which the dependent variable is sales growth and the explanatory variables are leverage, change in in the
exchange rate, firm size and the interactions among these variables. All the regressions control for firm fixed effects, column 1 controls for country
and year fixed effects, and specifications 2-6 control for country-year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the firm and country-year
level in parenthesis.
                                          (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                (6)
 Leverage                              -0.0261            -0.0451             0.342               -0.111             -0.129             -0.284
                                       (0.129)            (0.129)            (0.277)              (0.147)            (0.142)            (0.217)
 Leverage× Δ"#                          -0.069             -0.097           -0.793***            -0.0914            -0.0361            -0.0388
                                       (0.074)            (0.073)            (0.152)             (0.0858)           (0.0742)           (0.0751)
 Large                                -748.2***          -991.3***                                                 -988.7***          -771.1***
                                       (35.79)            (43.13)                                                    (43.25)            (43.05)
 Δ"#                                    -8.078
                                       (5.150)
 Large× Δ"#                                                                                                          30.25*             11.54
                                                                                                                    (17.18)            (15.83)
 Leverage× Large                                                                                                     0.388             0.688**
                                                                                                                    (0.279)            (0.302)
 Leverage× Δ"# × Large                                                                                             -0.866***          -0.823***
                                                                                                                    (0.177)            (0.170)
 Observations                           40,674             40,674             8,616             31,024               40,674             20,504
 Number of firms                        0.108              0.124              0.288              0.121               0.124              0.241
 Sample                                  All                All            Large Firms        Small Firms              All           Largest 150
 Firm FE                                 YES                YES               YES                YES                  YES                YES
 CY FE                                   NO                 YES               YES                YES                  YES                YES




                                                                         51
                                                               Appendix

                         Table A1: Sample Sales and Country Market Cap and GDP
This table shows what percentage of a country’s economy is captured by firms in our sample. Column 1 reports – by country – the total sales in
firms in our sample divided by the country’s total market capitalization, as measured by the World Bank. Column 2 shows the ratio of total
market capitalization and GDP in each country. * No country-level market capitalization data. Value shows Sales / GDP instead.
                                                                      (1)                  (2)
                                                                    Sales to           Market Cap
                                          Country
                                                                   Market Cap           to GDP
                                          Argentina                    52%                 14%
                                          Brazil                       43%                 49%
                                          Chile                        51%                 111%
                                          China                        49%                 51%
                                          Colombia                     30%                 45%
                                          Eastern Europe               100%                34%
                                          India                        36%                 72%
                                          Indonesia                    34%                 39%
                                          Jordan*                      27%
                                          Malaysia                     46%                 146%
                                          Mexico                       61%                 35%
                                          Morocco*                     12%
                                          Pakistan                     107%                16%
                                          Peru                         33%                 45%
                                          Philippines                  32%                 69%
                                          Russia                       116%                26%
                                          South Africa                 23%                 225%
                                          South Korea                  119%                78%
                                          Taiwan*                      93%
                                          Thailand                     59%                 75%
                                          Turkey                       68%                 31%
                                          Vietnam                      79%                 13%




                                                                      52
                         Table A2: Leverage and Altman’s EM Z-score Heat Maps
This table shows average leverage and Z-scores each country over time. The color scale moves from red (for low Z-scores and high leverage) to
green (for high Z-scores and low leverage), going through several shades of orange yellow. Jordan’s 1992-2014 averaged until 2007 and Vietnam
since 2003.


                                               Leverage                                    Altman's EM Z-score
    Country                1992-2014           2003-07            2008-14          1992-2014    2003-07        2008-14
    Argentina                 56%                45%                74%               6.18         7.38          5.62
    Brazil                    76%                83%                94%               5.76         6.13          5.88
    Chile                     90%                82%                93%               6.45         6.44          6.20
    China                     89%                95%               103%               5.59         5.58          5.28
    Colombia                  45%                47%                44%               6.53         6.58          6.77
    Eastern Europe            47%                48%                55%               6.22         6.49          6.30
    India                    100%                79%               118%               5.73         5.62          5.55
    Indonesia                 78%                81%                72%               6.42         6.36          7.13
    Jordan                    66%                81%                                  5.53         5.97          5.14
    Malaysia                  66%                69%                63%               6.95         6.95          7.77
    Mexico                    65%                59%                89%               6.73         6.26          5.53
    Morocco                   68%                42%                128%              6.95         7.47          5.04
    Pakistan                  83%                56%                84%               5.17         5.26          5.44
    Peru                      56%                53%                68%               7.11         7.23          6.99
    Philippines              103%               103%                131%              6.28         6.02          6.11
    Russia                    38%                42%                56%               7.79         8.76          7.60
    South Africa              49%                50%                54%               6.83         6.71          6.88
    South Korea              158%               140%                110%              4.96         5.58          6.11
    Taiwan                    63%                66%                66%               6.73         6.80          7.03
    Thailand                 119%                84%                83%               5.56         6.21          6.32
    Turkey                   105%               104%                124%              6.54         6.30          5.80
    Vietnam                  109%                95%                116%              6.28         6.51          6.18




                                                                    53
                                                    Table A3: Balanced Sample
This table estimates the model of column 1, Table 4 (reproduced in Column 1 of this table) by restricting the analysis to firms that are in the sample
of at least 5 years (column 2), 10 years (column 3), and 15 years (column 4).

                                                  (1)                         (2)                     (3)                      (4)
 Leverage                                      0.236**                    0.332***                0.450***                 0.773***
                                                (0.117)                     (0.127)                (0.158)                   (0.188)
 Firm Size                                    -1.586***                   -1.610***              -1.596***                 -1.758***
                                               (0.0732)                    (0.0818)                (0.104)                   (0.149)
 Leverage× Δ"#                                 -1.046**                    -1.282**              -1.891***                 -2.692***
                                                (0.487)                     (0.555)                (0.671)                   (0.734)
 Observations                                   13,104                      10,082                  7,037                     4,055
 R-squared                                       0.428                       0.380                  0.364                     0.378
 Sample                                        Original                            Firms which are in the sample for at least
                                                                            5 years               10 years                  15 years




                                                                         54
                                    Table A4: Dropping China from the Sample
This table estimates the models of Table 4 dropping Chinese firms from the sample.

                                            (1)               (2)               (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Leverage                                0.313**             0.251           0.875**       0.231       0.209       0.329
                                          (0.123)           (0.214)           (0.348)     (0.216)     (0.288)     (0.604)
 Firm Size                              -1.593***         -1.593***         -1.588***   -1.595***   -1.612***   -1.603***
                                         (0.0788)          (0.0785)          (0.0791)    (0.0790)    (0.0889)    (0.0892)
 Leverage× Δ"#                           -1.177**          -1.250**          -1.311**    -1.130**    -1.244**   -1.541***
                                          (0.519)           (0.548)           (0.523)     (0.525)     (0.518)     (0.556)
 Leverage× %&_%()                                            1.229                                                 2.999
                                                            (2.708)                                               (3.478)
 Leverage× Inflation                                                          -0.141                             -0.0880
                                                                             (0.0879)                             (0.109)
 Leverage× FINDEV                                                                        0.00105                0.000108
                                                                                        (0.00236)               (0.00346)
 Leverage× LMF                                                                                        0.121        0.158
                                                                                                     (0.217)      (0.248)
 Observations                             11,391            11,336            11,391     11,391       9,635        9,630
 R-squared                                0.418             0.419             0.419       0.418       0.435        0.435
 Firm and Country-Year FE                  Yes               Yes               Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Sample                                    All               All               All         All         All          All




                                                                     55
                                                   Table A5: Constant Sample
This table estimates the models of Table 4 using the same sample of firms in all regressions (that of column 6).

                                              (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)         (6)
 Leverage                                 0.357***             0.215            0.586*            0.407*              0.209      0.191
                                            (0.130)           (0.236)           (0.322)           (0.238)            (0.281)    (0.518)
 Firm Size                                -1.586***         -1.581***         -1.582***         -1.585***          -1.585***   -1.575***
                                            (0.086)           (0.085)           (0.086)           (0.086)            (0.086)    (0.086)
 Leverage× Δ"#                             -1.210**          -1.391**          -1.248**          -1.237**           -1.218**   -1.496***
                                            (0.520)           (0.555)           (0.518)           (0.531)            (0.510)    (0.545)
 Leverage× %&_%()                                              2.481                                                             2.924
                                                              (2.957)                                                           (3.373)
 Leverage× Inflation                                                           -0.0613                                           -0.051
                                                                               (0.0848)                                         (0.082)
 Leverage× FINDEV                                                                                 -0.001                         -0.001
                                                                                                  (0.003)                        (0.00)
 Leverage× LMF                                                                                                       0.129       0.210
                                                                                                                    (0.215)     (0.233)
 Observations                               10,278            10,278            10,278            10,278            10,278       10,278
 R-squared                                  0.443             0.443             0.443              0.443             0.443       0.443
 Firm and Country-Year FE                    Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes         Yes
 Sample                                      All               All               All                All               All          All




                                                                       56
                              Table A6: The Granularity Effect, Additional Controls
This table reports a set of regression which shows that the results of the granularity regressions of Table 7 are robust to including additional controls.

                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)
 G                                              0.829*          0.478*          0.609**        0.479**         0.661**        0.602**        0.588**
                                                (0.409)         (0.258)         (0.257)        (0.222)         (0.254)        (0.230)        (0.243)
 Debt to GDP                                    -0.010
                                                (0.020)
 Financial depth                                               0.040***
                                                                (0.008)
 Trade balance                                                                   -0.086
                                                                                 (0.061)
 Government Consumption                                                                        -0.505**
                                                                                                (0.221)
 Investment                                                                                                   0.224***
                                                                                                               (0.057)
 Inflation                                                                                                                     -0.017
                                                                                                                               (0.012)
 Ln(population)                                                                                                                                4.796
                                                                                                                                              (3.353)
 Observations                                     197             452              462           462             462             467            467
 R-squared                                       0.497           0.515            0.492         0.509           0.533           0.481          0.483
 Country fixed effects                            Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
 Year fixed effects                               Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
 Sample                                                                                      1994-2014




                                                                           57
      Table A7: Leverage, Depreciation and Firm Size, Excluding China from the Sample
This table reports a set of regression similar to those of Table 9 but excluding China from the sample.

                                         (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)         (5)         (6)
 Leverage                              0.123               0.112              0.389               0.004      -0.028      -0.194
                                      (0.133)             (0.134)            (0.282)             (0.152)    (0.149)     (0.225)
 Leverage× Δ"#                         -0.082              -0.107           -0.804***           -0.0965      -0.044      -0.044
                                      (0.074)             (0.073)            (0.150)            (0.0857)    (0.074)     (0.075)
 Large                               -612.4***           -840.5***                                         -837.1***   -750.0***
                                      (36.86)             (47.09)                                           (47.14)     (45.99)
 Δ"#                                   -4.594
                                      (5.096)
 Large× Δ"#                                                                                                  16.12        9.473
                                                                                                            (15.99)      (15.70)
 Leverage× Large                                                                                             0.537*      0.671**
                                                                                                            (0.281)      (0.312)
 Leverage× Δ"# × Large                                                                                     -0.863***    -0.830***
                                                                                                            (0.167)      (0.168)
 Observations                          31,454              31,454            8,292             22,304        31,454       19,095
 Number of firms                       0.100               0.119             0.260              0.127        0.120        0.197
 Sample                                 All                 All           Large Firms        Small Firms       All     Largest 150
 Firm FE                                YES                 YES              YES                YES           YES          YES
 CY FE                                  NO                  YES              YES                YES           YES          YES




                                                                        58
