NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INSURANCE IS THE LEMON:
FAILING TO INDEX CONTRACTS
Barney Hartman-Glaser
Benjamin M. Hébert
Working Paper 25450
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25450

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019, Revised May 2019

The authors would like to thank Vladimir Asriyan, Francesca Carapella, Eduardo Davila, Peter
DeMarzo, Emmanuel Farhi, Valentin Haddad, David Hirschleifer, Christopher Hrdlicka, Roger
Myerson, Batchimeg Sambalaibat, Jesse Shapiro, Alp Simsek, Amir Sufi, David Sraer, Sebastian
Di Tella, Victoria Vanasco, Jeff Zwiebel, and seminar and conference participants at Stanford
University, UC Berkeley Haas, the University of Washington Foster, the Federal Reserve Board,
the Finance Theory Group Meeting at the University of Minnesota, Columbia Law School, the
Adam Smith Conference, and the 2018 WFA Meetings. We would particularly like to thank John
Kuong and Giorgia Piacentino (discussants), Philip Bond (editor), an anonymous associate editor,
and two anonymous referees for comments that helped improved the paper. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Barney Hartman-Glaser and Benjamin M. Hébert. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Insurance is the Lemon: Failing to Index Contracts
Barney Hartman-Glaser and Benjamin M. Hébert
NBER Working Paper No. 25450
January 2019, Revised May 2019
JEL No. D82,D86,G21
ABSTRACT
We model the widespread failure of contracts to share risk using available indices. A borrower
and lender can share risk by conditioning repayments on an index. The lender has private
information about the ability of this index to measure the true state that the borrower would like
to hedge. The lender is risk averse and thus requires a premium to insure the borrower. The
borrower, however, might be paying something for nothing if the index is a poor measure of the
true state. We provide sufficient conditions for this effect to cause the borrower to choose a nonindexed contract instead.

Barney Hartman-Glaser
University of California at Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C421
Los Angeles, CA 90095
barney.hartman-glaser@anderson.ucla.edu
Benjamin M. Hébert
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
bhebert@stanford.edu

A central implication of the literature on financial contracting is that agents should structure contracts to share risk as efficiently as possible. In many financial markets, standard contracts are
simple and do not include risk-sharing arrangements that condition payments on publicly available
indices. A leading example of this phenomenon is the mortgage market. In this market, homeowners
are exposed to the risk that their homes will decline in value. Lenders are arguably better equipped
to bear this risk and could insulate homeowners against declines in house prices by making mortgage repayment terms contingent on a house-price index. These types of mortgage contracts have
been widely proposed as a solution to problems facing the mortgage market, such as the subprime
default crises of 2007,1 but have failed to supplant the standard mortgage. Two common explanations for this type of market failure are that either the space of feasible contracts is incomplete (Hart
and Moore (1988)) or that implementing risk-sharing contracts entails high transaction costs. However, neither explanation applies when indices are available that would allow agents to share risk
efficiently and appear almost costless to contract upon.
In this paper, we develop a model in which the failure to condition on indices and thus efficiently
share risk is an equilibrium outcome resulting from asymmetric information. In our model, an agent,
who we call the borrower, seeks financing from a set of lenders. This financial contract must be written in view of potential conflicts of interest between the lender and the borrower, which are related
to an “internal,” or idiosyncratic, state. For example, this internal state could represent the hidden
ability of a mortgage borrower to make payments to the lender. At the same time, there may be some
benefits of risk sharing between the lender and the borrower over some imperfectly measured state
(e.g., local area house prices). We call this state “external” to indicate that it is unaffected by the
actions of the lenders and the borrower. The external state is not directly observable. To realize any
risk sharing benefits, the contracts must condition on some potentially imperfect measurement of
the state, which we call an index (e.g., a house price index). Lenders know the true joint distribution
of the index and the external state (i.e., the quality of the index), while the borrower does not. In
effect, the borrower faces an adverse selection problem over basis risk when lenders offer an indexed
contract.
At least two equilibria can arise in the model. In the first type, which we call the full-information
optimal contracts equilibrium, all lenders offer a contract featuring the optimal amount of insurance conditional on the true quality of the index. The full-information optimal contracts equilibrium
exists when there is competition between lenders, and features no loss in efficiency due to asymmetric information about the index. In the second type, which we call the non-contingent contracts
equilibrium, all lenders offer a contract that does not condition on the index. To see why such an
equilibrium can arise, consider the borrower’s response when a single lender deviates and offers a
contingent contract. To at least break even on such a contract, the lender must charge the borrower
an insurance premium. At the same time, the borrower will be concerned that the index is in fact
1 See, for example the “Shared Responsibility Mortgage” proposed in Mian and Sufi (2015), in which interest and prin-

cipal payments are contingent upon local house price indices or the “Shared-Equity Mortgage” proposed by Caplin et al.
(2007), in which a borrower receives a second mortgage where payment is only due upon the sale of the house and is
contingent on house value.

1

uncorrelated with the risk that she is aiming to insure, i.e., the basis risk for the contract is too high
to justify the premium. Lenders that know the basis risk is high are happy to offer insurance and
charge a high premium because the insurance is cheap for them to provide (precisely because the
basis risk is high). As a result, the borrower will reject the indexed contract in favor of a standard
non-contingent contract. We note that the non-contingent-contracts equilibrium exists, even though
the contracting space allows for the use of an index, there are no transactions costs, and lenders
make competing offers.
To illustrate the intuition behind these two equilibria, suppose that there are just two equally
likely external states, “good” and “bad.” Now suppose that a borrower receives offers of 1 dollar of
financing from several competing lenders. The borrower is risk-averse with respect to the external
state, meaning that her expected marginal value of a dollar is 1/2 in the good state and 3/2 in the
bad state. The lenders are also risk averse, but less so than the borrower. Their expected marginal
value of a dollar is 3/4 in the good state and 5/4 in the bad state. Lenders can offer contracts that
are contingent upon some index but not upon the true external state directly. The index can be “high
quality”—in which case it is perfectly correlated with the true underlying state—or “low quality”—
in which case it is entirely independent of the true state and hence unrelated to the either the
borrower’s or the lender’s preferences. The borrower believes that these two cases are equally likely
but the lenders observe the quality of the index before making their offers. Finally, the lenders
cannot offer contracts that specify positive transfers from the lender to the borrower.
Suppose that the lenders make the following offers, depending on the quality of the index. If the
index is high quality, then they offer a contract that calls for the borrower to repay 8/3 dollars if the
realization of the index indicates the good state and nothing otherwise. If the index is low quality,
then they offer a contract that calls for the borrower to repay 1 dollar regardless of the realization
of the index. These offers constitute what we call a full-information optimal contracts equilibrium.
To see why they can arise in an equilibrium, note that all lenders are earning weakly positive profits
and they could not possibly earn more by making different offers. Moreover, given that all lenders
have common information, the borrower can perfectly infer the quality of the index by observing the
contracts that the lenders offer. In other words, it is not possible for a single lender to convince the
borrower that the index is high quality if all of the other lenders offer a non-contingent contract.
This same intuition carries over to the second type of equilibrium we describe: the non-contingent
contracts equilibrium.
Now suppose that all lenders offer a contract that calls for the borrower to repay 1 dollar, regardless of whether the index is high-quality or low-quality. These offers constitute what we call the
non-contingent-contracts equilibrium. Can a single lender gain by deviating and offering the best
contingent-contract? Again, the answer is no. If a single lender deviates by offering a contingent
contract, then she will have to charge a premium for it to at least break even. By premium, we mean
that the contract calls for the borrower to repay an amount that in expectation exceeds the amount
financed. In the case of the best contingent contract, the expected repayment of the borrower is 4/3;
that is, 8/3 (the repayment if the index is in a good state) times 1/2 (the probability that the index is

2

in a good state), while the amount financed is 1, so that premium is 1/3. If the index is low quality,
then the lenders are risk-neutral with respect to the index and the premium is pure profit. If the
index is high quality, then the premium is compensation for risk and leaves the lenders with zero
net present value. Consequently, the lender would be at least as willing to make this offer given a
low quality index as when given a high quality index. As such, standard belief refinements imply
that the borrower can believe that the index is low quality after observing this deviation. Given
these beliefs, the borrower is strictly better off when accepting one of the offers of a non-contingent
contract. The failure of the agents to share risk in this case is closely related to the classic lemons
market breakdown of Akerlof (1970).
Two elements are essential to the existence of the non-contingent contracts equilibrium in this
simple example. First, the lenders are risk averse with respect to expected payoffs across external
states; and second, the borrowers are even more risk averse, meaning that it is efficient for the lender
to insure the borrower. The first element means that deviating from the non-contingent contracts
equilibrium requires that a lender charge a premium for a contingent contract, which makes such a
deviation more attractive when the index is low quality. We discuss this example and these two key
conditions in section §I.
Our general model encompasses settings in which there is an additional security design problem
concerning payoffs given idiosyncratic states. These security design problems are important for our
results in that they determine the borrower’s and lenders’ indirect utility over securities and external
states, and thus the potential gains from indexation. In our mortgage example (section §II), the borrower needs incentives to repay the lender across idiosyncratic states. In this example, conditional
on a particular external state, standard debt contracts are optimal. In principle, these debt contracts
could allow for risk sharing over the external states by having a higher face value in a good external
state than a bad one. However, the face value of a debt contract is not equivalent to its expected
payoff; put differently, promises are not payoffs. A lender can prefer a higher debt level in a good
external state simply because the debt is more likely to be repaid in good external states. At the
same time, the lender has a lower marginal utility in the good external state. The key condition to
generate a non-contingent contracts equilibrium becomes a tradeoff between the lender’s decreasing
marginal utility and the increasing value of promises as the external state improves. If the latter
force dominates, then the lender will not need to charge a premium to insure the borrower against
bad external states and the non-contingent contracts equilibrium does not exist. A key condition
for the existence of the non-contingent contracts equilibrium is that the lender be sufficiently “risk
averse over promises,” a notion we formalize in our general model (sections §III, §IV, and §V).
There is an important distinction between the type of adverse selection problem we consider
and one in which lenders have information about the external state itself. In our model, lenders do
not have better information about the distribution of the external state, they only have information
about the relationship between the index and the external state. In contrast, much of the literature
on adverse selection (following Akerlof (1970)) assumes that there is asymmetric information about
something that is directly relevant to payoffs. For example, in the context of mortgages, lenders may

3

know that local house prices are more likely to appreciate in the future than the borrower expects.
In an extension of our model (section §VI), we show that under our assumptions, the non-contingent
contracts equilibrium does not exist if the index is known to be perfectly correlated with the external
state, and the adverse selection is only about the distribution of the external state itself.
Our work is related to the literature on incomplete contracts, as surveyed by Tirole (1999). Papers focusing on incomplete contracts and asymmetric information include Spier (1992), Allen and
Gale (1992), and Aghion and Hermalin (1990), among others.2 Our model differs from most of this
literature in several respects. First, our model emphasizes competitive markets, rather than bilateral negotiation. Second, our model is focused on asymmetric information about the quality of the
index, rather than the “fundamentals.” This second difference allows us to generate non-contingent
contracts in equilibrium without relying on transaction costs of using the index or arguing that the
index is manipulable. Like some, but not all, of the incomplete contracts literature, we focus on
equilibria with no indexation at all (as opposed to explaining why agents might use the index but not
achieve perfect risk-sharing).
More significantly, our model differs from the incomplete contracts literature in its assumptions
about what is contractible and what is observable. In the risk-sharing extension of Hart and Moore
(1988), the agents can renegotiate after observing a non-verifiable state. The subsequent literature
(Green and Laffont (1992), Dewatripont and Maskin (1995), Segal and Whinston (2002)) has found
that, by altering the outside options or other aspects of the renegotiation process, the agents can
share risks and perhaps even achieve first-best risk sharing, despite their inability to contract on
the state. In contrast, in our model the index is both observable and verifiable, whereas the true
external state is not observed by the agents until the end of the game, when renegotiation is no
longer possible.3
Formally, our model is similar in some respects to Allen and Gale (1992), although the focus of
that paper is the manipulability of the index. One can also view our model as related to models of
insurance, in the vein of Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) or more recently Hendren (2013). The key
difference between our model and these models is that our model places the information advantage
and the competition on the same side of the market (with lenders), rather than on opposite sides of
the market. Loosely speaking, the key intuition in our model is that the insurance itself might be a
“lemon,” in the sense of Akerlof (1970).
Spier (1992) is closely related to our paper and shows that asymmetric information can amplify
the effect of transaction costs on the ability of agents to write contracts that condition on relevant
information. In Spier (1992), an informed and risk-averse principal contracts with an uninformed
and risk-neutral agent. If the principal offers a contract that insulates herself from risk, then she
must also signal her private information, which in turn reduces the benefits of risk sharing. This
2 Papers that endogenize contractual incompleteness but do not emphasize asymmetric information, include Anderlini

and Felli (1994), Battigalli and Maggi (2002), Bernheim and Whinston (1998), Dewatripont and Maskin (1995), Kvaløy
and Olsen (2009), Tirole (2009).
3 Similarly, the Maskin and Tirole (1999) critique of the incomplete contracts literature applies when the agents are
aware of the payoff-relevant states before actions are taken and, for this and other reasons, is not directly applicable to
our model.

4

effect lowers the level of transaction costs needed to destroy risk sharing in equilibrium. However, in
Spier (1992), if transaction costs are close enough to zero, then asymmetric information alone does
not eliminate risk sharing. In contrast, in our model, asymmetric information can lead to zero risk
sharing without transaction costs. Another related paper, Asriyan (2015), shows that concern for
future liquidity and dispersed private information can lead market participants to write very simple
contracts. The intuition here is that if the holder of a contract must liquidate at some future date,
then she will want to hold a contract that is as informationally insensitive as possible. In contrast,
we emphasize situations in which risk-sharing failures are associated with simple contracts. In other
words, the value of simple contracts is informationally sensitive in our model, and only by using the
index could the agents minimize information sensitivity.
We also employ a general space of states and contracts. As a result, there is a great deal of scope
for signaling, in contrast to the previous literature (in Spier (1992) and Aghion and Hermalin (1990),
the contract space has one or two dimensions). As a result of this ability to signal, to generate our
results, borrowers must be somewhat “suspicious,” in the sense that they place non-zero probability
on the index being irrelevant. Belief in this possibility, however unlikely, creates at least some chance
that the index is not useful (and in this sense is reminiscent of the conditions of the Myerson and
Satterthwaite (1983) theorem).
The failure of risk-sharing in our model can be thought of as a coordination failure, in the sense
that there are multiple, Pareto-ranked equilibria. In the context of mortgages, we view this multiplicity as a feature. Mortgage contracts differ substantially across countries in ways that are difficult
to explain with “fundamentals.” Our model considers only a single index but could naturally be extended to consider multiple indices (interest rates and house prices, for example). In this case, we
expect that “partial indexing” equilibria exist (e.g., indexing to interest rates but not home prices,
like an adjustable rate mortgage). As a result of this multiplicity, there is the potential for policy
to improve welfare in our model by ruling out undesirable equilibria. However, our model does not
feature any externalities as a result of this risk-sharing failure, even though the existence of such
externalities (which are emphasized by Campbell et al. (2011), among others) would provide an additional motivation for policy interventions.
Our motivating example is the mortgage market, although our most general model is abstract
and could easily apply to other settings. In the context of home ownership, as noted by Sinai and
Souleles (2005), purchasing a house hedges a homeowner against changes in future rents. Nevertheless, homeowners are exposed to both price and rent risks, and these could be hedged through
the mortgage contract. Of course, as discussed by Case et al. (1995) and Shiller (2008), homeowners
could also hedge these risks through other financial markets, although this almost never occurs in
practice. This failure to hedge might be explained by limited access to these markets or by the sophistication required to hedge in this manner. However, these arguments suggest that it would be
profitable for a financial intermediary to provide hedging services. Mortgage lenders appear to be
ideally situated to do this as part of their mortgage contracts.
Mortgages that have a more equity-like claim on house value have been proposed (see, for ex-

5

ample, Caplin et al. (2007)). Some of these early proposals made mortgage payments contingent on
the sale price of the house, which clearly induces moral hazard for the borrower. More recent studies have pointed out that conditioning mortgage payments on an index of house prices avoids this
problem. Relatedly, Campbell et al. (2018) propose that mortgages that provide optional payment
reductions during recessions increase financial stability. Piskorski and Tchistyi (2017) develop an
equilibrium model of housing and mortgage markets. They show that under many circumstances,
the optimal mortgage design hedges the borrower against house price risk. Greenwald et al. (2018)
provides a quantitative analysis of the general equilibrium effects of house-price-indexed mortgages
and show that using a local house price index improves financial stability. Proposals for mortgage
reform after the recent financial crisis (e.g., Mian and Sufi (2015)) have advocated this approach.
Although rare, shared appreciation mortgages are legal in the United States and used, for example,
by Stanford University faculty who borrow from Stanford to purchase a house.4 We develop a stylized model of mortgage borrowing and show that the conditions of our general theorem apply in this
model and thus can explain the lack of prevalence of shared appreciation mortgages by appealing to
asymmetric information over the quality of house price indices.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. We begin in section §I by using the numerical
example given above to illustrate the two key assumptions required for non-contingent contracts to
be an equilibrium. Next, in section §II, we discuss a more complicated example which is focused on
mortgages, and we show how these key assumptions must be adapted in a setting in which default
is possible. We then begin to describe our general model, discussing the market for loans, the asymmetric information problem, and the equilibrium concept in section §III. In section §IV, we discuss
the zero-profit condition that arises from competition in our model and characterize the “best” equilibria, which features contingent contracts. In section §V, we discuss our most general results, which
describe assumptions under which risk-sharing fails and non-contingent contracts arise in equilibrium. In section §VI, we describe a number of variations and extensions to our basic framework. We
conclude the paper in section §VII.

I.

Non-Contingent Equilibrium: A Simple Example

We begin by elaborating on the example in our introduction. In this example, there are two
possible “external” states: bad and good. We call these states external to emphasize that they are
outside of the control of the borrower and lenders. Let A = {a b , a g } be the set of possible external
states. There are also two possible index realizations, high and low. Let Z = { z l , z h } be the set of
possible index realizations. The two external states are equally likely, P(a = a b ) = P(a = a g ) = 1/2,
as are the two index values, P(z = z l ) = P(z = z h ) = 1/2. The index might be “perfect,” in which case
z = z h if and only if a = a g , and z = z l if and only if a = a b . The index might also be “uninformative,”
in which case the realizations of z ∈ Z and a ∈ A are independent.
4 Stanford mortgages are indexed to an appraisal rather than a local house price index, and involve renegotiation when

the homeowner makes major investments.

6

Recall in our example that the borrowers’ marginal value of a dollar is 1/2 if a = a g and 3/2 if
a = a b , whereas the lender’s marginal value of a dollar is 3/4 if a = a g and 5/4 if a = a b . We considered
two contracts, a contingent (on z ∈ Z) contract and a non-contingent contract. The contingent contract
requires the borrower to pay d = 8/3 if z = z h and d = 0 if z = z l , whereas the non-contingent contract
requires the borrower to pay d = 1 regardless of the value of z.
The initial investment required by the lender is K = 1. As a result, the non-contingent contract is
break-even for the lender, regardless of whether the index is perfect or uninformative. The contingent
contract is break-even for the lender if the index is perfect. However, the contingent contract is
positive net present value for the lender if the index is uninformative. As a result, the lender has the
greatest incentive to deviate from a non-contingent equilibrium when the index is uninformative.
We conclude that using the non-contingent contract is an equilibrium. If the borrower was expecting to be offered the non-contingent contract and was offered the contingent contract instead,
then she could (and perhaps should) assume that the index is uninformative because a lender with
an uninformative index has the most to gain by deviating to the contingent contract. In this case,
the lender’s gain is the borrower’s loss because the contingent contract does not provide insurance
that is useful to the borrower and consequently the borrower should reject this deviation.
This conclusion depends on two key assumptions. First, the borrower and lender agree on which
states have high/low marginal values of a dollar. If instead the lender’s marginal value of a dollar
were 5/4 if a = a g and 3/4 if a = a b (reversing the order for the lender), then the contingent contract
that breaks even for the lender with a perfect index is d = 8/5 if z = z h and d = 0 if z = z l . However,
a lender with an uninformative index would not offer this contract because the amount financed
exceeds the amount the borrower repays in expectation. As a result, the non-contingent equilibrium
could not exist. We conclude that agreement about which states have high/low marginal values is
critical for the existence of a non-contingent equilibrium.
The second key assumption is that the borrower should buy insurance from the lender, and not
vice-versa. Suppose that we switch the marginal values between the borrower and lender, so that the
borrowers’ marginal value of a dollar is 3/4 if a = a g and 5/4 if a = a b , and the lender’s marginal value
of a dollar is 1/2 if a = a g and 3/2 if a = a b . In this case, the best contingent contract that breaks even
for the lender with a perfect index is d = 0 if z = z h and d = 4/3 if z = z l . In other words, the lender
is buying insurance from the borrower using this contingent contract. We find again that a lender
with an uninformative index would not offer this contract because the amount financed exceeds the
amount that the borrower repays in expectation. As a result, the non-contingent equilibrium could
not exist. We conclude that the borrower must be “more sensitive” to the external state a than
the lender, in the sense that the lender should be insuring the borrower and not vice-versa, for a
non-contingent equilibrium to exist.
Looking ahead, these two assumptions correspond exactly to the key assumptions in our general
model. Intuitively, if the lender can insure the borrower at a negative insurance premium (i.e., with
a contract that calls for the borrower to repay an amount that is in expectation less than the amount
financed), or if the lender should be buying insurance from the borrower and can offer a high price for

7

that insurance, the lender can prove that the index is perfect. But if the lender should be insuring
the buyer and requires a (weakly) positive insurance premium to do so, then the non-contingent
equilibrium can exist. Moreover, the non-contingent equilibrium exists even though, if the index is
in fact perfect, both the lender and borrower can be made better-off by using the index.
This example is constructed to clearly illustrate the key requirements for the existence of a noncontingent equilibrium. In particular, the example is simple because both the borrower and lender
have constant marginal utility within each external state a. While this might make sense for a
lender (e.g., if the stochastic discount factor of the lender is a function of a, and this transaction is
small relative to the size of the lender), it often does not make sense as a model of borrowers. In the
context of mortgages, we would prefer to assume that borrowers have concave utility. We would also
like to incorporate the possibility that the borrower defaults instead of repaying the promised value
d. For this reason, before describing our general model, we introduce a simple model of the mortgage
market. We also show how the two key assumptions of “agreement on marginal values” and “lender
should insure the borrower” can be understood in this context.

II.

Non-Contingent Equilibrium: A Mortgage Example

In this section, we discuss a simple model of mortgage lending that illustrates the key conditions
necessary for the existence of a non-contingent contracts equilibrium.

A.

The Setup
There are two dates. At date zero, a borrower receives take-it-or-leave-it offers from |L| ≥ 3

mortgage lenders to finance the purchase of a house for K dollars. The borrower promises repayment
at date one, collateralized by the house. The borrower can accept one offer and occupies the house
until the start of date one, at which point she liquidates it and consumes her final wealth. The value
of the house at date one is x ∈ {0, xh } with K < xh .5 As in the previous example, there are two external
states, A = {a b , a g }, and two possible index values, Z = { z l , z h }. The external state a ∈ A affects the
likelihood of a high house price and both agents’ other sources of income. The external state could
represent the aggregate component of house prices in a local area containing the borrower’s house or
a broader economic variable that affects house prices and the agent’s other sources of income. The
index z ∈ Z can therefore be thought of as either a house price index or a broader economic index.6
The realization of the index z is publicly observable, while the realizations of the house price x
and external state a are not. The marginal distributions of a and z are common knowledge, and
for simplicity we assume as in the previous example that P(a = a g ) = P(z = z h ) = 1/2. The joint
distribution of x and a, P(x = xh |a) = π(a), is also common knowledge, with high house prices being
more likely in good states, π(a b ) < π(a g ).
5 The assumption that the liquidation value is either high or zero simplifies the exposition considerably.
6 This example is too simple to draw a distinction between these two types of indices.

8

The lenders all privately observe the joint distribution of a and z, given by θ (a, z) where
1
+ ρ,
4
1
θ (a g , z l ) = θ (a b , z h ) = − ρ ,
4

θ (a g , z h ) = θ (a b , z l ) =

for some ρ ∈ [0, ρ̄ ].7 We refer to ρ as the quality of the index. The borrower does not know ρ and has a
prior with full support on ρ ∈ [0, ρ̄ ]. After the borrower observes the contracts offered by the various
lenders, she may update her beliefs about ρ .
To motivate the use of debt (which can be non-contingent or contingent on the index z), we assume that the borrower privately observes the value of her house at date t = 1 and can make a report
x̃ to her lender. While the lender cannot observe the value of the house, she can implement a foreclosure rule conditional on the borrower’s report. For simplicity, we assume that foreclosure results in
liquidation value of x = 0 and that the lender cannot randomize foreclosure.8 As a result, any feasible
outcome can be implemented by debt with face value d(z), which depends on the index realization z,
such that if the borrower fails to repay the face value, then the lender forecloses on the house. We
assume in what follows that d(z) ≤ xh , and therefore the borrower will default if x = 0 and repay if
x = xh .
In addition to her house, the borrower also has a non-pledgeable endowment yB (a), with yB (a b ) <
yB (a g ), available at date one. Consequently, the borrower’s final wealth is W = yB (a) + xh − d if x = xh
and the borrower owes d to the lender, and W = yB (a) otherwise. The borrower has CRRA expected
utility E[u B (W)] over final wealth, where
u B (W) =

W 1−γB − 1
.
1 − γB

We summarize the payoffs for a borrower that owes d in external state a using the indirect utility
function
φB (d, a) = π(a)u B (yB (a) + xh − d) + (1 − π(a))u B (yB (a)).

If the borrower does not purchase the house, then she receives u B (yB (a)) in external state a. We
have assumed, for simplicity, that defaulting and never purchasing the house are identical from the
borrower’s perspective, so the borrower’s participation constraint will never bind.
All lenders have an existing portfolio of assets (e.g., other mortgages) with value yL (a), again with
yL (a b ) < yL (a g ). Conditional on making the loan, a lender’s total asset value is R = yL (a) + d − K if
the borrower repays d, and R = yL (a) − K otherwise. Lenders derive CRRA expected utility E[u L (R)]
of their total payoff R, where
u L (R) =

R 1−γL − 1
.
1 − γL

We assume that this particular borrower is small relative to the lender, which means that d and
7 If ρ̄ = 1 , a perfect index is possible. However, our assumptions require only that ρ̄ > 0.
4
8 This is a simplified costly state verification model (Townsend (1979), Gale and Hellwig (1985)).

9

K are small relative to yL (a). We also normalize the lender’s indirect utility function, φL (d, a), by
subtracting the lender’s expected utility if the lender does not make a loan to this borrower, so that
her indirect utility is zero if she does not make the loan. As a result, using a first-order Taylor
expansion, if a lender is owed d in external state a, then the lender has indirect utility
φL (d, a) = π(a)u0L (yL (a))(d − K) − (1 − π(a))u0L (yL (a))K.

Note that u0L (yL (a)) can be interpreted as a stochastic discount factor.
We now impose assumptions on the endowments and preferences of the lenders and the borrower
that will ensure agreement on marginal values and that the lender should insure the borrower. First,
we assume that lenders’ endowment and risk aversion satisfy
γL log

µ

yL (a g )

¶

µ
≥ log

yL (a b )

π(a g )
π(a b )

¶

,

(1)

and the borrower’s endowment and risk aversion satisfy
γB log

µ

yB (a g ) + xh
yB (a b ) + xh

¶

µ
≥ log

π(a g )
π(a b )

¶

.

(2)

The conditions in equations (1) and (2) state that the percentage change in marginal utility between
a b and a g is greater than the percentage change in the default probability. As a result, both the
borrower and the lenders have decreasing (between a b and a g ) marginal utilities with respect to
payments, which only occur if the borrower does not default. In other words, they agree that there is
a high marginal value of such payments in external state a b and a low value in a g .
Next, we assume that the borrower faces a greater cost of bearing the risk of her endowment
than the lender, conditional on no-default; that is,
γB log

µ

yB (a g ) + xh
yB (a b ) + xh

¶

> γL log

µ

yL (a g )
yL (a b )

¶

.

(3)

Equation (3) implies that under full information, it is efficient for the lender to insure the borrower.9
Briefly, an equilibrium of this market is given by a set of offers d l (z), for each lender l, such that
lenders maximize their expected utility, a borrower belief function that maps the set of possible offers
to a posterior belief about the quality of the index and is consistent with Bayes’ rule where possible,
and an acceptance rule that that maximizes the borrowers utility conditional on her beliefs about the
quality of the index. We describe the market structure and equilibrium definition more thoroughly
in our general model.

B.

Analysis
Equations (1) and (2) ensure that both the borrower and lender agree that the marginal value of

a promise (a payment conditional on no-default) is higher in the bad external state. In other words,
9 Note that equations (3) and (1) imply equation (2). An analogous result appears in our general model.

10

they are both risk averse with respect to promises. This kind of risk-aversion is related but not
identical to having a risk-averse utility function. For example, because the loan under consideration
is small relative to the lender’s other income, the lender is effectively risk-neutral with respect to
the borrower’s idiosyncratic outcome. However, the lender can still be risk-averse with respect to
promises because the lender’s stochastic discount factor is a function of the external state a ∈ A.
This type of risk aversion for the lender can arise for at least three reasons. First, the lender can
be thought of as another agent in the economy, with her own CRRA preferences and other sources
of income. Second, suppose that the lenders are intermediaries subject to regulatory or financial
constraints and that yL is the cash flow on the lender’s portfolio of other mortgages.10 When the
external state is good (bad) because the aggregate component of house prices is high (low), then the
cash flow from the lender’s mortgage portfolio is higher (lower) and repayment of one individual loan
has a smaller (larger) effect on the health of lender’s balance sheet. Third, suppose that the lenders
are integrated with financial markets, in which case yL is the representative agent’s consumption
and γL is the representative agent’s relative risk aversion. In this case, the external state affects
broader economic conditions. When the economy is good (bad), the lender’s stochastic discount factor
is lower (higher).
There are two competing forces that determine whether the lender is risk averse with respect to
promises. First, the lender is risk averse with respect to the external state, which means that the
lender has higher marginal utility in the bad external state. Second, promises are more likely to
be paid in the good external state (π(a h ) > π(a l )). Equation (1) implies that the first of these forces
weakly dominates the second, so that the lender has a higher marginal value of promises in bad
states, which means that

∂
∂d

φL (d, a) = π(a)u0L (yL (a))

(4)

is decreasing in a. Note that Equation (1) is equivalent to assuming that the lender’s stochastic
discount factor is more volatile than mortgage default probabilities.
As with the lender, there are two competing forces that determine whether the borrower is risk
averse with respect to promises. The borrower is risk averse, and hence will have higher marginal
utility in the bad state because of her non-pledgeable income. At the same time, in the bad state,
promises are less likely to be repaid and, hence, are less costly to make. Equation (2) implies that
the first of these forces dominates the second, so that
∂
∂d

φB (d, a) = −π(a)u0B (yB (a) + xh − d)

(5)

is increasing in a. Note that, unlike the lender, the marginal cost of a promise for the borrower
depends on the size of the promise. If the borrower is risk averse with respect to promises ( ∂∂d φB (d, a),
which is negative, is increasing in a) at d = 0, then she will be risk averse with respect to promises
10 In this case, the CRRA preferences should be understood as a proxy for the curvature induced by the financial or

regulatory constraints.

11

at all higher debt levels.11
As discussed in section §I, although the borrower and lender agree on which external state has
a higher marginal benefit/cost of promises, this is not sufficient to guarantee the existence of a noncontingent equilibrium. We also need to ensure that the lender should be insuring the borrower, and
not vice-versa. Intuitively, which agent should be providing insurance and which agent should be
receiving insurance depends on the ratio of the marginal values of promises. Equation (3) implies
the borrower’s marginal value of a promise is more sensitive to the external state than the lender’s.
In particular, this property holds at d = 0,
∂
φ (d, a g )|d =0
∂d B
∂
φ (d, a b )|d =0
∂d B

<

∂
φ (d, a g )|d =0
∂d L
.
∂
φ (d, a b )|d =0
∂d L

(6)

Equation (6) also implies that if the index is related to the external state (ρ > 0), then the first-best
contract features promised face value payments that increase with the index, d(z l ) < d(z h ).
We now give a heuristic argument that the asymmetric information between the lenders and
borrower over the quality of the index can lead to the use of non-contingent contracts. Suppose that
L − 1 lenders offer the same non-contingent contract d ∗ . Can the the L-th lender offer a contingent
contract d 0 , with d 0 (z l ) < d 0 (z h ), to exploit the risk sharing benefits that such contracts offer? If the
borrower accepts the offer of d 0 , the lower the index quality (lower ρ ), the higher the profit for the
lender. That is,
∂
∂ρ

E[φL (d 0 (z), a)] = (φL (d 0 (z h ), a g ) − (φL (d 0 (z l ), a g )) − ((φL (d 0 (z h ), a b ) − (φL (d 0 (z l ), a b )) < 0,

by the definition of ρ and the lenders’ risk-aversion with respect to promises. Intuitively, the higher
the index quality, the more variation in d 0 (z) is correlated with lenders’ endowment, and consequently the more costly it is for the lender to offer this insurance. Therefore, if the borrower is
offered d 0 , then it is reasonable for the borrower to believe that the index has the lowest quality.
Given this belief, the borrower will reject any d 0 that the L-th lender would be willing to offer. What
if the L-th lender offered a contingent contract that was decreasing in z, d 0 (z l ) > d 0 (z h )? In this case,
the lender is purchasing insurance from the borrower, which is inefficient. As a result, if the lender
is willing to offer a decreasing contract, then the borrower is not willing to accept it. This logic leads
to the following proposition:
Proposition 1. There exists a K̄ > 0 such that, for all K < K̄, there exists an equilibrium in which
non-contingent contracts are used regardless of the type θ .
Proof. See the appendix, section B.1.
The requirement that K < K̄ is needed to, among other things, guarantee that is possible to
finance the house with a non-contingent contract.12
11 This follows from u000 (·) > 0, and we prove it in the proof of proposition 1.
B
12 We prove Proposition 1 by demonstrating that the mortgage model of this section satisfies the assumptions of our

12

In this mortgage example, we have illustrated the distinction between promises and payments,
and what it means to be risk-averse with respect to promises. We now turn to the general version of
the model, which treats the indirect utility functions φB and φL as primitives. We provide a set of
assumptions (assumptions 2 and 3 below) that generalize equations (1) and (3). These assumptions
ensure that both lenders and the borrower are risk averse with respect to promises, and that it
is efficient for the lender to insure the borrower. We then prove a general result, Proposition 3,
which shows that as long as these assumptions are satisfied, there exists an equilibrium with noncontingent contracts. The model of mortgage lending that we have described in this section satisfies
the assumptions of our general model, meaning that Proposition 1 is a consequence of our general
result, Proposition 3.

III.

The General Model

In this section, we setup our general model. At date zero, a borrower wishes to raise K > 0 dollars
to pursue a project (e.g., purchasing a home). If the borrower accepts a contract offer by a lender,
then the borrower will initiate the project. Payoffs are determined at date one.
We now describe each component of the model in more detail. First, we introduce the external
states a ∈ A and index z ∈ Z, which are the key exogenous random variables in the model. Second, we
describe the contracting environment and the indirect utility functions that summarize the payoffs
for the borrower and lender from using a particular contract. Third, we introduce the “types” in our
model, which describe the index quality; that is, the relationship between the external state and the
index. Fourth, we discuss the market structure. Finally, we define the equilibrium in the context of
our model.

A.

The States and the Index
After the borrower and lender agree to a contract and initiate the project, an index z ∈ Z is

determined at date one. This index is observable and verifiable, and related to the true external
state a ∈ A. The true external state a is what enters the agents’ indirect utility functions—they have
no particular concern for the value of the index.
The index z ∈ Z should be thought of an index based on the external state a ∈ A. For simplicity,
we assume that both A and Z are totally ordered sets. We write a Â a0 to denote the idea that the
external state a ∈ A is “better than” the external state a0 ∈ A, and use the same notation for the index
values. In the context of mortgages, the external state a ∈ A might influence house prices, borrower
income, and/or the cost of capital for lenders. The index z ∈ Z is an index that, perhaps imperfectly,
measures these things, such as a local area house price index, a wage index, or an interest rate. We
assume that A and Z are finite sets.
general model (described in the next sections), provided that K < K̄ for some K̄ > 0, and then invoking our most general
result, Proposition 3 below. The assumptions of our general model are sufficient but not necessary. We speculate that a
proof tailored to this mortgage example could prove Proposition 1 under weaker conditions (a higher value of K̄).

13

The external state a ∈ A influences the distribution of the borrower’s idiosyncratic outcomes, i ∈ I.
For a mortgage borrower, idiosyncratic outcomes could include the borrower’s particular house price
or income. The idiosyncratic outcomes may or may not be observable or contractible, and might be
influenced by the borrower’s behavior.

B.

The Indirect Utility Functions and Contract Space
A contract is a function s : I × Z → R+ that takes the idiosyncratic outcome i and index z, and

determines a payment from the borrower to the lender. We use the notation s z : I → R+ to refer to the
“conditional contract,” which is the contract for a particular value of the index.
We require that conditional contracts are “ex-post efficient,” appealing to notions of renegotiationproofness after the index z ∈ Z has been revealed. We further assume that the set of ex-post efficient
contracts, which we denote as S D , can be indexed by a number, d ∈ D ⊂ R. We assume that D is a
convex subset of the real line whose minimum is d = 0.13 For example, if the ex-post efficient contract
is a debt contract, as in many optimal contracting models (e.g., Hart and Moore (1998), Innes (1990),
Townsend (1979), Hébert (2018)), then d is the face value of the debt claim. For this reason, we
refer to the parameter d as a “promise.” We use the notation s d ∈ S D to indicate an ex-post efficient
contract with a promise of d. The set of feasible contracts S is the set of contracts such that for each
z ∈ Z, s z ∈ S D .
The primitives of our model are the indirect utility functions of the borrower and lender. Given
a particular state a ∈ A and ex-post efficient contract s d ,14 the borrower’s indirect utility function is
φB (s d , a). We refer to this as an indirect utility function because it summarizes the borrower’s payoff,

given some underlying relationship between the external state a, contract s d , and the distribution
of idiosyncratic outcomes. Similarly, we denote the lender’s payoff (including the cost of the initial
investment K) as φL (s d , a). In both cases, these functions should be understood as expected utilities
conditional on a, and do not necessarily imply that the borrower or lender perfectly knows a.
We treat the indirect utility functions as primitives that satisfy several properties. First, we
assume that φL (s d , a) is lower semi-continuous on d ∈ D for all a ∈ A.15 Second, we assume that
φL (s d , a) is negative for d = 0. We set the lender’s indirect utility to zero if she does not make

the loan, so this property implies that the lender is not willing to make the loan in exchange for a
promise of zero in all states. Third, the borrower’s utility function satisfies a monotonicity property:
if d 0 > d for some d, d 0 ∈ D, then φB (s d 0 , a) ≤ φB (s d , a) for all a ∈ A. Intuitively, if the borrower makes
a larger promise to the lender, then she is worse off. For the lender, this property does not necessarily
hold; promises will not necessarily be paid, and demanding excessive repayment can result in lower
expected utility for the lender.
13 In our mortgage example (section §II), d is the face value of the debt claim and it is natural to restrict attention to
D ∈ [0, xh ].
14 These indirect utility functions are naturally defined over all conditional contracts, not just ex-post efficient ones, but
ex-post inefficient contracts play no role in our analysis.
15 Inefficient foreclosure/liquidation can generate downward jumps in the lender’s payoff in certain examples, which is
why we assume lower semi-continuity instead of continuity.

14

Although we use debt as our leading example, these conditions can also describe other families of
securities. Examples include the set of fixed payments of varying size, the set of 100% equity claims
less a fixed payment of varying size, and the set of equity shares of varying percentages. The first
two of these examples could be motivated by risk-sharing type problems, and the third by security
design problems resulting in equity as the optimal security design.
Our simple example (section §I) and mortgage example (section §II) provide examples of indirect utility functions φL and φB that satisfy our assumptions. We provide another example in the
appendix, which is based on costly state verification models (section §A).

C.

Types
We define θ (a, z) as the joint distribution of the external state and the index. This joint distribu-

tion is common knowledge amongst the lenders but is not known to the borrower, and is the type of
our adverse selection problem. The types θ are drawn from a set Θ, which we define as the set of all
joint distributions that have the same marginal distributions for a ∈ A and z ∈ Z, which we denote
p(a) and q(z), respectively. Without loss of generality, we assume these marginal distributions have
full support over A and Z, respectively. Let θ0 (a, z) = p(a)q(z) denote an “uninformative type” (i.e.,
the type with an index that is independent of the external state).
The borrower’s prior belief over these types is µ0 . In effect, the borrower is uncertain about the
relationship between the index and the external state. A homeowner, for example, might not be
certain how the S&P Case-Shiller index for his metro area is related to the price of his particular
house. We assume that the borrower is aware of the marginal distributions, to abstract from the
problems generated by that type of asymmetric information and focus instead on the borrower’s
doubt about the relevance of the index (we revisit this in our extensions, section §VI). We do not
require that the beliefs µ0 have full support on Θ but impose assumptions on the support, which we
describe below. In particular, we do not require that the type space contains a perfectly informative
index, even though our results apply if such a type exists.
Having defined the type space, we next describe the market for loans.

D.

The Market for Loans
Let L denote the set of lenders, with |L| ≥ 3, each of whom can post a contract. After these lenders

post contracts, the borrower can pick whichever one she prefers or choose to forgo the investment opportunity. The outside options for the lenders are normalized to zero. Note that, from the borrower’s
perspective, lenders are perfect substitutes.
Let S L = (s1 , s2 , . . . , s|L| ) be the menu of contracts offered by the lenders at date zero. From the
lender l’s perspective, the expected utility of offering a contract s l ∈ S, when the other lenders offer
contracts S −l , the resulting menu is S L = (s l , S −l ), and the common type is θ , is
σ(s l , S L )

θ (a, z)φL (s lz , a),

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

15

(7)

where σ(s l , S L ) is the probability that the buyer accepts the contract s l , given the menu of contracts
posted. This notation implicitly assumes that the buyer’s decision does not depend on the identity of
the lender but only depends on the contract that the lender offers. We assume this in the equilibria
we study, and note that it is consistent with the assumption that the borrower’s utility does not
depend on the lender she chooses, only on the design of the contract.
Assuming that the borrower chooses to borrow, his expected payoff for contract s is (abusing
summation notation)
X
θ 0 ∈Θ,a∈ A,z∈ Z

µ(θ 0 ; S L )θ 0 (a, z)φB (s z , a),

(8)

where µ(θ 0 ; S L ) denotes the borrower’s beliefs about the distribution of the lender’s common type θ 0
after observing the menu S L . The beliefs µ(θ 0 ; S L ) are central to our theory. The borrower does not
observe the lender’s common type θ . Initially, she has prior µ0 over the set of types Θ, but might
update these beliefs based on the menu of securities offered. It is important to note that, because
the type θ is common across lenders, an optimal mechanism could allow the borrower to solicit this
information and then negotiate a contract (Cremer and McLean (1988)). The market structure we
impose, which we believe is realistic in many contexts, prevents the buyer from conducting this sort
of auction.16
Having discussed the basic structure of the model, we next describe the equilibrium concept and
the refinements for off-equilibrium beliefs that we employ.

E.

Equilibrium Definition
The basic equilibrium concept we use is perfect Bayesian, and we focus on pure strategies for the

lenders. Given the strategies of the other lenders (S −l ∗ ) and the borrower (σ∗ ), and the common type
θ , we require that lender l posts

s l ∈ arg max σ∗ (s, S −l ∗ )
s∈ S

X

θ (a, z)φL (s lz , a),

(9)

a∈ A,z∈ Z

if that strategy yields weakly positive expected utility, and otherwise does not participate. That is,
each lender’s choice of contract maximizes her utility, given the strategies of the other lenders and
borrower.
If the borrower is offered any contracts, then she must choose a strategy σ(s l , S L ), such that,
given posterior beliefs µ(·; S L ), if σ(s l , S L ) > 0, then
s l ∈ arg max
s∈ S L

X
θ 0 ∈Θ,a∈ A,z∈ Z

µ(θ 0 ; S L )θ 0 (a, z)φB (s z , a),

(10)

and
X
θ 0 ∈Θ,a∈ A,z∈ Z

µ(θ 0 ; S L )θ 0 (a, z)φB (s lz , a) ≥ φ̄B ,

(11)

16 The mechanism of Cremer and McLean (1988) also requires commitment, and hence is inconsistent with our ex-post
efficiency assumption.

16

where φ̄B denotes the borrower’s expected utility if she does not accept any contract. In words, the
borrower must maximize his utility given the menu of contracts being offered.
The equilibrium strategies of the lenders create a function S ∗ (θ ) that describes the menu of
securities that might be offered, given the common type. If the borrower observes a menu S L for
which there exists a type θ 0 such that S L = S ∗ (θ 0 ), then she must update her beliefs according to
Bayes’ rule:
µ(θ ; S L ) = P

µ0 (θ )1(S L = S ∗ (θ ))
θ 0 ∈Θ µ0 (θ

0 )1(S L

= S ∗ (θ 0 ))

.

(12)

This does not, of course, pin down what the borrower believes when he observes a menu S L that
could not have been generated from the equilibrium strategies S ∗ (θ ), for any θ ∈ Θ with µ0 (θ ) > 0.
For the purpose of determining if a conjectured set of strategies is an equilibrium, we only need to
consider menus S L that differ from a menu S ∗ (θ 0 ) for a single lender. The result we are building
towards is that there are many equilibria. This would be expected in the absence of refinements for
off-equilibrium beliefs. Without refinements, however, the borrower can in effect dictate the contract
by forming pessimistic beliefs when offered any other contract, justifying rejection. This kind of
multiplicity is common in multi-sender signaling games (in our context, each lender is sending a
signal about the common type). For this reason, we employ two refinements, unprejudiced beliefs
and D1, in the spirit of common practice in the literature on multi-sender signaling games (Vida and
Honryo (2019)).17
The first refinement, unprejudiced beliefs (Bagwell and Ramey (1991)), requires that the borrower believe the minimal number of lenders have deviated from equilibrium play. For concreteness,
suppose the true common type is θ , and that all but one of the lenders offer an equilibrium contract
for that type. The other lender deviates by offering another security that is not offered by type θ in
equilibrium. Moreover, suppose that the resulting menu could not have arisen from the equilibrium
strategies of any type. Absent this refinement, the borrower could believe that multiple lenders have
deviated. By imposing this refinement and using the fact that there are at least three lenders, the
borrower must instead correctly identify the deviating lender.
The second refinement we employ is the D1 equilibrium refinement (Banks and Sobel (1987)),
which is applied to the correctly-identified deviating lender. This refinement captures the intuition
that, if confronted with a “deviating” contract, the borrower should believe that the lender is of a type
that would benefit from this deviation. Under our first refinement, the borrower is able to identify
the deviating lender (when there is only a single deviating lender), and it is to the security offered by
this lender that we apply the D1 refinement. We believe that our results are robust to using other
refinements (aside from D1) that provide a similar intuition.
17 As discussed by Vida and Honryo (2019), it is common in multi-sender signaling games to require that equilibria
satisfy both unprejudiced beliefs and the intuitive criterion of Cho and Kreps (1987). Unprejudiced beliefs allows the
receiver to identify the deviating sender, and the intuitive criterion, usually applied in single-sender games, is applied
to this deviating sender. For an example, see Schultz (1996). In our setting, the intuitive criterion has no bite, but D1,
which is a similar but stronger refinement, does. As noted by Vida and Honryo (2019), unprejudiced beliefs, the intuitive
criterion, and D1 are all related to strategic stability (Kohlberg and Mertens (1986)); however, we are not aware of any
other papers that have applied unprejudiced beliefs and D1 simultaneously.

17

Following the standard definition of D1, we think of the borrower’s strategy as consisting of an
acceptance probability ξ. A lender of type θ offering contract s0 , instead of the equilibrium contract
s, would benefit when given that the buyer accepts the deviating contract with probability ξ, if
ξ

X

0

θ (a, z)φL (s z , a) ≥ σ∗ (s, S ∗ (θ ))

a∈ A,z∈ Z

X

θ (a, z)φL (s z , a).

(13)

a∈ A,z∈ Z

The types for whom the set of ξ ∈ [0, 1] satisfying this condition is maximal are those where the
buyer’s beliefs can place positive support on following this deviation.
Looking ahead, we will show that in equilibrium, the lender’s expected utility is equal to their
outside option of zero due to the effects of competition. As a result, the D1 refinement will simply
state that the buyer must place the support of her beliefs on types that would weakly profit from
offering the deviating contract, if that contract were accepted and that such a type exists. The buyer
cannot believe the deviating lender is of a type such that the lender would lose money if the buyer
accepted the deviating contract, unless every lender type would lose money if the contract were
accepted (and in this case, the deviating contract would never be offered). The requirement that the
borrower should believe the deviating lender would weakly profit if the borrower accepted that the
deviating contract is intuitive in our setting. We will demonstrate that this requirement does not
eliminate the non-contingent contract’s equilibrium.
Our analysis will focus on a particular set of equilibria, symmetric pure-strategy equilibria.
These equilibria are pure strategy equilibria and symmetric in the sense that, for all types θ ∈ Θ,
either all of the lenders offer the same security with certainty, s(θ ), or none of the lenders offer a security. They are also symmetric in the sense that the borrower, when faced with a menu of identical
securities, chooses each lender with probability |L|−1 .

IV.

Preliminary Analysis

We begin our analysis by focusing on the effects of competition. Consider a symmetric purestrategy equilibrium and then imagine that the lenders’ profits from offering the contract s(θ ) are
strictly positive. Intuitively, this could not be an equilibrium. Suppose that a lender offered a deviating contract s0 ∈ S such that for each index value z ∈ Z, the associated promise d 0z was less than
the promise associated with the original contract, d z . The buyer would then be better off regardless
of her beliefs, and therefore accept the contract with probability one. By sacrificing some profit, the
lender would capture the entire market and be better off. Because of the monotonicity property of
the buyer’s indirect utility function and the lower semi-continuity property of the lender’s indirect
utility function, standard Bertrand competition effects apply and profits must be zero in equilibrium.
Lemma 1. In any symmetric pure-strategy equilibrium, lender expected utility is zero.
Proof. See the appendix, section B.2.
We next introduce an assumption to ensure that there are contracts which can satisfy both the
18

lender and borrower’s participation constraints.
Assumption 1. There exists a contract s ∈ S D that offers sufficient utility to the borrower, while
satisfying the lender’s participation constraint. That is, the problem
max

X

s∈S D a∈ A,z∈ Z

subject to the constraint

P

θ0 (a, z)φB (s, a)

a∈ A,z∈ Z θ0 (a, z)φL (s, a) = 0

is feasible and has a solution weakly greater than

the borrower’s outside option φ̄B .
Because we have assumed that the marginal distributions are the same for all types θ ∈ Θ, this
assumption is sufficient to ensure that for any type, there is a contract that both the borrower and
lender would be willing to accept under full information.
Next, we discuss the existence of a “best” equilibrium. Consider a symmetric, pure-strategy
equilibrium, which is described by an offer of the contract s(θ ). Suppose that the mapping between
types θ and securities s(θ ) is one-to-one. In this case, in equilibrium, the borrower knows the lenders’
common type. We then define a full-information optimal contract as
s̄(θ ) ∈ arg max

X

s∈S a∈ A,z∈ Z

subject to the constraint that

P

θ (a, z)φB (s z , a),

a∈ A,z∈ Z θ (a, z)φL (s z , a) = 0.

(14)

By Assumption 1, the solution to the above

maximization can offer the buyer a higher payoff than her outside option for all types θ ∈ Θ.
A set of full-information optimal contracts is on the Pareto frontier for all θ , and offers the lenders
zero expected utility. As a result, for any deviating contract that a lender might be willing to offer,
if the borrower correctly inferred the lenders’ true type, then the borrower would weakly prefer the
full-information optimal contract being offered. The D1 refinement in our model allows the borrower to make this inference, and the presence of a competing lender allows the borrower to choose
the equilibrium full-information optimal contract instead of the deviating contract. The following
proposition summarizes this logic:
Proposition 2. Under Assumption 1, the pure-strategy symmetric equilibrium s(θ ) = s̄(θ ) exists.
Proof. See the appendix, section B.3.
This proposition describes a “best” pure-strategy symmetric equilibrium, in which a full-information
optimal contract is offered.18 Our main results describe the conditions under which another type of
pure-strategy symmetric equilibrium exists. This alternative equilibrium is notable because it uses
a non-contingent contract, is a pooling equilibrium, and is Pareto-inferior to the “best” equilibrium,
from an ex-ante perspective.
18 Note that there is a tension between the existence of the best equilibrium, which uses indexed (contingent on z ∈ Z)
contracts, and the assumption that the lender’s indirect utility function depends only on the external state and not directly
on the index. For example, if the lender made a number of other indexed loans, then the lender’s marginal utility might be
a function of both a ∈ A and z ∈ Z. Because the focus of our analysis is the existence of an equilibrium without indexation,
we do not discuss this issue in more detail.

19

We say that a contract is “non-contingent” if s z = s z0 for all z, z0 ∈ Z; that is, the contract does not
make use of the index. We consider the existence of a non-contingent contract pooling equilibrium,
in which, for all θ ∈ Θ with µ0 (θ ) > 0,
s z (θ ) = s∗ ∈ arg max

X

s∈ S D a∈ A

subject to

X

p(a)φB (s, a),

(15)

p(a)φL (s, a) = K.

a∈ A

By Assumption 1, this contract can offer the buyer a higher payoff than her outside option for all
types θ ∈ Θ. Note also that this equilibrium is at least weakly Pareto-inferior to the “best” equilibrium
and is strictly inferior if the non-contingent contract s∗ is sub-optimal for any type θ under full
information.

V.

Risk-Sharing Failure in Equilibrium

In this section, we provide sufficient conditions for the existence of a “non-contingent” equilibrium. This equilibrium will exist despite its ex-ante Pareto-inferiority to the “best” equilibrium
discussed above.
Our second assumption states that the value of a larger promise to the lender is higher in bad
external states than in good external states. In other words, the lender is risk-averse with respect to
promises.
Assumption 2. For all d 0 , d ∈ D with d 0 > d, φL (s d 0 , a) − φL (s d , a) is weakly decreasing on a ∈ A.
From the lender’s perspective, it is preferable to receive larger promises in worse states. In other
words, φL (s d , a) is sub-modular in (d, a). This is what we mean by the idea that “lenders are riskaverse with respect to promises.”
Our third assumption is defined using the variable λ∗ , which is the Pareto-weight associated
with the non-contingent contract s∗ :
s∗ ∈ arg max

X

s∈ S D a∈ A

p(a)U(s, a; λ∗ ),

(16)

where
U(s, a; λ) = φB (s, a) + λφL (s, a)
is the social welfare function. The Pareto-weight λ∗ > 0 is also the multiplier on the constraint in
equation (15), and hence s∗ causes the lender to receive zero expected utility.
Our assumption requires that the marginal social value of a promise to a lender is lower in bad
external states than in good external states. In other words, it is efficient to the lender to insure the
borrower.
Assumption 3. For all d, d 0 ∈ D with d 0 > d, U(s d 0 , a; λ∗ ) − U(s d , a; λ∗ ) is weakly increasing on a ∈ A.
20

The social welfare function is super-modular in (d, a), which implies among other things that the
borrower’s indirect utility function, φB (s d , a), is super-modular in (d, a). That is, this assumption
implicitly embeds the assumption that the borrower is also “risk-averse with respect to promises.”
These two assumptions can be understood as consisting of several claims. The first claim is that
the “marginal benefit of debt” to the lender, φL (s d 0 , a) − φL (s d , a), is monotone in the aggregate state,
regardless of the levels of debt involved. The first part of this claim can be thought of as defining
the order on the aggregate states—up to this point, nothing has depended on that order. The second
part (“regardless of the level of debt”) is the key point. The second claim is that the “marginal cost
of debt” to the borrower, φB (s d , a) − φB (s d 0 , a), is monotone and increases in the same direction as
the marginal benefit of debt to the lender. In other words, states in which the lender would really
like larger promises are also states in which the borrower would really prefer not to make larger
promises. The third claim is that the borrower is “more risk averse” than the lender in this sense.
That is, in states in which the lender would really like a large promise, and the borrower would
really prefer a small promise, the latter effect dominates, and under the Pareto weight λ∗ , it is more
efficient to have smaller promises when both “marginal cost” and “marginal benefit” are high. In
other words, the optimal contract would involve the lender insuring the borrower and because their
preferences are aligned, this is costly for the lender.
As suggested by this description, our results do not really depend on the ordering over the external states; that is, the proof of Proposition 3 that follows would hold almost unchanged if we
imposed, instead these two assumptions, that φL (s d , a) was super-modular and that U(s d , a; λ∗ ) was
sub-modular.
Our last assumption requires that the set of possible types (the support of the prior µ0 ) be sufficiently rich, in the sense that there is always a “less interrelated” type. There are a variety of
ways of defining “less interrelated” in the context of joint probability distributions with identical
marginal distributions. For two variables (i.e., a ∈ A and z ∈ Z), many of these orders are equivalent
(Meyer and Strulovici (2012)). One intuitive way of measuring interrelatedness is the greater weak
association relation defined by Meyer and Strulovici (2012). A definition, in our context, follows:
Definition 1. A type θ ∈ Θ has greater weak association than a type θ 0 ∈ Θ, θ ºGW A θ 0 , if, for all
non-decreasing functions h : A → R and g : Z → R,
Covθ (h(a), g(z)) ≥ Covθ (h(a), g(z)).
0

In other words, the type θ 0 has less correlation than the type θ , regardless of how the external
states a and index values z are mapped to real numbers. One particular consequence of θ ºGW A θ 0 is
that (again, from Meyer and Strulovici (2012)),
X

(θ (a, z) − θ 0 (a, z)) f (a, z) ≥ 0

a∈ A,z∈ Z

for all super-modular functions f . We can also relate greater weak association to the more familiar

21

notion of first-order stochastic dominance. If θ ºGW A θ 0 , then for all z0 ∈ Z, the conditional distribution θ (a| z º z0 ) first-order stochastically dominates θ 0 (a| z º z0 ), and θ 0 (a| z ≺ z0 ) first-order stochastically dominates θ (a| z ≺ z0 ). That is, if θ ºGW A θ 0 , then higher values of the index are more strongly
associated with better external states under θ than under θ 0 .
We assume that every type θ in the support of µ0 has greater weak association than the uninformative type θ0 (i.e., all θ ∈ Θ are weakly associated). The key part of our assumption is that “it can
always be worse.” In other words, for any type θ that is possible (µ0 (θ ) > 0), every type that is less
interrelated is also possible, including in particular the uninformative type.
Assumption 4. For all θ ∈ Θ in the support of µ0 , θ ºGW A θ0 , and if µ(θ ) > 0, then µ(θ 0 ) > 0 for all
θ 0 ∈ Θ such that θ ºGW A θ 0 ºGW A θ0 .

This assumption ensures that for any type, there is a rich set of less informative types, which
limits the lender’s ability to simultaneously signal her type and capture risk-sharing benefits.
Before proving our main result, we note that we have made assumptions 2 and 3 weak so that
they are easy to satisfy. In this spirit, we have also imposed relatively little structure on the indirect utility functions φL and φB . Consequently, although it is guaranteed that the full-information
optimal contract is weakly better than the non-contingent contract, we have not assumed enough to
show that it is strictly better. We now provide the following lemma to show that stronger versions of
our assumptions are sufficient but not necessary to ensure that the full-information optimal contract
is strictly better.
Recall that both the full-information optimal contract s̄(θ ) and the non-contingent optimal contract s∗ are designed to ensure that the lender earns zero expected utility.
Lemma 2. Let d(s∗ ) denote the value of d ∈ D associated with the non-contingent optimal contract
s∗ , and suppose it is in the interior of D. If φB (s d , a) and φL (s d , a) are both differentiable with respect
to d at d(s∗ ) and

∂
∂d

U(s d , a; λ∗ )|d =d ∗ (s)

is strictly increasing on a ∈ A , then for all types θ ∈ Θ such that θ ºGW A θ0 , except θ0 itself, the
full-information optimal contract is strictly Pareto-superior to the non-contingent contract,
X

θ (a, z)φB ( s̄ z (θ ), a) >

a∈ A,z∈ Z

X

θ (a, z)φB (s∗ , a).

a∈ A,z∈ Z

Proof. See the appendix, section B.4.
The stronger assumptions of this lemma rule out things such as the possibility that the fullinformation optimal contract is non-contingent due to some kind of boundary or discontinuity, or
that there are really no risk-sharing benefits. In the examples we have constructed, these issues do
not arise except in pathological cases and the full-information optimal contract is indeed better than
the non-contingent contract for almost all θ in the support of µ0 . This sets up the following “puzzle”
in our model: can the non-contingent equilibrium exist even though the best equilibrium is ex-ante
strictly Pareto-superior? Our main result answers this question in the affirmative:
22

Proposition 3. Under Assumptions 1, 2, 3, and 4, there exists a symmetric pure-strategy equilibrium
in which s(θ ) = s∗ .
Proof. See the appendix, section B.5. The proof relies on results from Meyer and Strulovici (2015).

This proposition establishes that the assumptions given above are sufficient for the existence of
a non-contingent equilibrium. Intuitively, if it is not efficient for the borrower to insure the lender,
then the deviations necessary to separate from the uninformative type are never welfare-improving.
Our conditions are designed to ensure that this is the case.
Having presented the main result, we briefly comment on the importance of each of our assumptions. Assumption 1 ensures that both the full-information optimal contract and the non-contingent
optimal contract are feasible from a participation constraint perspective. However, because the
full-information optimal contract can strictly Pareto-dominate the non-contingent contract for many
types, under an alternative assumption it is possible to have the full-information optimal contract
feasible for some types, while the non-contingent contract is infeasible. In this case, there could not
be a non-contingent equilibrium. However, the proof of Proposition 3 could be adapted to prove that
a “no trade” equilibrium exists in this case, despite the possibility of gains from trade for some types.
Assumption 2, lender risk-aversion with respect to promises, is essential to the result. If the
lender were risk-seeking with respect to promises while the borrower remained risk-averse with
respect to promises, then lenders with a more accurate index could separate from the uninformative
type by paying higher prices to provide insurance. Assumption 3, which implies that it is efficient
for the lender to insure the borrower and not vice versa, is essential for similar reasons. If it were
instead optimal for the lender to purchase insurance from the borrower, then a lender with a more
accurate index could separate from the uninformative type by paying a high price for insurance.19
Assumption 4 is essential to rule out non-monotone (in z) security designs. If the security were
required to be monotone in z (but allowed to be either increasing or decreasing), then the possibility
of the uninformative type θ0 would be sufficient to generate the non-contingent equilibrium. Using
non-monotone securities potentially allows a lender to purchase insurance over some subset of Z at
a high price, separating from the uninformative type, while providing insurance over another subset
of Z. This would perhaps generate enough gains from trade to make such a deviation worthwhile.
The richness of the type space allows the borrower to be suspicious of such an offer, thinking that the
index is likely to work well over the subset of Z for which the lender is buying insurance but poorly
over the subset for which the borrower is buying insurance.
Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 are properties of the indirect utility functions φB and φL , and the required funds K. As a result, they can be checked in the context of a specific model, such as the
mortgage model presented previously. For another example, which uses a costly state verification
model, see appendix section §A.
Having presented our main result, we next turn to the variations and extensions of the model.
19 We do not mean to imply that our assumptions are necessary; they are only sufficient, and we speculate that our result

could be proven under modified versions of these assumptions.

23

VI.

Variations and Extensions

In this section, we discuss modifications and extensions to the model. We begin by discussing a
model with positive profits for lenders, which nevertheless retains the competition between lenders.
In this case, our results go through essentially unchanged. We then discuss what would happen with
a single, monopoly lender. We see that there is no full-information optimal contracts equilibrium
with a monopoly lender but there is still a non-contingent equilibrium. Finally, we discuss how to
extend our results to settings in which there is an adverse selection about the marginal distribution
of the index (q), or only about the distribution of the external states and not about the index quality.

A.

Profitable Lending
In this extension, we describe a model in which lenders make positive profits; that is, receive

expected utility greater than their outside option, in equilibrium, but nevertheless face competition.
We introduce profits into the economy by assuming that each lender faces a convex cost in the number
of loans she makes, and that there is a unit mass of borrowers.20 Let Q l be the number of loans made
by lender l. Suppose that a lender of type θ who makes Q loans using contract s receives utility

Π(s,Q, θ ) = Q {

X

θ (a, z)φL (s z , a)} − C(Q),

(17)

a∈ A,z∈ Z

where C(Q) is a convex, twice differentiable function with C 0 (|L|−1 ) = 0.
With this quasi-linear functional form and the normalization that C 0 (|L|−1 ) = 0, a lender that
considers a deviation in which the lender offers a single, marginal borrower a different contract faces
a problem that is identical to the one considered in our general model. In this case, the D1 refinement
is the same as in our main analysis, because (in equilibrium) the marginal profit of each lender is
zero.
However, if the lender contemplates a deviation in which he offers a deviating contract to all
borrowers, then substantial profits could be at stake because the average profits of lenders are positive. In this case, the D1 refinement requires that the borrower place her beliefs on the lender type
that would break-even under the smallest amount of the demand for the deviating contract. This is
equivalent to saying that the borrower must believe that the lender is of a type for whom the difference between the marginal profit of the deviating contract and the marginal profit of the equilibrium
contract is maximal.
Surprisingly, perhaps, our non-contingent equilibrium exists under the same conditions in this
model. The intuition comes from the proof description in section §V. When a lender with a “good”
index offers a contract that insures the borrower, the lender requires a higher expected value of repayments to be indifferent between the deviating contract and the non-contingent contract. However,
a lender with an irrelevant index could offer the same deviating contract at a profit and, therefore,
(in the case of profitable lending) the borrower must believe that the lender is of this type or of a type
20 Introducing profits in this way is an old idea, described in the textbook of Tirole (1988).

24

that is even worse from the perspective of the borrower.

B.

Monopoly Lending
In this extension, we consider what type of equilibrium can exist when the lender has monopoly

power. Specifically, we assume that a single lender can make a take it or leave it offer to the borrower
and that if the borrower rejects this offer, then she receives her outside option. Neither the fullinformation optimal contract nor the non-contingent contract defined in section §IV are equilibria
because both offer positive surplus to the borrower and zero surplus to the lender.
To study the monopoly case, we parameterize both the full-information optimal contract and
the non-contingent contract by the required investment. Suppose that there exists a K̄ > K such
that the full-information optimal contract, s̄(θ , K̄), results in a payoff for the borrower equal to her
outside option. Likewise, suppose that there exists a K ∗ > K such that the non-contingent contract,
s∗ (K ∗ ), also results in a payoff for the borrower equal to her outside option. In this sub-section, we
ask whether there exist equilibria with contracts s̄(θ , K̄) and s∗ (K ∗ ). We continue to impose the D1
refinement on off-equilibrium contract offers.
The answer is no for the full-information contract and yes for the non-contingent contract. The
existence of the non-contingent contracts equilibria follows from the proof of Proposition 3; nothing
in that proof depended on a specific value for K. The only effect of competition was to allow the
borrower to choose a contract from another lender. Although the type θ is common to all lenders,
because the non-contingent contract’s payoff for the borrower does not depend on θ , the borrower’s
inference about θ does not change the appeal of the non-contingent contract. It is as if the borrower
had a fixed outside option instead, which is what is assumed in the monopoly case.
However, for the full-information contract, competition is essential. For the uninformative type
(θ0 ), the full-information contract is identical to a non-contingent contract. For many other types (by
Lemma 2), the full-information contract is contingent and, due to lender risk-aversion over promises
(Assumption 2), offers a higher payoff to the uninformative type than the non-contingent contract.
As a result, the uninformative type is tempted to deviate. When there are other lenders, the borrower can use their offers to determine the common type and avoid being “tricked” by this deviation.
However, this is not possible with a monopoly lender, and as a result there is no full-information
contract equilibrium. In summary, competition is necessary for the existence of the best equilibrium
but the non-contingent equilibrium always exists.
Note that this result offers a hysteresis-based explanation for why we might expect the noncontingent equilibrium to occur despite the presence of competition. If, at the beginning of the market, there was only one lender, then the non-contingent contract would be used. This might anchor
the borrower’s expectations, so that as other competing lenders entered, the non-contingent contract
would continue to be employed. The entry of lenders would still benefit the borrower, due to better
pricing (the difference between K ∗ and K described above), but would not achieve the full benefit of
allowing for contingent contracts.

25

C.

Adverse Selection of Marginal Distributions
Throughout this paper, we have assumed that the set Θ contained only joint distributions of the

external state and index with marginal distributions p(a) and q(z). Suppose that we relax this and
require only that the marginal distribution over external states, p(a), be the same for all types. Under this assumption, there is no adverse selection about the true external state, only about the index
(as in the main part of the paper). Intuitively, adding additional dimensions of adverse selection
cannot improve the situation and should only reinforce the non-contingent contracts equilibrium.
Formally, let q(z; θ ) denote the marginal distribution of the index associated with type θ , and
let Θ(q) be the set of all joint distributions with marginals q(z) and p(a), satisfying the monotone
likelihood ratio property for the conditional distribution of a given z. Let Q be the set of all marginal
distributions for the index, and let Θ be the union of all Θ(q) for each q ∈ Q. We modify our Assumption 4 (rich type space) so that it applies to each Θ(q) such that µ(θ ) > 0 for some θ ∈ Θ(q). In other
words, there is a “rich” type space and an opportunity for risk-sharing for each possible marginal
distribution of the index. Under this condition, the proof of Proposition 3 is essentially unchanged
and the result holds.

D.

Adverse Selection of External States
In this extension, we modify the model of the main text to consider the case in which the index is

known to be perfect but there is adverse selection about the marginal distribution of the aggregate
state. This sort of adverse selection is closer to the problems studied in the literature (e.g., Spier
(1992), Asriyan (2015)). We build on the notation used in the previous extension. We assume that the
set Z is identical to the set A, and that each Θ(q) is a singleton, containing only the joint distribution
θ (a, z) = δ(a, z)q(z),

(18)

where δ(a, z) is one if a = z and zero otherwise. Adverse selection occurs because, in this context,
there are types in Θ with different values of q(z; θ ).
In this setting, the “rich type space” assumption (Assumption 4) is irrelevant. We continue to
impose our feasibility assumption (Assumption 1) for each Θ(q). Our result in this section does not
depend on detailed assumptions about risk-sharing (like Assumptions 2 and 3), and we thus do not
discuss how to adapt them to this setting. We assume instead the result of Lemma 2: that the
full-information optimal contract is contingent for all θ in the support of µ0 and generates strictly
higher payoffs than any non-contingent contract. We discuss how to weaken these assumptions in
the following. We also assume that both φL and φB are continuous in d.
For technical reasons, we assume that the support of the prior beliefs µ0 (·) is a closed set, which
was not required in the main text. We also assume that all types θ ∈ Θ for which µ0 (θ ) > 0 are
associated with marginal distributions that have full support. In other words, q(z; θ ) > 0 for all z ∈ Z
and θ ∈ Θ such that µ0 (θ ) > 0. This generalizes the full support assumption of the main text.

26

Define the mapping Θ∗ (θ ) as a set-valued function

Θ∗ (θ ) = {θ 0 ∈ arg

X

max00

θ 00 ∈Θ:µ0 (θ )>0 a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ 00 (a, z)φL ( s̄ z (θ ), a)},

(19)

where s̄ z (θ ) is the full-information optimal contract associated with the type θ . The set Θ∗ (θ ) is the
set of types in the support of µ0 (·) that would earn the highest payoff from offering the security s̄ z (θ ).
The following lemma (which is based on standard fixed-point arguments) states that there is a
fixed point to this mapping.
0

Lemma 3. There exists a θ ∗ such that θ ∗ ∈ Θ∗ (θ ∗ ). For any such θ ∗ , for all θ ∈ Θ∗ (θ ∗ ), s̄(θ 0 ) = s̄(θ ∗ ).
Proof. See the appendix, section B.6.
This type, θ ∗ , can essentially “prove itself” by offering its full-information optimal contract. When
a lender of type θ ∗ offers the contract s̄(θ ∗ ), then it breaks even. All other types either recover less
than the initial investment K, or also break even and have an identical full-information optimal
contract. Hence, under the D1 refinement, the borrower must believe that she is being offered a
full-information optimal contract.
By assumption, every full-information optimal contract is not equal to a non-contingent contract.
By the Pareto-optimality of the full-information optimal contract, the borrower must be willing to
accept this contract. Therefore, there cannot be an equilibrium in which a non-contingent contract is
employed.21
What makes this setting different than that studied in the main text? The key here is that there
is no type for which the full-information optimal contract is equal to the non-contingent contract.
When there is adverse selection about the distribution of external states, this makes sense; the only
way a non-contingent contract could be optimal is if some type of lender knew with certainty what the
ex-post “fair” level of debt was. In contrast, in the case emphasized in the main text, a non-contingent
contract can be optimal as long as it is possible that the index is irrelevant; perfect foresight about
the external state is not required for a non-contingent contracts equilibrium.
This result can be viewed as pointing to the necessity of something like Assumption 4 in the main
text. If the borrower knew the index was at least somewhat relevant, then the type with the least
relevant index could “prove herself ” and eliminate the non-contingent equilibrium. In this case, an
equilibrium with a minimal (and ex-ante sub-optimal) level of indexing would exist. Non-contingency
could be restored in this case by introducing a fixed cost of using the index in addition to asymmetric
information, following Spier (1992). In this case, a non-contingent equilibrium would exist as long
as the “worst” type was sufficiently bad, relative to the fixed cost.
Note also that, consistent with the Hirshleifer effect (Hirshleifer (1971)), with adverse selection
on external states, the risk-sharing will generally be reduced relative to the case in which the lenders
21 This argument does not really depend on every full-information optimal contract being contingent, only that the type

which can prove itself has a contingent full-information optimal contract. To formalize this argument, we would need to
use continuity to show that a lender can deviate to a contract close to the full information contract but with a tiny profit
and that the borrower cannot reject such a contract.

27

shared the borrower’s prior. That is, although one type can “prove itself,” most types will not be able
to do so and the equilibrium will likely involve less risk-sharing than if the lenders were uninformed
and shared the borrower’s prior. Our point is that this reduction in risk-sharing is, under our assumptions, never enough to generate a non-contingent contracts equilibrium. In contrast, adverse
selection of the relationship of the index and the external state, as studied in the main part of this
paper, can generate a non-contingent contracts equilibrium.

VII.

Conclusion

We have introduced a theory to explain the widespread lack of indexation observed in contracts.
Intuitively, when a borrower is offered a contract that includes insurance, then she is concerned that
the insurance is not actually relevant for the risks she faces. Under the conditions described in our
model, this effect is strong enough to cause the borrower to reject that offer and choose instead a
contract without insurance from a different lender. As a result, equilibria that feature little or no
risk-sharing can arise, even though they are ex-ante Pareto-dominated by equilibria that feature full
risk-sharing.

References
Philippe Aghion and Benjamin Hermalin. Legal restrictions on private contracts can enhance efficiency. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 6(2):381–409, 1990.
George A Akerlof. The market for “lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3):488–500, 1970.
Franklin Allen and Douglas Gale. Measurement distortion and missing contingencies in optimal
contracts. Economic theory, 2(1):1–26, 1992.
Luca Anderlini and Leonardo Felli. Incomplete written contracts: Undescribable states of nature.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 1085–1124, 1994.
Vladimir Asriyan. Balance sheet recessions with informational and trading frictions. Available at
SSRN 2565603, 2015.
Kyle Bagwell and Garey Ramey. Oligopoly limit pricing. The Rand Journal of Economics, pages
155–172, 1991.
Jeffrey S Banks and Joel Sobel. Equilibrium selection in signaling games. Econometrica: Journal of
the Econometric Society, pages 647–661, 1987.
Pierpaolo Battigalli and Giovanni Maggi. Rigidity, discretion, and the costs of writing contracts. The
American Economic Review, 92(4):798–817, 2002.

28

B Douglas Bernheim and Michael D Whinston. Incomplete contracts and strategic ambiguity. American Economic Review, pages 902–932, 1998.
John Y Campbell, Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. Forced sales and house prices. The American
Economic Review, 101(5):2108–2131, 2011.
John Y Campbell, Nuno Clara, and Joao F Cocco. Structuring mortgages for macroeconomic stability.
Working Paper, Harvard University and London Business School, 2018.
Andrew Caplin, James H Carr, Frederick Pollock, Zhong Yi Tong, Kheng Mei Tan, and Trivikraman
Thampy. Shared-equity mortgages, housing affordability, and homeownership. Housing Policy
Debate, 18(1):209–242, 2007.
Karl E Case, Robert J Shiller, and Allan N Weiss. Mortgage default risk and real estate prices:
the use of index-based futures and options in real estate. Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1995.
In-Koo Cho and David M Kreps. Signaling games and stable equilibria. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 102(2):179–221, 1987.
Jacques Cremer and Richard P McLean. Full extraction of the surplus in bayesian and dominant
strategy auctions. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 1247–1257, 1988.
Mathias Dewatripont and Eric Maskin. Contractual contingencies and renegotiation. The RAND
Journal of Economics, pages 704–719, 1995.
Douglas Gale and Martin Hellwig. Incentive-compatible debt contracts: The one-period problem.
The Review of Economic Studies, 52(4):647–663, 1985.
Jerry R Green and Jean-Jacques Laffont. Renegotiation and the form of efficient contracts. Annales
d’Economie et de Statistique, pages 123–150, 1992.
Daniel Greenwald, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. Financial fragility with sam? 2018.
Oliver Hart and John Moore. Incomplete contracts and renegotiation. Econometrica: Journal of the
Econometric Society, pages 755–785, 1988.
Oliver Hart and John Moore. Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of debt. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1998.
Benjamin Hébert. Moral hazard and the optimality of debt. The Review of Economic Studies, 85(4):
2214–2252, 2018.
Nathaniel Hendren. Private information and insurance rejections. Econometrica, 81(5):1713–1762,
2013.

29

Jack Hirshleifer. The private and social value of information and the reward to inventive activity.
The American Economic Review, 61(4):561–574, 1971.
Robert D Innes. Limited liability and incentive contracting with ex-ante action choices. Journal of
economic theory, 52(1):45–67, 1990.
Elon Kohlberg and Jean-Francois Mertens. On the strategic stability of equilibria. Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 1003–1037, 1986.
Ola Kvaløy and Trond E Olsen. Endogenous verifiability and relational contracting. The American
Economic Review, 99(5):2193–2208, 2009.
Eric Maskin and Jean Tirole. Unforeseen contingencies and incomplete contracts. The Review of
Economic Studies, 66(1):83–114, 1999.
Margaret Meyer and Bruno Strulovici. Increasing interdependence of multivariate distributions.
Journal of Economic Theory, 147(4):1460–1489, 2012.
Margaret Meyer and Bruno Strulovici. Beyond correlation: Measuring interdependence through
complementarities. 2015.
Atif Mian and Amir Sufi. House of debt: How they (and you) caused the Great Recession, and how we
can prevent it from happening again. University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Roger B Myerson and Mark A Satterthwaite. Efficient mechanisms for bilateral trading. Journal of
economic theory, 29(2):265–281, 1983.
Tomasz Piskorski and Alexei Tchistyi. An equilibrium model of housing and mortgage markets with
state-contingent lending contracts. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.
Michael Rothschild and Joseph Stiglitz. Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay on
the economics of imperfect information. In Foundations of Insurance Economics, pages 355–375.
Springer, 1976.
Christian Schultz. Polarization and inefficient policies. The Review of Economic Studies, 63(2):331–
344, 1996.
Ilya Segal and Michael D Whinston. The mirrlees approach to mechanism design with renegotiation
(with applications to hold-up and risk sharing). Econometrica, 70(1):1–45, 2002.
Robert J Shiller. Derivatives markets for home prices. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2008.
Todd Sinai and Nicholas S Souleles. Owner-occupied housing as a hedge against rent risk. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 120(2), 2005.

30

Kathryn E Spier. Incomplete contracts and signalling. The RAND Journal of Economics, pages
432–443, 1992.
Jean Tirole. The theory of industrial organization. MIT press, 1988.
Jean Tirole. Incomplete contracts: Where do we stand? Econometrica, 67(4):741–781, 1999.
Jean Tirole. Cognition and incomplete contracts. The American Economic Review, 99(1):265–294,
2009.
Robert M Townsend. Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state verification. Journal of Economic theory, 21(2):265–293, 1979.
Peter Vida and Takakazu Honryo. Strategic stability of equilibria in multi-sender signaling games.
2019.

A.

Costly State Verification Example

In this appendix, we provide a numerical example under which a version of the costly state
verification model (Townsend (1979), Gale and Hellwig (1985), and others) satisfies the conditions of
our main theorem, particularly Assumptions 2 and 3. We introduce some functional forms to apply
the results of our general model as simply as possible. The key modifications to the standard CSV
model are the introduction of an external state, risk-aversion for the borrower, and the existence of
non-verifiable income for borrower. Better external states induce a better (in a monotone-likelihoodratio property sense) distribution of both verifiable and non-verifiable income. The presence of the
non-verifiable income, when combined with risk-aversion, implies that the borrower has low expected
marginal utility in good external states, as in our mortgage example (section §II).
We now describe the specific modifications we make to the standard CSV model. The idiosyncratic
state (as opposed to external state) for the borrower is a triple (x, y, y0 ), where x is the borrower’s nonverifiable income, y is the borrower’s verifiable income, and y0 represents the borrower’s report of her
verifiable income, all of which are weakly positive reals. The conditional contract s(y, y0 ) can depend
on both the true verifiable income and the report.22 The borrower’s utility is
u(x + y − s(y, y0 )),
where u(·) is the borrower’s strictly increasing, twice-differentiable, concave utility function. Our
numerical example uses CARA utility for the borrower. We do not analyze the borrower’s participation constraint—making an assumption that the project is sufficiently valuable from the borrower’s
perspective to always be enough to ensure that the participation constraint is satisfied.
22 It is without loss of generality to assume that this does not depend on a report of the borrower’s non-verifiable income
because the borrower would also report the non-verifiable income level that minimized her repayment.

31

9 11
, 10 }, which are equally likely, and two
We assume that there are two external states, A = { 10

equally likely index values, Z = { z l , z h }, as in our two examples in the main text. We assume that the
quality of the index (ρ , see section §II) is at most 81 .23
Let f (y|a) denote the distribution of y given a, and suppose that it has the following functional
form:
f (y|a) = q(y) exp(a ln(y) − ψ(a)),
where q(y) = f (y|0) is a measure on the positive reals. In other words, the distributions f (·|a) are
an exponential family whose sufficient statistic is the expected log verifiable income. The function
ψ(a) ensures that each f (y|a) integrates to one. In our numerical calculations, we assume that q(y)

is Gamma-distributed with shape parameter 4 and scale parameter 21 . As a result, the distributions
f (y|a =

9
10 )

and f (y|a =

11
10 )

are also Gamma-distributed, with the same scale parameter and shape

parameters slightly below and above 5, respectively. We use the Gamma distribution because it
generates tractable expressions for the integrals that define marginal utility and because it has a
“hump” shape.
We suppose (for tractability) that the non-verifiable income x is equal to
x = χa y,
where χ is a positive constant. In our numerical exercise, we set χ = 1, meaning that roughly half of
the borrower’s income is non-verifiable. We have in mind, for example, future labor income. Under
our assumptions, the expected total pledgeable and non-pledgeable income is five and the standard
deviation of the total income is roughly half this value. The expected total income is about 15%
higher in the good external state than the bad external state. We set the cost of project, K, to one.
One consequence of our assumptions is that the borrower, observing x and y, can infer the true
external state a. This implication is by no means necessary—we could add noise to the value of x
and prevent the borrower from inferring a, at the cost of having a more complicated example.
We now turn to the lender. The lender is risk-neutral within each external state (i.e., with respect
to the borrower’s idiosyncratic state), but risk-averse with respect to the external state. Let M(a)
denote the lender’s marginal utility given the external state. We use the notation M(a) to emphasize
that this can be interpreted as the lender’s stochastic discount factor. We use the functional form
1

M(a) = M̄a− 2 , setting M̄ so that the expected value of M(a) is equal to one. By interpreting M(a) as
an SDF, this is sets the risk-free rate to zero.
If the conditional (on z ∈ Z) contract differs depending on the true value, for a given value of the
report, then there the lender pays a verification cost. Let c(y0 ; s) = c̄ > 0 if there exists a y1 , y2 such
that the conditional contract s offers different payments for (y1 , y0 ) and (y2 , y0 ), and zero otherwise.
In our numerical calculation, we use c̄ = 10%, recalling that we have normalized the project size to
one.
We next describe the general forms of the indirect utility functions. Let ω(y0 | y, x) denote a (pos23 The maximum value of ρ matters only when determining the largest debt level that must be considered.

32

sibly mixed) reporting strategy by the borrower, and let ω∗ (y0 | y, x) be the optimal reporting strategy.
The indirect utility functions are

ˆ
φB (s, a) =

∞ˆ ∞

max
0

ω(y | y,x)∈Ω(s) 0

ˆ
φL (s, a) = M(a)
0

∞ˆ

u(χa y + y − s(y, y0 ))ω(y0 | y, χa y) f (y|a)d y0 d y,

0
∞

(s(y, y0 ) − c(y0 ; s) − K)ω∗ (y0 | y, χa y) f (y|a)d y0 d y,

0

where Ω(s) denotes the constraints in the reporting strategy, which we describe next. We impose limited liability, meaning that, for all reports y0 , either s(y1 , y0 ) = s(y2 , y0 ) for all y1 , y2 and 0 ≤ s(y0 , y0 ) ≤ y0
(the non-verification case), or 0 ≤ s(y, y0 ) ≤ y for all y (the verification case). We restrict the reporting
strategies ω(y0 | y, x) to place support only on y0 for which the reports are feasible, meaning that if
s(y1 , y0 ) = s(y2 , y0 ) for all y1 , y2 , then ω(y0 | y, x) = 0 if y < s(y0 , y0 ). In words, for reports that do not
trigger verification, the borrower must have the funds to repay the loan.
Although this model is slightly different from Townsend (1979) and Gale and Hellwig (1985), the
arguments for the optimality of a debt contract are essentially unchanged. By fixing some distribution over external states p(a) and taking the expected value of the indirect utility functions, it
is immediately apparent that the model is exactly that of Townsend (1979) except that it has nonverifiable income. However, the argument for the optimality of debt depends only on non-satiation
and that utility at zero verifiable income net debt repayments is not infinite. Therefore, with either
u0 (0) > −∞ or x > 0 with probability one, debt will be optimal for all p(a). It follows that debt is
“ex-post optimal” in the sense assumed in the main text, and we thus restrict attention to contracts
that are (possibly indexed on z ∈ Z) debt contracts.
The set of feasible debt levels is D = [0, d̄]. The level of d̄ is determined by the smallest promise
such that if the promise for the other value of z ∈ Z is zero, then all lender types at least break even.
Any promise larger than this will necessarily generate profits for all lender types, and can therefore
be rejected by the borrower. The value of d̄ is determined by the φL function and our assumption on
the set of possible index qualities; we omit the details for brevity.
Specializing the indirect utility functions to a debt contract induces truthful reporting,

ˆ
φB (s d , a) =

∞

u((1 + χa)y − d) f (y|a)d y

d
ˆ d

u(χa y) f (y|a)d y,

+
0

and

ˆ
φL (s d , a) = M(a)

∞

(d − K) f (y|a)d y

d
ˆ d

+ M(a)

(y − K − c̄) f (y|a)d y.
0

We note that these indirect utility functions satisfy the assumption we have imposed. In particular,

33

they are both differentiable (and hence continuous) in d and the lender’s indirect utility function is
negative when the level of debt is zero. The derivative of the borrower’s indirect utility function with
respect to the level of debt is

ˆ

∞

φB,d (s d , a) = −

u0 ((1 + χa)y − d) f (y|a)d y,

d

and hence is strictly negative, which satisfies our monotonicity requirement. The derivative of the
lender’s indirect utility function is

ˆ
φL,d (s d , a) = − M(a) f (d |a) c̄ + M(a)

∞

f (y|a)d y.
d

As in the mortgage example of Section §II, several key forces will determine whether Assumptions 2 and 3 are satisfied. Loosely speaking, lender risk-aversion (decreasing M(a)) must outweigh
the increasing likelihood of not being repaid in bad states, while borrower risk-aversion with respect
to promises must sufficiently dominate lender risk-aversion with respect to promises.
We now turn to our numerical analysis. The table that follows summarizes our functional form
and parameter assumptions. Under these functional forms and assumptions, we have verified using
9 11
Mathematica that Assumptions 2 and 3 are satisfied for all a ∈ { 10
, 10 } and d ∈ [0, d̄].

Table I. Parameters of CSV Example
Function/Parameter

Functional Form

Utility u(·)

CARA

Lender Marginal Utility
PDF q(y)
Verification cost c̄
N.V. Income Function µ(y, a)
Required Funds K
External States A
Probabilities p(a)

1
− 12

M(a) = M̄a
Gamma(κ, θ )

M̄

9 − 12
= [ 12 ( 10
)

1

11 − 2 −1
+ 12 ( 10
) ]
1
κ = 4, θ = 2
1
10

µ(y, a) = χ ya

B.
1.

Value

χ=1
1
9 11
{ 10 , 10 }
( 21 , 21 )

Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1
We prove Proposition 1 by demonstrating that the model described in section §II satisfies the

assumptions of our general model described in sections III, IV, and V, and then relying on our main
result, Proposition 3. Consequently, this proof uses the notation and refers to the assumptions that
are introduced in the text after proposition 1. We encourage readers to read sections III, IV, and V
of the main text before examining this proof.
To prove Proposition 1 , we show that Assumptions 1, 2, 3, and 4 of the main text are satisfied.
We begin by showing that Assumption 2, lender sub-modularity, is satisfied. The lender’s indirect
34

utility function φL (s d , a), is sub-modular, in a differentiable context, if
φL,d (s d , a) = π(a)u0L (yL (a))

is decreasing on a ∈ A. With two states, and CRRA, this condition is equivalent to
yL (a good )−γL π(a good ) ≤ yL (a bad )−γL π(a bad )
Therefore φL (s d , a) is sub-modular by equation (1).
We next show that social welfare function is super-modular (Assumption 3). This assumption
requires that
Ud (s d , a; λ∗ )
is increasing in a. We can write
Ud (s d , a; λ∗ ) = φB,d (s d , a) + λ∗ φL,d (s d , a).
The definition of λ∗ (by equation (16), notes that an interior solution is guaranteed for K (and hence
d ∗ ) sufficiently small)
X

p(a)Ud (s∗ , a; λ∗ ) = 0,

a∈ A

which implies that
λ∗ = −

φB,d (s∗ , a g ) + φB,d (s∗ , a b )
φL,d (s∗ , a g ) + φL,d (s∗ , a b )

.

The denominator is positive because λ∗ > 0. We now observe that the social welfare function is
super-modular if and only if
Ud (s d , a; λ∗ )(φL,d (s∗ , a g ) + φL,d (s∗ , a b ))
is increasing in a. Using the solution for λ∗ , this condition is equivalent to
φB,d (s d , a g )[φL,d (s∗ , a g ) + φL,d (s∗ , a b )] − φL,d (s d , a g )[φB,d (s∗ , a g ) + φB,d (s∗ , a b )] ≥
φB,d (s d , a b )[φL,d (s∗ , a g ) + φL,d (s∗ , a b )] − φL,d (s d , a b )[φB,d (s∗ , a g ) + φB,d (s∗ , a b )].

We can rewrite this as
[φB,d (s d , a g ) − φB,d (s d , a b )][φL,d (s∗ , a g ) + φL,d (s∗ , a b )] ≥
[φL,d (s d , a g ) − φL,d (s d , a b )][φB,d (s∗ , a g ) + φB,d (s∗ , a b )].
Observe that, for all d, d 0 ∈ D,
φL,d (s d , a) = φL,d (s d 0 , a).

35

(B1)

We have
φB,d (s d , a) = −π(a)u0B (yB (a) + xh − d)

and therefore
ln(

−φB,d (s d , a g )
−φB,d (s d , a b )

) = ln(

π(a g )
π(a b )

) − γB ln(

yB (a g ) + xh − d
yB (a b ) + xh − d

).

It follows that the bound given in equation (B1) is tightest at d = 0,
[φB,d (s 0 , a g ) − φB,d (s 0 , a b )][φL,d (s 0 , a g ) + φL,d (s 0 , a b )] ≥
[φL,d (s 0 , a g ) − φL,d (s 0 , a b )][φB,d (s∗ , a g ) + φB,d (s∗ , a b )].

(B2)

We now prove the following claim: there exists a K̄ > 0 such that, if K < K̄, and this inequality
(equation (B2)) is satisfied.
The debt level associated with s∗ , d ∗ , is determined by the lender’s break-even condition,
0=

X

p(a){π(a)u0L (yL (a))(d ∗ − K) − (1 − π(a))u0L (yL (a))K },

a∈ A

which is

P
∗

d =KP

a∈ A

a∈ A

p(a)π(a)u0L (yL (a))

p(a){π(a)u0L (yL (a)) + (1 − π(a))u0L (yL (a))}

.

Consequently, holding all other parameters fixed, d ∗ is continuous in K, and
lim d ∗ (K) = 0.

K →0

It follows by the continuity of φB,d (s d , a) in d that if equation (B2) is satisfied at d ∗ = 0 (s∗ = s 0 ),
[φB,d (s 0 , a g ) − φB,d (s 0 , a b )][φL,d (s 0 , a g ) + φL,d (s 0 , a b )] >
[φL,d (s 0 , a g ) − φL,d (s 0 , a b )][φB,d (s 0 , a g ) + φB,d (s 0 , a b )],
there exists a K̄ such that for all K < K̄, the required inequality holds. This condition can be simplified to
φB,d (s 0 , a g )φL,d (s 0 , a b ) − φB,d (s 0 , a b )φL,d (s 0 , a g ) >

−φB,d (s 0 , a g )φL,d (s 0 , a b ) + φB,d (s 0 , a b )φL,d (s 0 , a g ),

which further simplifies to

−φB,d (s 0 , a g )
−φB,d (s 0 , a b )

<

φL,d (s 0 , a g )
φL,d (s 0 , a b )

.

Plugging in functional forms, this is
(yB (a g ) + xh )−γB
(yB (a b ) + xh )−γB

36

<

(yL (a g ))−γL
(yL (a b ))−γL

,

or
γB ln(

yB (a g ) + xh
yB (a b ) + xh

) > γL ln(

yL (a g )
yL (a b )

),

as assumed by equation (3). We conclude that there exists a K̄ > 0 such that Assumption 3 holds for
all K < K̄.
To verify Assumption 1, we require
X

p(a){π(a)u B (yB (a) + xh − d) + (1 − π(a))u B (yB (a))} ≥

a∈ A

X

p(a)u B (yB (a)),

a∈ A

which is always be satisfied, and that the debt level d ∗ is less than the maximum feasible debt level,
xh . By the continuity of d ∗ in K, the latter holds for sufficiently small K.
Finally, we verify Assumption 4. In the model of section §II, the set of types Θ can be indexed
by the parameter ρ , and the borrower’s prior has full support on [0, ρ̄ ]. Moreover, by the definition
of greater weak association (equation (1)) and its equivalence to the supermodular stochastic ordering (Meyer and Strulovici (2012)), θ ºGW A θ0 if and only if ρ (θ ) ≥ 0. It follows immediately that
Assumption 4 holds.
We conclude that the model of section §II satisfies Assumptions 1, 2, 3, and 4, provided that K < K̄
for some K̄ > 0. Hence, there exists a non-contingent equilibrium in this case, by Proposition 3.

2.

Proof of Lemma 1
First note that for any values of θ for the which the lenders do not offer a security, the expected

utility is zero.
Proof by contradiction: suppose that there exists a symmetric pure-strategy equilibrium such
that, for some values of θ ∈ Θ, the security s(θ ) is offered and equilibrium lender expected utility is
strictly positive.
Let θ 0 and s0 = s(θ 0 ) denote the equilibrium type and security for which lender expected utility is
strictly positive. In this equilibrium, each lender earns
|L|−1

X

θ 0 (a, z)φL (s0z , a) > 0.

a∈ A,z∈ Z

Let d 0 (z) be the function satisfying s0z = s d 0 (z) for all z ∈ Z. Consider a deviation by some lender to
the security s00z = s d 00 (z) , where d 00 (z) = α d(z) from some α ∈ (0, 1). By assumption, s00 ∈ S. By the
monotonicity property of the borrower’s indirect utility function, φB (s d , a), in d, we have
X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ (a, z)φB (s00z , a) >

X

θ (a, z)φB (s0 z , a)

a∈ A,z∈ Z

for all θ ∈ Θ. It follows that, regardless of the beliefs the borrower forms off-equilibrium, she will
accept security s00 if offered, for any value of α ∈ [0, 1).

37

The change in expected utility for the deviating lender is
θ 0 (a, z)(φL (s00z , a) − |L|−1 φL (s0z , a)).

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

By the lower semi-continuity of φL in d and the fact that |L| > 1, there exists an α ∈ (0, 1) such that
this quantity is positive. It follows that an equilibrium where lenders earn strictly positive expect
utility cannot exist.

3.

Proof of Proposition 2
By Assumption 1, this equilibrium delivers sufficient utility for the borrower. Therefore, the

borrower is willing to participate, and lenders earn zero profits (by the construction of s̄(θ )) and are
thus also willing to participate.
Now consider a deviation by a single lender: suppose some lender of type θ offers security s0
instead of s̄(θ ), and would weakly profit from doing so if the security was accepted. Because the
lender can weakly profit from offering this deviation, the borrower is free to place the full support of
her beliefs on the lender’s true type, if the security s0 is not an offer of any type in equilibrium. If the
security s0 is offered in equilibrium by some type other than θ , by the existence at least three lenders,
then the borrower can infer the true common type. Because the security s̄(θ ) is on the Pareto-frontier
and offers zero profit to lenders, it follows that the borrower must be weakly worse off using security
s0 , and therefore would prefer the security s̄(θ ). Because there are multiple lenders, the borrower
can choose a non-deviating lender and reject the deviating security. Given that the security will be
rejected, the lender does not profit from offering it and, therefore, s(θ ) = s̄(θ ) is an equilibrium.

4.

Proof of Lemma 2
First, observe by the definition of the full-information optimal security that, for all θ ∈ Θ,
X

θ (a, z)φB ( s̄ z (θ ), a) ≥

a∈ A,z∈ Z

X

θ (a, z)φB (s∗ , a).

a∈ A,z∈ Z

Proof by contradiction: suppose the full-information optimal security is non-contingent. The fullinformation optimal security solves, for some value of λ > 0,
max

X

{ d(z)∈D } z∈ Z a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ (a, z)U(d(z), a; λ).

Suppose that the optimal d 0 (z) = d(s∗ ) for all z ∈ Z, with d ∗ (s) in the interior of D. In this case, λ = λ∗
and by the differentiability of φB and φL at that point, we must have, all z ∈ Z,
X

θ (a, z)Ud (d(s∗ ), a; λ∗ ) = 0.

a∈ A

Because θ ºGW A θ0 , it also dominates it in the super-modular stochastic order (Meyer and Strulovici
38

(2012)). It follows by Meyer and Strulovici (2015) that θ can be expressed using those authors’ “elementary transformations” t ∈ T . That is,
θ = θ0 +

X

α t t,

t∈T

for some constants α t ≥ 0. For all θ 6= θ0 , there must exist at least one α t > 0.
Consequently, there exists some z0 ∈ Z such that
(θ (a, z) − θ0 (a, z))h(a)1(z º z0 ) > 0

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

for any strictly increasing function h(a), and in particular Ud (d(s∗ ), a; λ∗ ), contradicting the requirement that
θ (a, z)Ud (d(s∗ ), a; λ∗ ) = 0

X
a∈ A

for all z ∈ Z.

5.

Proof of Proposition 3
The non-contingent security s∗ = s d ∗ has payoffs that do not depend on the index. As a result,

it offers zero expected utility for the lender, regardless of the lender’s type, by the assumption that
all θ ∈ Θ have the same marginal distribution with respect to the external state. By Assumption 1,
s d ∗ can deliver sufficient utility to the borrower, and the participation constraints are thus satisfied
in this equilibrium. It is sufficient to rule out deviations in which a single lender offers security s0
instead of s d ∗ , when the common type is θ 0 , to demonstrate that this is an equilibrium.
The security s0 ∈ S, s0z = s d 0 (z) with must offer strictly positive utility for the lender of type θ 0 (if
accepted) to break the equilibrium:
X

θ 0 (a, z)φL (s d 0 (z) , a) > 0.

a∈ A,z∈ Z

Define θ̄ as a type that would profit the most from offering the security s0 :
θ̄ ∈ arg

max

X

θ ∈Θ:µ0 (θ )>0 a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ (a, z)φL (s d 0 (z) , a)

Consider the set of “elementary transformations” t ∈ T defined by Meyer and Strulovici (2015),
and suppose that for some z0 , z00 ∈ Z that are adjacent in the order on Z (with z00 Â z0 ), d(z00 ) > d(z0 ).
By Meyer and Strulovici (2015), we can write
θ̄ = θ0 +

X

α t t,

t∈T

for some constants α t ≥ 0. If there exists a t ∈ T with support on z0 and z00 such that α t > 0, then by
the richness of the type space (Assumption 4), there exists a type θ̂ = θ̄ − β t, for some β > 0, such that
39

θ̃ is in the support of µ0 . By the sub-modularity of φL (Assumption 2),

X

X

θ̂ (a, z)φL (s d 0 (z) , a) ≥

θ̄ (a, z)φL (s d 0 (z) , a).

a∈ A,z∈ Z

a∈ A,z∈ Z

Therefore, it is without loss of generality to assume that the security d 0 (z) is weakly decreasing
between adjacent pairs z0 , z00 such that α t > 0 for some elementary transformation with support on
those pairs.
By this result and the super-modularity of the social welfare function with Pareto-weight λ∗
(Assumption 3), we must have
θ̄ (a, z)U(s d 0 (z) , a; λ∗ ) ≤

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ0 (a, z)U(s d 0 (z) , a; λ∗ ).

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

By the Pareto-optimality of the non-contingent security s∗ under θ0 ,
θ0 (a, z)U(s d 0 (z) , a; λ∗ ) ≤

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ0 (a, z)U(s∗ , a; λ∗ ).

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

Therefore,
θ̄ (a, z)φB (s d 0 (z) , a) + λ∗

X

X

θ̄ (a, z)φL (s d 0 (z) , a) ≤

a∈ A,z∈ Z

a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ0 (a, z)φB (s∗ , a) + λ∗

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ0 (a, z)φL (s∗ , a).

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

It follows by
X

θ̄ (a, z)φL (s d 0 (z) , a) > 0 =

a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ0 (a, z)φL (s∗ , a)

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

that
X

X

θ̄ (a, z)φB (s d 0 (z) , a) <

a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ0 (a, z)φB (s∗ , a),

a∈ A,z∈ Z

and by the non-contingency of s∗ ,
X

θ̄ (a, z)φB (s d 0 (z) , a) <

a∈ A,z∈ Z

X

θ̄ (a, z)φB (s∗ , a).

a∈ A,z∈ Z

By the D1 refinement, the borrower can place the support of her beliefs entirely on the type θ̄ .
Consequently, if there exists a θ 0 for which the deviation is profitable, then the borrower can believe
she is worse off and reject the deviation.

40

6.

Proof of Lemma 3
By definition, the set Θ is bounded and by assumption it is closed, and it is thus compact. It

follows that Θ∗ (θ ) is non-empty. By the linearity of
θ 00 (a, z)φL ( s̄ z (θ ), a)

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

in θ 00 , Θ∗ (θ ) is convex.
By the assumption of ex-post efficiency, s̄ z (θ ) = s d(z,θ) for some d(z, θ ) ∈ D. By definition,
d(z, θ ) = arg

max

X

{ d(z)∈D } z∈ Z a∈ A,z∈ Z

θ (a, z)φB (s d(z) , a)

subject to
X

θ (a, z)φL (s d(z) , a) ≥ 0.

a∈ A,z∈ Z

By assumption, φL (s d , a) and φB (s d , a) are continuous in d, and hence it follows that d(z, θ ) is
continuous in θ and that
θ 00 (a, z)φL ( s̄ z (θ ), a)

X
a∈ A,z∈ Z

is jointly continuous in (θ , θ 00 ). Therefore, by Berge’s theorem (the theorem of the maximum), Θ∗ (θ )
is upper semi-continuous.
It follows that Kakutani’s fixed point theorem holds, and therefore that there exists a θ ∗ such
that
θ ∗ ∈ Θ∗ (θ ∗ ),

as claimed.
Now suppose that there is another θ 0 ∈ Θ∗ (θ ∗ ). We must have
X

θ 0 (a, z)φL (s d(z,θ) , a) = 0.

a∈ A,z∈ Z

Because the index and the external state are perfectly correlated, we can rewrite this as
X

q(z; θ 0 )δ(a, z)φL (s d(z,θ) , a) = 0,

a∈ A,z∈ Z

where q(z; θ 0 ) is the marginal distribution associated with θ 0 .
By the definition of s̄(θ ), for all z ∈ Z (by the full support assumption, q(z; θ ∗ ) > 0),
φB (s d(z;θ∗ ) , a) + λφB (s d(z;θ∗ ) , a) ≥ φB (s d 0 , a) + λφB (s d 0 , a)

for all d 0 ∈ D and some multiplier λ > 0. It follows that the optimality would also hold if d(z; θ 0 ) =

41

d(z; θ ∗ ), and feasibility is satisfied, and therefore
s̄(θ 0 ) = s̄(θ ∗ ),
as required.

42

