NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMMON OWNERSHIP IN AMERICA:
1980-2017
Matthew Backus
Christopher Conlon
Michael Sinkinson
Working Paper 25454
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25454

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019

Thanks to seminar and conference participants at CEPR IO, Cornell, Harvard-MIT, IIOC,
MACCI - Mergers and Antitrust, Microsoft, Purdue, Rice, SITE, University of Chicago Booth,
University of Pennsylvania, University of Virginia, Wisconsin and Yale, and conversations with
Steve Berry, Wouter Dessein, Wei Jiang, Charles Jones, Amit Khandelwal, Bruce Kogut, Nathan
Miller, Fiona Scott Morton, Nancy Rose, Martin Schmalz, and Glen Weyl. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25454.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Matthew Backus, Christopher Conlon, and Michael Sinkinson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Common Ownership in America: 1980-2017
Matthew Backus, Christopher Conlon, and Michael Sinkinson
NBER Working Paper No. 25454
January 2019
JEL No. G34,L0,L13,L21
ABSTRACT
When competing firms possess overlapping sets of investors, maximizing shareholder value may
provide incentives that distort competitive behavior, affecting pricing, entry, contracting, and
virtually all strategic interactions among firms. We propose a structurally consistent and scaleable
approach to the measurement of this phenomenon for the universe of S&P 500 firms between
1980 and 2017. Over this period, the incentives implied by the common ownership hypothesis
have grown dramatically. Contrary to popular intuition, this is not primarily associated with the
rise of BlackRock and Van- guard: instead, the trend in the time series is driven by a broader rise
in diversified investment strategies, of which these firms are only the most recent incarnation. In
the cross-section, there is substantial variation that can be traced, both in the theory and the data,
to observable firm characteristics – particularly the share of the firm held by retail investors.
Finally, we show how common ownership can theoretically give rise to incentives for
expropriation of undiversified shareholders via tunneling, even in the Berle and Means (1932)
world of the “widely held firm.”
Matthew Backus
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 619
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
matthew.backus@columbia.edu
Christopher Conlon
Department of Economics
New York University
Stern School of Business
Henry Kaufman Management Center
44 W. Fourth St
New York, NY 10012
cconlon@stern.nyu.edu

Michael Sinkinson
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Ave, Suite 3473
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
michael.sinkinson@yale.edu

1

Introduction

Much of economics, and especially the study of firms, is predicated on the assumption
that firms maximize profits. Motivating the assumption, Friedman (1953) contends that
investors will discipline firms that do not at least mimic profit-maximizing behavior. Investor’s interests, however, may be complicated by investments in competing firms. If firm
decision-making is an expression of investor interests, and powerful investors have stakes in
competing firms, then we should expect the firm not to behave competitively, but instead
to put a nonzero profit weight on the competing firm’s profit when they make strategic decisions. This idea, that large, diversified owners imply nonzero profit weights among ostensibly
competing firms, is the common ownership hypothesis.
The theoretical framework of the common ownership hypothesis was first articulated in
Rotemberg (1984), but it has recently become the subject of a lively public policy debate
thanks to empirical work suggesting that the growth of large, diversified common owners
may have caused prices to increase among banks and airlines (Azar et al., 2016, 2018).
Contemporaneously, Eekhout and De Loecker (2017) argue that markups, economy-wide,
have sharply increased since 1980, and list common ownership as a potential culprit. This
line of argument could go so far as to implicate common ownership in macro-level phenomena
such as declining labor share and investment, the productivity slowdown, and diminished
“dynamism” (Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2016).
However appealing the explanation may initially be, there are myriad unanswered questions
to address before we connect common ownership to the rise of market power in general.
This paper contributes to the literature on common ownership by laying out some of these
issues, including: How should we measure common ownership in the economy at large?
Are the patterns of common ownership at the macro level economically salient? Where
should we expect these patterns to be stronger or weaker? To address these questions, we
compute the implied common ownership profit weights for the full set of S&P 500 Index
constituents pairwise, from 1980 through the end of 2017. Revisiting the math of common
ownership, we offer some simple insights on how the implied profit weights depend on investor
concentration, growing adoption of diversified investment strategies, as well as some very
particular assumptions on the nature of corporate governance. Guided by this, we are able
to show how each factor contributed to a staggering increase in implied common ownership
profit weights over the period, depicted on the Y axis in Figure 1. For comparison: a weight

1

Figure 1: Common Ownership Profit Weights Over Time

Notes: This figure depicts the mean implied profit weight across all pairs of firms in the S&P 500 index by year, excluding own
profit weights, which are normalized to 1. See Section 2 for an explicit formula for common ownership weights and derivation.

of 0 corresponds to what we expect in a world of profit-maximizing firms, and a weight of
1 corresponds to the weight that a merged firm places on an acquired subsidiary businesses
(or, equivalently, full collusion). We find that the average pairwise profit weights implied by
the common ownership hypothesis tripled among S&P 500 firms, from just over 0.2 in 1980
to almost 0.7 in 2017.
An interpretation of our findings is that the macro-level effects are large enough to be
consistent with the findings of Gutiérrez and Philippon (2016) and Eekhout and De Loecker
(2017), a claim we explore through calibration of a simple Bertrand pricing model to the rise
in profit weights depicted in Figure 1. Of course, this raises more questions for additional
research. In particular, how should we go about testing whether these patterns of common
ownership do in fact translate to distortions in firm behavior, e.g. higher prices? In related
research we take this question up in the context of a specific market – the ready-to-eat cereal
industry – and build on prior work on conduct testing in industrial organization (Backus
et al., 2018a). In contrast, this paper takes a bird’s-eye view of the economy at large,
to the end of measuring the economic significance and patterns of common ownership in
a structurally consistent way, exploring the empirical implications of taking the common
ownership hypothesis seriously.1
Prior work on aggregate measurement of common ownership has focused on the modified
1

Of course, one might take the plausibility or implausibility of the macro-level implications discussed here
as an implicit test of the common ownership hypothesis.

2

Herfindal-Hirschman Index (MHHI), measured at the four-digit SIC code level (Gutiérrez
and Philippon, 2016; Anton et al., 2016). This index requires the user to believe not only
in a particular variation of the profit weights studied here, but also that symmetric Cournot
pricing is the relevant strategic game. Its use has been a source of controversy in the
common ownership literature for two reasons, and both are related to the fact that it conflates
common ownership incentives with market shares. The first is its relationship to the nowdefunct structure-conduct-performance (SCP) literature in industrial organization, and the
econometric problems associated with treating functions of market share as independent
variables. We discuss and explore this concern in a companion piece (Backus et al., 2018b).
But second, the computation of market shares introduces a market definition problem, as
well as a number of other measurement problems that are likely to bias any measure of time
trends. For instance, foreign firms, like private firms, are unobserved in the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) data used to construct such indices, but are growing in U.S.
market share during this period of rising trade flows. Therefore we advocate a focus on the
primitive of the common ownership hypothesis: the implied profit weights that arise in the
firm’s optimization problem.
Our focus on the primitive element of the common ownership problem, the profit weights,
affords us an opportunity to look more closely into the sources of the growth of common
ownership incentives. In the time series, we show that this is driven not by the rise of
BlackRock and Vanguard, which have earned outsized mention in the literature, but instead
an older trend in increasing diversification of institutional portfolios that we trace back as
far as 1980. In the cross section, however, the story is rather different. Both in the theory
and the empirics, we show that the common ownership profit weights are strongly positively
correlated with the proportion of shares held by retail investors, which has been declining
since 1980.
Moreover, we observe that for a number of cases, the profit weights implied by common
ownership can exceed one. This would imply that the firm values a dollar of profits at another
firm more than a dollar of its own. This is important because a profit weight greater than
one is the condition under which we might expect to see “tunneling,” a phenomenon typically
thought to arise only when control rights are explicitly divorced from cash flow rights, e.g.
when there are multiple classes of stock or a pyramid structure (Porta et al., 1999; Johnson
et al., 2000). This is not often thought to happen in the world of the Berle and Means (1932)
“widely-held firm,” the United States. However, under the math of common ownership, the
potential for the phenomenon arises because low investor concentration effectively dilutes
3

control rights, leaving the remaining few investors with disproportionately high influence. In
particular, this is driven by holdings of retail investors, who do not exert the same influence
in corporate governance as institutional investors, and consistent with this we show that
firms with high retail shares (and, relatedly, large market capitalization) tend to place larger
profit weights on other firms.
A final contribution of this paper is a new dataset of institutional holdings of United States
publicly traded firms. While most research to date in this area has used a commercial
dataset of these holdings (Thomson Reuters), it has been frequently noted that this dataset
has gaps in coverage and errors relative to the source documents. As a result, we collected
all 13(f) filings from the SEC since electronic filing was made mandatory in 1999 through
2017 and extracted holdings of S&P 500 firms.2 We are making the code for this parsing
exercise available to other researchers as our alternative dataset appears to provide more
complete coverage, particularly during 2010-2014, as further discussed in Section 3.1. If one
were to complete our exercise using only the commercial dataset, one would reach different
qualitative and quantitative conclusions, as shown in Appendix Figure 19, which contrasts
Figure 1 using the commercial dataset vs our novel dataset.
The structure of the paper is as follows: In Section 2 we outline the theory of common
ownership, the derivation of the common ownership profit weights, and finally highlight
some yet-unexplored mathematical features of those weights. In Section 3 we offer our
descriptive evidence on profit weights from the S&P 500, in addition to particular industries.
Section 4 discusses the economic implications of the implied common ownership profit weights
through the lens of tunneling and through simulation. Robustness considerations to various
assumptions are addressed in Section 5, and Section 6 concludes.

2

Common Ownership: Theoretical Preliminaries

We begin with a generic setup: a firm f makes a strategic choice, xf and earns profits given
by πf (xf , x−f ), which depend on their rivals’ choices x−f as well. Under the maintained
hypothesis of firm profit maximization, the profit function constitutes the objective function
of the firm, and it is in this framework that economists have traditionally modeled behavior
ranging from pricing to entry to R&D. This is occasionally motivated by the claim that the
2

A total of 318,038 quarterly filings by institutional investors, including amendments. The total size of
the corpus is approximately 25GB.

4

firm answers to its investors, who should be unwilling to provide capital should the firm
fail to at least mimic profit maximization (Friedman, 1953). Shareholders hold different
portfolios, and thus receive different payoffs from the profits of those investments.
Consider the payoffs of an investor – for our purposes, a shareholder of a publicly traded
company. We assume that shareholder s has cash-flow rights denoted βf s , equal to the
fraction of each firm f that they own. The profit of the shareholder is given by the sum of
profits over their portfolio of investments weighted by cash-flow rights,

πs =

X

βgs πg .

(1)

∀g

In the framework of Rotemberg (1984), a firm acts to maximize the profits of shareholders.
However, because their portfolios differ, investors will disagree about the optimal strategy.
Firm f resolves this problem, as one might resolve a social choice problem, by placing Pareto
weights γf s on the profits of investor s and maximizing the Pareto-weighted sum of their
investors’ profits. Letting Qf denote the proposed objective function of the firm, we can
derive the weight that firm f places on its competitors g’s profits κf g as follows:
Qf (xf , x−f ) =

X

γf s · πs (xf , x−f )

∀s

!
=

X

=

X

γf s ·

∀s

X

βgs · πg (xf , x−f )

(2)

∀g

γf s βf s πf +

X

γf s

∀s

∀s

X

βgs πg

∀f 6=g

X  P γf s βgs 
P∀s
πg .
∝ πf +
γ
f s βf s
∀s
g6=f |
{z
}
≡κf g (γf ,β)

In the second to last line we show that one can rewrite the maximization of shareholder
profits into a maximization problem over own- and competing firms’ profits. Therefore it is
P
useful to normalize by ∀s γf s βf s , as we do in the last line. Then, κf f is always normalized
to one, so that κf g can be interpreted as the relative value of a dollar of profits accruing to
firm g in firm f ’s maximization problem. In most competitive models (Cournot, Bertrand,
etc.), one assumes that firms ignore the rivals’ profits, i.e. κf g = 0. A large literature in
Industrial Organization treats mergers as changing kf g = kgf = 0 → 1 (see, e.g., Bresnahan
5

(1987); Nevo (2001)). Common ownership concerns can, in principle, rationalize any κ ≥ 0,
but the interesting case is when κf g > 0, and the firm puts positive weight on its rivals’
profits. This occurs when (γf s , βf s , βgs ) > 0, in other words, when at least one investor
which f pays attention to (γf s > 0) has cash-flow rights in both the firm f and the rival g.3
We refer to these κ terms as profit weights and they are the primary focus of our paper.
The next question is: Where do we obtain the information on γf s and βf s that allows us to
calculate κ? For most publicly traded firms in the US, the cash flow rights of shareholder s
in firm f are given by the fraction they own of total shares outstanding. These quantities are
observed for large institutional investors from mandatory 13(f) filings made every quarter
to the SEC, discussed further in Section 3.1, and calculating βf s using this information is
straightforward.
The second element, the Pareto weight a firm places on each of its shareholders, sometimes
called the control weight, is less transparent. Any formulation of γ is implicitly a model
of corporate governance, and one where theory offers precious little guidance. Absent an
obvious alternative, much of the literature assumes γf s = βf s . This assumption is sometimes
motivated by intuitive appeals to proportional control —the “one share one vote” rule which
characterizes most publicly traded firms in the US. We caution that there is no formal link
between this parameterization and any micro-founded voting game that we are aware of.
We will at times relax the proportional control assumption and allow for γf s = f (βf s ).
There are two desirable properties that would like to retain: first, that f (·) be monotonically
increasing and continuous in holdings, and second, that f (0) = 0.4 A convenient choice is
f (βf s ) ∝ (βf s )α , which satisfies both.5 By varying α we can modify the convexity of the
control weights, with a larger value of α leading to more weight on the largest investors. We
will show that most of our results are qualitatively insensitive to the choice of α.
3

It is difficult to rationalize the conventional model of own-profit maximization in this framework, in the
presence of diversified investors. Implicitly, one needs to motivate the assumption that γf s = 0 for diversified
investors, and γf s > 0 for undiversified investors.
4
As an example where these features may fail, consider κ in the case where γ = 1 for all shareholders of
firm f , i.e. the firm maximizes their shareholder’s portfolio value. This model introduces a potentially large
discontinuity when a new investor with a large portfolio purchases a single share of a firm.
5
We write ∝ rather than = because we can always scale the S × 1 vector γ·s by a scalar because it appears
hγ ,β i
haγ ,β i
in both numerator and denominator of κf g = hγff ,βfg i = haγff ,βfg i .

6

2.1

Additional Properties of κ

Here we highlight some additional mathematical properties of κ to set the stage for our
P
P
empirical exercise. Recall, from the derivation in (2), κf g ≡ s γf s βgs / s γf s βf s . Letting βf
hγ ,β i
and γf be vectors over s, this can be expressed as a ratio of inner (dot) products κf g = hγff ,βfg i .
And from the geometric definition of an inner product, hx, yi = cos(x, y) kxk kyk, with
cos(x, y) the cosine distance (i.e. the cosine of the angle between vectors x and y) and kxk
pP
2
the L2 norm
i xi . Substituting, we obtain a useful decomposition of κf g :
κf g

cos(γf , βg )
=
cos(γf , βf )

s

IHHIg
IHHIf

(3)

Here, IHHIf ≡ kβf k2 . Because βf s represents the fraction of firm f owned by s, then
PS
2
kβf k2 =
s=1 βf s is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) for the investors in firm f ,
which we label the IHHIf . Under the proportional control assumption of Rotemberg (1984)
γf s = βf s , we can further simplify the expression, because cos(βf , βf ) = 1:
s
κf g (γf , β) = cos(βf , βg )

IHHIg
.
IHHIf

(3’)

What is helpful about this expression in (3) or (3’) is that it decomposes profit weights
into two economically meaningful components. First, it draws a clear link between investor
concentration and profit weights or common ownership incentives. Common ownership incentives are determined in part by relative concentration of investors. If firm g has a large
(undiversified) investor then IHHIg will be large; if firm f has many small investors then
IHHIf will be small. All other things being equal, firms with concentrated investors will
place more weight on their own profits, and less weight on competitor profits. However, if a
diversified investor increases its positions in several firms at once, this may not change the
IHHIg
.
ratio IHHI
f
q
IHHIg
to be greater than one, or even greater than two or three,
It is entirely possible for IHHI
f
which makes it possible for κf g > 1 (a firm places more weight on its competitors’ profits
than their own). Also, because it is a quadratic measure, IHHI shows that small retail
investors have a negligible contribution towards IHHI and thus κ, which implies that γ ≈ 0
for retail investors is a result of proportional control rather than an assumption.

7

The second important and common term in (3) and (3’) is the cosine of the angle between the
positions which investors hold in f and those which investors hold in g. So long as all investors
hold long positions in both (f, g) we have that cos(βf , βg ) ∈ [0, 1]. As the investor positions
become more similar, the angle between those portfolios shrinks and cos(βf , βg ) → 1. This
suggests a link between indexing strategies, e.g. investing in the “market portfolio,” and
common ownership incentives. We explore this relationship further in our empirical results.
Finally, a brief word on the term that appears in (3) but not (3’): cos(βf , γf ). This corresponds to the alignment of cash-flow rights and control rights within firm f . The proportional
control assumption aligns them perfectly, so it is equal to 1. All else held equal, a weaker
relationship between the two will, since this term sits in the denominator, inflate common
ownership incentives.
The relationship between control rights and cash-flow rights is central to the common ownership hypothesis. Typically, the discussion of these two hinges on institutional structures
that divorce them, e.g. “golden shares” in the hands of founders, or business groups that
centralize control (Porta et al., 1999). In the objective function defined by (2), the mechanisms are different. On the intensive margin, the issue is that the product of the two that
enters into the firm’s objective function. If γf s is increasing in βf s , then this means that even
if my cash flow and control rights are linear, the marginal effect of additional investment by
shareholder s is increasing in their existing holdings. Therefore, larger investors can have an
outsized effect in determining optimal actions. Moreover, if γf s → 0 as βf s → 0, then retail
investors, who are assumed to be atomistic, drop out of the objective function of the firm
altogether. This is the extensive margin. Since retail investors have no influence, it implies
that the influence of institutional investors is magnified whenever the retail share is large,
in proportion to the inverse of the institutional share. This will tend to magnify the responsiveness of firms to common ownership among even a relatively small set of institutional
investors, as we see in the examples that follow.

2.2

Examples of the Math of Common Ownership

The following examples maintain the proportional control assumption of γf s = βf s .
Example 1 : Consider a market with three firms. Firm 1 is privately held, in its entirety, by
an undiversified investor. Firms 2 and 3 have the following identical ownership structure: 60
8

Table 1: Example 1 Ownership Structure

Investor 1
Investor 2
Investor 3
Investor 4
Retail Share

Firm 1
100%
-

Firm 2
20%
20%
60%

Firm 3
20%
20%
60%

Notes: This table presents investor holdings in three firm for Example 1.

percent of each is held by small, undiversified retail investors. 20 percent of each are held,
respectively, by two large, undiversified investors. The final 20 percent of each is held by a
single, diversified investor. This ownership pattern is summarized in Table 1.
This yields the following set of profit weights:



1 0
0


κ = 0 1 1/2
0 1/2 1
To see how this calculation is done, denote column j of Table 1 as βj (excluding the bottom
row, the retail share which is assumed to have no control weight). Then, the profit weight
firm f has on firm g’s profit is κf g = (βf 0 · βg )/(βf 0 · βf ). This example highlights that the
profit weights can be quite large with a modest amount of cross-ownership. An important
factor here is the large retail share, which at 60% corresponds to the average retail share
(i.e. non-institutional share) among S&P 500 firms in the early 1980s (see Figure 4 below).
Example 2 Now consider an alternative market with just two firms. The vast majority of
both firms are held by a large set of undiversified retail investors. A boundedly small fraction
of both firms is held by a finite set of N symmetric, diversified investors who each hold 1
percent of firm one and x percent of firm two, and we assume N · x < 100. This ownership
pattern is summarized in Table 2.
Then, we would have the following κ matrix of profit weights:

9

Table 2: Example 2 Ownership Structure

Investor 1
Investor 2
..
.

Firm 1
1%
1%
..
.

Firm 2
x%
x%
..
.

Investor N
Retail Share

1%
(100 − N ) %

x%
(100 − N · x)%

Notes: This table presents investor holdings in two firm for Example 2. Note that N · x < 100.

"

1 x
κ=
1/x 1

#

The calculation follows in the same manner as Example 1. This example highlights a few
points about profit weights. Notice that the profit weights do not depend directly on N .
Letting x = 1, we have that an arbitrarily small share of ownership has led to monopoly
pricing. If x is 2%, then the first firm will value $1 of the competitor’s profit as $2 of their
own. Therefore firm 1 would, if it could, divert profits directly to firm 2. This raises concerns
around tunneling (Johnson et al., 2000), which we discuss in Section 4.1.
We can also re-interpret this problem by working backwards from the retail share. Suppose
we know that all investors are symmetric (holding a “market portfolio”) and we observe
1
2
and κ21 = 1−r
. This suggests that as a firm’s
the retail shares (r1 , r2 ). Then κ12 = 1−r
1−r1
1−r2
retail share grows, it puts a higher weight on competitor profits. Holding all else equal,
this suggests that the growth of institutional investors may dampen (rather than enhance)
common ownership incentives.6

2.3

Profit Weights and Market Outcomes

Do common ownership incentives affect economic outcomes and welfare? In the context of
pricing, our profit weight measures κf g relate to other measures of common ownership such
as the MHHI-Delta or ∆P P I measures of O’Brien and Salop (2000), that have been used
to understand effects on consumer welfare. We provide a (not original) derivation of each in
Appendix A.1 for reference.
6

This is because that while the numerator changes at rate −r1 the denominator changes at rate

10

−r2
(1−r2 )2 .

If we solve (2) where firms choose quantity in a homogeneous, symmetric Cournot game, we
find a monotone relationship between the Lerner Index and the M HHI measure of O’Brien
and Salop (2000) which is used in empirical work on airlines Azar et al. (2018) and banks
Azar et al. (2016):
M HHIm =

X

s2f t +

XX
f

f

| {z }

|

HHIm

κf g sf m sgm

(4)

g6=f

{z

M HHI–Deltam

}

Observe that κf g appears inside the MHHI computation. In this sense the MHHI index it
is not an alternative to κ weights; rather, it requires strictly stronger assumptions. Alternatively, if we solve (2) where firms choose price in a differentiated Bertrand game, we get the
less well-known ∆P P I measure of O’Brien and Salop (2000):

∆P P Ijm =

X
g

κf g · 


X

(pkm − mckm )Djkm 

(5)

k∈Jg

For both of these games, common ownership implies higher prices, lower output, and welfare
loss. However, in other games, e.g. complementary products, vertical relations or R&D, the
welfare effects may be very different, and even positive (Levy, 2018; López and Vives, 2018).
We choose to make κ the profit weight our object of interest because it is the primitive which
captures how common ownership affects M HHI or P P I. Both M HHI and P P I require
additional assumptions on firm conduct and the nature of competition as well as additional
data which make them difficult to measure using aggregate data.
Our approach represents an important departure not just from industry-specific studies of
common ownership: (Azar et al., 2018, 2016), but also broader cross-industry studies of
common ownership: (Anton et al., 2016; Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2016) which rely on
M HHI. In order to compute M HHI we need to define a relevant market and compute
appropriate market shares. Defining a relevant market is often the most contentious aspect of
antitrust practice. Prior studies often use 4-digit SIC codes as reported in Compustat. These
may not represent appropriate product markets either in terms of geography or the nature
of the products themselves.7 If privately-held and foreign firms are present and unmeasured,
then our market shares will be incorrect.8 If the unmeasured share of privately-held and
7

The oft-cited counterexamples: National concentration in supermarket retailing or cable television is not
a useful measure for the competitive conditions faced by individual consumers.
8
For example, in chocolate confections the four largest firms are: Mondelez (formerly Kraft foods, owner

11

foreign firms is rising over time, this will cause us to overstate the growth of MHHI, as the
residual share of publicly traded domestic firms appears more concentrated.
We provide a more detailed (and critical) discussion of M HHI and its relationship to the
Structure-Conduct-Performance (SCP) literature in Backus et al. (2018b), and we offer alternatives for differentiated Bertrand competition in Backus et al. (2018a).

3

Trends and Patterns in Common Ownership

While there is broad agreement that common ownership is on the rise – under the premise
that there is growing concentration among highly diversified institutional investors – little
is known about the magnitude of the trend or patterns therein. Which types of firms seem
most exposed to common ownership? And, what is it that drives the heterogeneity?
We compute common ownership weights (κ values) among all firms in the S&P 500 for
the period 1980–2017, excluding a relatively small set of firms that use dual-class shares to
separate control rights from cash-flow rights.9 We use the S&P 500 as it is designed to reflect
the broader US economy, it consists of of widely held firms, and many investment funds offer
products tied to the constituent firms in one way or another.

3.1

Data on Common Ownership

Our first data source for investor holdings is Thomson Reuters (TR) S34 database, which
consolidates the “13(f)” filings required by the SEC for all investment managers with over
$100 million in holdings among a list of “13(f) securities.”10 The filings are quarterly and
mandatory. These data are available to researchers through Wharton Research Data Services
(WRDS) and span the period from 1980-2017. There are some documented data issues in
of Cadbury), a member of both the NASDAQ-100 and S&P 500 Indices; Hershey an S&P 500 component;
Mars, one of the largest privately held firms in the world; and Nestle which is traded on the Swiss stock
exchange.
9
We exclude a total of 49 firms for using dual-class shares throughout our sample. These tend to be
relatively recent entrants, which is our sample falls somewhat more steeply below 500 constituents in later
years, as seen in Figure 2.
10
The SEC publishes a quarterly list of 13(f) securities whose holdings must be reported.

12

the S34 database, particularly in later years.11 We augment this ownership data by scraping
the data ourselves from the SEC filings. These data are available from 1999 onwards (when
the SEC started requiring electronic filing), though they are much more reliable beginning
in mid-2013 when the filings were required to be in XML format.12 We also gather data on
prices and shares outstanding from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).
We use our scraped data on 13(f) holdings from 2000 onwards, and the S34 database for filings
from 1980-1999. We provide additional details on dataset construction and comparisons of
the two databases in Appendix B. We show that our scraped data seem to have better
coverage than the Thomson Reuters database from 1999-2017 in Figure 2. Our sample of
S&P 500 firms does not always include all 500 firms in each period. Because of our focus
on profit weights that arise from overlapping investors, it is inappropriate to calculate these
from financial holdings when there are controlling shareholders or multiple share classes.
Therefore we exclude companies with controlling shareholders or special share classes with
enhanced (or no) voting rights, such as Alphabet (Google) or Facebook.13 We also exclude
firms where the US listing is an ADR of a stock primarily traded on a foreign exchange.
We also document the number of 13(f) Managers holding S&P 500 constituents in Figure
3. The number of managers rises from around 500 in 1980 to around 4000 by 2017. In part
this rise is driven by the fact that the reporting threshold of $100 million in 13(f) securities
is nominal rather than indexed to inflation. Both the Thomson Reuters and our scraped
data indicate similar numbers of 13(f) managers. We also compute the share of each firm
owned by 13(f) managers and report the straight average over index constituents in Figure
4. This share has been rising from below 40% in 1980 to more than 80% by 2017, in part
driven by the increasing number of 13(f) filers from Figure 3. Around 2010, the Thomson
Reuters data indicates a sharp decline in the 13(f) share, while we observe no such decline
11

Recently, WRDS and some researchers (Ben-David et al. (2018)) noticed data quality issues regarding
the TR dataset, and they have worked to resolve these issues. We use the July 2018 update provided by
WRDS below. We consolidate managers that report multiple subsidiaries. Data quality issues are discussed
in more depth in Backus et al. (2018b) and in Appendix B.
12
A highly critical report from the SEC’s Inspector General in 2010 noted a number of shortcomings
in how 13(f) filings were treated, prompting a number of changes to 13(f) reporting. See Securities and
of Inspector General (2010).
13
Occasionally, these controlling shareholders are inside or retail investors, e.g. the Walton family, in
violation of our theoretical assumption that retail investors are atomistic. We have excluded known examples
here, however it is possible to use data from SEC Forms 4,5, 6, and 144, available from the Thomson Reuters
Insider holdings database through WRDS, in order to construct industry holdings where available. These
data are impractical to clean for analysis at the aggregate level, however it is feasible and important to do so
for case studies of particular industries as, e.g., Azar et al. (2018) do when they compute the profit weights
for airlines.

13

Figure 2: Number of Firms in The S&P 500 Sample

Notes: We report the Thomson Reuters in solid lines and our scraped sample in dashed lines. We report two sets of firms for
each sample: (Red) an unrestricted sample consisting of all firms in the dataset (Blue) a restricted sample which drops firms
with multiple share classes unlikely to satisfy control assumptions. The S&P 500 Index can contain fewer than 500 securities on
a particular date (if the end of a quarter occurs on a weekend), and more recently has included over 500 securities as multiple
classes of shares for the same company are included and deemed to count as one constituent (ie: BRKA and BRKB).

Figure 3: Number of 13(f) Managers holding S&P 500 Constituents

Notes: This figure depicts the number of managers filing 13(f) reports by year. For the scraped dataset, a manager is a Central
Index Key (CIK). In the Thomson Reuters data, a manager is identified by a “mgrno”.

in our scraped data.14
14

This is one of the documented issues with the S34 database see Ben-David et al. (2018).

14

Figure 4: Share of S&P 500 Owned by 13(f) Managers

Notes: This figure depicts the average total share of a firm that is owned by managers filing form 13(f). This corresponds to
the institutional ownership share of the firm, and one hundred minus this number corresponds to what we are calling the retail
share. We report the straight average across index constituents rather than a weighted average.

We document a number of additional discrepancies between our scraped dataset and the
Thomson Reuters S34 dataset in Appendix B. In particular, Appendix Figure 17 shows the
distribution of the number of owners reported for S&P 500 constituents over time in the TR
dataset, as well as our scraped and parsed sample. In TR, up to 10% of firms have fewer
than 50 reported shareholders in some periods, while in our data, the numbers are more
consistent over time. To further highlight this coverage issue, Appendix Figure 18 shows
how much of the ownership of three particular, large firms is reported in the TR dataset
versus what we find in our dataset. There is an inexplicable drop in reported ownership in
the TR data, while our dataset produces a smooth series for each firm. Finally, Appendix
Figure 19 shows that if one were to create Figure 1 using only the TR dataset, one would
get a very different time-series, with average profit weights doubling in some time periods.

3.2

Profit Weights and Control

In Figure 1, we saw that under the assumption of proportional control, γ = β, there is a stark
positive trend in common ownership incentives (κ) among S&P 500 firms, growing from an
average of 0.2 to 0.7 between 1980 and 2018. Figure 5 plots the average κ for every pair of
S&P 500 firms by quarter for different control assumptions. We set γf s ∝ β α and vary the α
15

Figure 5: Profit Weight κ Under Different Control Assumptions γ

Notes: This figure reports κ =

1
F (F −1)

P P
f

g6=f

κf,g under different maintained assumptions of control weights, with γ ∝ β α .

parameter. As we increase the exponent α, we concentrate more control among the largest
investors in firm f . We see that the increasing trend is relatively robust to assumptions
about corporate control, and that toward the end of the sample (2012-2017), the average κ
profit weight does not appear to depend on our choice of γ.
Perhaps contrary to expectations, as we increase α, the average weight κ that a firm places
on its competitors’ profits decreases. Toward the very end of the sample this relationship
inverts, though differences among average profit weights become negligible.
These results challenge some previously held assumptions regarding common ownership.
If common ownership effects were driven entirely by the rise of the largest institutional
investors, we would expect the profit weights to be more sensitive to different assumptions
about effective control γ. Instead, we find that for most of the sample, more weight on
large investors acts to reduce rather than increase κ. The second is that while we know very
little about how ownership translates into control, in recent years average profit weights are
relatively insensitive to a wide range of control assumptions.
While our γf s ∝ βfαs parameterization is convenient, our choice of α ∈ { 12 , 1, 2, 3} is not
obviously interpretable, other than that larger values of α place more weight on the largest
shareholders. In order to quantify the effects of α on effective control, we calculate a concen-

16

P
tration measure for effective control is for a particular firm f . We define CHHIf = s γf2s
and plot average CHHIf under different choices of α where γf s ∝ βfαs . Because this measure resembles an HHI, we can compute the equivalent number of symmetric controllers as
1
.15
n∗ = CHHI
f
In Figure 6, we report our concentration measures for effective control which we multiply
by 10, 000 as is common in the antitrust literature. Under proportional control α = 1,
CHHI = IHHI, so that a typical firm had the equivalent of 65 symmetric “controllers”
(CHHI ≈ 150) in 1980 and around 33 symmetric “controllers” (CHHI ≈ 300) by 2018.
As we increase α, we place more weight on a small number of larger investors. For example
when α = 3, in 2018 we find that CHHI ≈ 2500, or that firms effectively pay attention to
the four largest investors. We can also see that this measure has grown substantially over
time, as it was only CHHI ≈ 600 in 1980 (or around 17 symmetric “controllers”). To us,
this suggests we have considered the range of relevant values for α.

3.3

Trends in Profit Weights: Investor Concentration

Discussions of common ownership are often linked to the rise in concentration among a
firm’s investors and the “Big Three” (BlackRock, Vanguard, State Street) in particular.
These three institutional investors collectively manage over $13 Trillion at present.16 Figure
7 highlights holdings by these “Big Three” managers. The plot shows that these firms
holdings in an average S&P 500 constituent has increased substantially over time, to between
4% and 9% of a typical S&P 500 firm in 2017. Most of that rise happened after the year
2000; combined, the “Big Three” owned approximately 6% of the average firm in 2000, and
21% percent of the average S&P 500 firm by the end of 2017. While this rise is staggering,
Figure 1 indicates that much of the rise in common ownership incentives predates it; indeed
κ rose from 0.2 to 0.5 from 1980-1999, and 0.5 to 0.7 from 1999-2017.
More broadly, we can ask: How concentrated are the set of investors in a typical S&P 500
P
constituent? We can calculate the investor HHI: IHHIf = s βf2s and interpret this measure
15

Unlike in our calculation of κ where we can multiply γ·s by a scalar a without loss of generality, because
P
2
P
β
CHHIf = s γf2s the normalization of af · βfαs matters. We choose our normalization af = Ps γff ss
s
P
P
so that s βf s = s γf s . This keeps the overall institutional investor share the same as we change the
convexity α.
16
Fichtner et al. (2017) maps the historic rise of the “big three” and raises concerns for their role in
corporate governance. Assets under management figures are taken from annual reports.

17

Figure 6: Control Weights γ Concentration (CHHI)

α
Notes: These
√ figures average CHHI under different maintained assumptions of control weights, with γ ∝ β . The second zooms
in on γ ∝ β and γ = β.

1
in terms of equivalent symmetric investors as n∗ = IHHI
. We report the quantiles of investor
f
concentration (multiplied by 10, 000 as is common practice) in Figure 8. What we see is that
investor concentration has grown dramatically since 1980. In 1980, the median firm’s investor
concentration was around 50 points (or approximately 200 symmetric investors), and today
it has an IHHI ≈ 250, or around 40 symmetric investors. For the most concentrated firms
(95th percentile of investor concentration), the IHHI ≈ 500, which would represent around
20 equally-sized investors.

18

Figure 7: Share of Typical Firm Owned by Big Three Institutional Owners

Notes: This figure depicts the holdings of the three large asset managers over time, combining BlackRock and Barclays. The
vertical line denotes the acquisition of the Barclay’s Global Investors iShares business by BlackRock. The source data are the
authors’ own scraped 13(f) dataset.

Figure 8: Investor β Concentration (IHHI)

Notes: This figure plots quantiles of the firm distribution of IHHI, which is given by
report 10, 000 × IHHIf .

P

s

βf2s . As is common in antitrust we

It is important to point out that by antitrust standards, investors are not very concentrated
at all. For example, the DOJ and FTC consider product markets to be highly concentrated
only when HHI > 2500, and consider markets to be moderately concentrated when HHI ∈
19

[1500, 2500]. We caution that there is no reason to think antitrust guidelines for product
markets are appropriate to apply to investors.
We might ask, what has driven the rise in IHHI over time? As we showed in Section 2.2,
1
where rf is the “retail share” of firm f (ie: the fraction of
the IHHIf is related to 1−r
f
shares held by investors who do not file a 13(f) form). Also recall that the typical retail
share (Figure 4) has fallen from around 60% in 1980 to around 20% today. Thus part of this
trend is about 13(f) filers taking larger positions, such as the rise of the “Big Three”, while
part is driven by the rise in 13(f) filers overall.
The theoretical relationship between investor concentration and
qprofit weights is not straightcos(γf ,βg )
IHHIg
, or that profit weights
forward. Recall equation (3) which showed that κf g = cos(γf ,βf ) IHHI
f
depend on relative investor concentration. Holding all else equal, as firm f ’s own investors
become more concentrated we expect them to put less weight on other firms’ profits.17
Though IHHI has been rising since 1980, relative investor concentration cannot be rising
for all pairs of firms simultaneously.

3.4

Trends in Profit Weights: Investor Similarity and Indexing

In addition to relative investor
concentration, the other element determining profit weights
q
IHHIg
in (3) κf g = cos(βf , βg ) IHHIf is cos(βf , βg ).18 Cosine similarity is an L2 measure, and
measures how similar the investor positions in firm f are to those in in firm g. For long-only
portfolios it ranges from [0, 1] and is maximized when the vector of investor shares in firm f
can be expressed as a scalar multiple of the investor positions in firm g. This can arise if all
of the investors agree on all of the portfolio weights for their investments but have differently
sized portfolios.19 To be explicit we can write:
P
L2 (βf , βg ) = cos(βf , βg ) =

βf s βgs
kβf k kβg k
s

Conversely as g’s investors become more concentrated we expect that all firms f 0 will increase the weight
on g’s profits.
18
This is under the simplifying assumption of proportional control so that γf s = βf s .
19
As an example: assume that all investors have different sizes to their overall portfolio but allocate
β
a portfolio share of βf s to firm f and βgs to firm g. If we can write βfgss = a for all investors s then
cos(βf , βg ) = 1
17

20

Figure 9: Cosine Similarity Among Investors

Notes: We report average similarity measures across all pairs of firms in each period. Note that similarity here is across firms
(the vector βf ) rather than investors (the vector βs ), where the latter appears in Figure 10 below.

One potential criticism of L2 measures of similarity is that they put additional weight on the
largest investors, and may therefore conflate investor similarity and investor concentration.
To better get at investor similarity directly, we can construct an L1 measure. The core of
P
this measure is s |βf s − βgs |. It is smallest when all investors hold the same fraction of both
firms (f, g) so that βf s = βgs . Assuming no short positions are allowed, it is largest when
investors hold either a position in firm f or in firm g, and thus are not common owners. We
construct a L1 measure of similarity which varies from [0, 1]:20
L1 (βf , βg ) =

1X
(βf s + βgs − |βf s − βgs |)
2 s

(6)

This is not our preferred measure, as it does not correspond to a profit weight of an objective
function, but it may help us quantify the extent to which firms (f, g) have owners in common.
In Figure 9 we explore this relationship, we find that the average (across pairs of firms) cosine
similarity almost perfectly tracks the average profit weight κ. We also see that the L1 measure
of overlapping investors is also increasing though it doesn’t line up as directly with the profit
weights.
20

P
P
Absent retail investors ∀s βf s = 1. In practice, ∀s βf s < 1, because the set of investors
contains
P
only large institutional investors who provide 13(f) filings to the SEC. We can think about ∀s βf s = 1 − rf
where rf represents the retail investor share in firm f . As rf grows, the L1 measure declines, which may (or
may not) be the desired behavior.

21

Figure 10: Similarity Between Investor Portfolios and S&P 500 Index

Notes: This figure depicts L1 and L2 similarity measures comparing investor portfolios weighted by investor AUM within our
sample of S&P 500 assets.

Both of our L1 and L2 measures focus on pairs of firms, and tell us that positions held in firm
f look more similar to those in firm g over time. Perhaps the most important phenomenon
from 1980-2017 is the rise of index investors. Instead of looking at pairs of firms, we might
want to focus the extent to which
investors pursue indexed strategies. For each period
P
β
s
we can construct a set of wf = P s βff,s
’s which represent the market portfolio.21 We can
f,s

β

then compare the normalized portfolio weights wf s = P fβsf s and measure the distance each
f
investor’s portfolio is to the market portfolio: L1 (ws , w) and L2 (ws , w). This is consistent
with the literature in that the active share measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009) is given
by 1 − L1 (ws , w).22
Our goal is to quantify how indexed each investor is on a scale of [0, 1] with 1 being perfectly
indexed. We compute the similarity between an investor’s portfolio βes and our constructed
“market portfolio” β. In Figure 10, we report the weighted average of these similarity
measures, where we weight each investor by assets under management (AUM).23 As one
21

Our measure of the “market portfolio” is based on cashflow shares rather than market-cap weights.
But for the “retail share” of non 13(f) filers, these two measures would coincide. One interpretation of our
measure is as the “market portfolio” weights among large institutional investors only. We obtained S&P
weights for the most recent period and our “market portfolio” weights were highly similar. Note: we ignore
all non S&P 500 securities from our calculation of portfolio weights.
22
We should point out that our analysis is at the investor/manager level from 13(f) filings not at the level
of an individual fund.
23
Again restricted to the set of S&P 500 securities.

22

might expect, at least on an asset weighted basis, investor portfolios become much more
similar to the “market portfolio”.
Taken together, these facts are meant to highlight what we think are the two main trends
driving long run changes in common ownership profit weights: (1) the positions of investors
in firms (f, g) become more similar to each other over time and (2) the similarity is largely
driven by a broad trend towards indexing among asset managers. This contrasts what
appears to be the developing narrative that common ownership is largely a function of rising
investor concentration particularly among the “Big Three” (as discussed in the previous
section).

3.5

Within Industry and Case Studies

An obvious criticism of the above economy-wide analysis is that a pharmaceutical firm’s
decisions hardly affect the profits of an airline, so why do these profit weights tell us anything?
What are profit weights within relevant product markets? Answering this question requires
us to make assumptions about market definition, which we have avoided so far.
Here we follow the literature and adopt, perhaps unsatisfyingly, four-digit SIC codes as
“markets.” We show average profit weights κf g over time where both firms f and g are in
the same four-digit SIC code according to Compustat. While these industry classifications
are often criticized, it would be problematic if the overall trends we document did not hold
under this restriction. Figure 11 shows the results: the overall trend is the same, and the
level is, if anything, slightly higher.
Next, we present the average profit weight for a pair of specific industries: commercial
banks, as defined by SIC code 6021 (National Commercial Banks) in Compustat that are
also S&P 500 constituents, and airlines, using a hand-collected sample of 27 nationwide
airline securities. The airline sample required extensive data cleaning due to the many
bankruptcies and mergers over the timeframe. Details are in Appendix B.2.5. Results are
depicted in Figure 12. We see that the qualitative and quantitative patterns are similar to
those in the S&P 500 as a whole: a large increase in profit weights for competing firms over
the past few decades.

23

Figure 11: Within & Between Industry Profit Weights

Note: This figure presents average pairwise profit weights separately between and within industry codes. Industry codes are from
Compustat data as reported at the 4 digit SIC code level. Profit weight κf g computed under proportional control γf s = βf s .

Figure 12: Profit Weights Among Commercial Banks and Airlines

Note: This figure presents average pairwise profit weights separately for banks and airlines. Banks are for SIC code 6121 from
S&P 500 sample only. Airlines are separately scraped from 13(f) filings and are available only for 2000-2017. Profit weight κf g
computed under proportional control γf s = βf s .

3.6

Correlations with Profit Weights

Next we turn to understanding the cross-sectional heterogeneity in common ownership
weights among our sample of S&P 500 firms. In Figure 13 we plot the profit weights against
24

Figure 13: Heterogeneity in Common Ownership

Note: Binscatter plots are residualized using quarter fixed effects. Grand means are added back in to give sense of scale.

25

log market capitalization as well as the retail share of investors for 20 equal-sized bins. The
market capitalization and retail share are constructed at the firm-quarter level. The market
P
capitalization comes from CRSP while the retail share is simply rf t = 1 − s βf,s,t (the
fraction shares owned by non 13(f) investors). All plots absorb year fixed effects to account
for levels of average nominal capitalization or retail share of aggregate investment. Our goal
is to focus on cross-sectional variation in profit weights within a time period.
We find a stark relationship: Large market cap firms tend to have substantially higher
common ownership weights for other firms. We hypothesize that this is related to retail
share. In the common ownership framework, retail investors are infinitesimally small and
therefore do not exercise any control over the firm. Large aggregate retail share then tends
to inflate the control rights associated with institutional ownership. As we showed in Section
1
, where rf is the retail share of
2.2, with symmetric investor holdings we expect κf g ∝ 1−r
f
firm f . Indeed, as we see in the second panel of Figure 13, retail share is strongly positively
1
.
correlated with common ownership weights and appears proportional to 1−r
f
We can now put together both the time series evidence from sections 3.3 and 3.4 with the
cross sectional evidence from Figure 13 above in a regression framework. Here we include
fixed effects at the firm level and either a time trend or quarter dummies λt .
Two additional key variables we include are the market-level and firm-level measures of
investor indexing behavior. For the market-level variable, in each quarter we compute our
L2 (cosine similarity) measure between each investor’s portfolio and the “market portfolio”
and then take an AUM weighted average as we do in Section 3.4 and Figure 10. We also
construct a firm-level measure of how “indexed” a particular firms investors are by taking
a weighted average of the same L2 measure but using βf s (the shares of firm f owned by
investor s) as the weights. Finally, we also consider the number of (self-reported) Compustat
business segments and dummies for being a diversified or highly diversified firm following
the definition of Lang and Stulz (1994).
In Table 3 we present these results in regression form. Results are consistent with Figures 1
and 13: robustly positive with the time trend for κ weights, but in both cases positively and
robustly correlated with both market cap and retail share. There is substantially less heterogeneity across sectors – differences are small (less than 0.02) and not strongly significant.
It is important to stress that the relationship between retail share and common ownership

26

Table 3: Correlations with κf,g,t
Quarter
Aggregate Indexingt

(1)
0.0046∗
(0.0002)
0.5383∗
(0.1092)

Indexingf,t
log(Market Cap)f,t
Retail Sharef,t

0.0386∗
(0.0033)
0.7647∗
(0.0327)

(2)
0.0034∗
(0.0002)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.9688∗
(0.0480)
0.0359∗
(0.0031)
0.6593∗
(0.0312)

1.0390∗
(0.0509)
0.0395∗
(0.0034)
0.6456∗
(0.0321)

1.0424∗
(0.0508)
0.0395∗
(0.0033)
0.6460∗
(0.0319)
-0.0016
(0.0008)

1.0408∗
(0.0508)
0.0395∗
(0.0033)
0.6450∗
(0.0319)

no. Segments
Diversified Firm (2+)
Highly Diversified Firm (5+)
Firm FE
Quarter FE
R2
N

X

X

0.5363
36355363

0.5510
36355363

X
X
0.5547
36355363

X
X
0.5549
36353863

-0.0164
(0.0084)
-0.0092
(0.0063)
X
X
0.5549
36355363

Notes: This table reports correlates of the common ownership profit weights. An observation is a pair of S&P 500 constituent
firms in a given quarter. Robust standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. * indicates
significance at the 5% level.

27

incentives does not explain the trend we observed in Figure 1. In fact, as we saw in Figure
4, retail share is sharply declining between 1980 and 2017, from an average of approximately
65% to 20%. Here we have identified this relationship off of the cross-section alone, and if
anything, in the time series it has worked to dampen common ownership incentives.
We find a strong relationship between our firm-level measure of “indexing” behavior and our
κf,g,t profit weights. For each percentage point that each of a firm’s 13(f) investors become
more similar to the index, we expect an equivalent rise in the profit weights that firm f places
on all other firms g. The 10th percentile of our firm-level investor L2 similarity measure is
≈ 0.373 and the 90th percentile is ≈ 0.625. Thus an increase from the “least indexed” firms
in the sample to the “most indexed” would increase the average weight f places on other
firms by ≈ 0.26 units. Much of the difference in our “indexing” measures has taken place
over time, looking just at the last quarter of 2017, the range between the top and bottom
deciles of “indexing” is 0.56 → 0.70.
There appears to be no relationship between the profit weights and the number of business
segments or whether the firm is diversified, however those correlations are identified only
off of within-firm changes. We provide additional regression specifications and robustness
(including SIC-code fixed effects and firm pair fixed effects) in Appendix C.

4

4.1

Economic Implications

Relationship to Tunneling

Following the language of Johnson et al. (2000), “tunneling” is the practice of transferring
profits, whether via acquisition, mispriced purchase orders, or direct transfer, from one
company to another in order to benefit the interests of a controlling stakeholder in both,
defrauding both creditors and minority shareholders in the former firm. The above-referenced
paper offers anecdotal evidence of tunneling even in developed countries, particularly civil
law countries, and other work has found evidence in the developed world (Bertrand et al.,
2002). However it is not typically believed to occur in the US, for two reasons: strong
investor protections that facilitate healthy financial markets (Porta et al., 1999) and the
near-universal absence of a controlling interest in publicly-traded firms; the US is the land
of the “widely-held” firm (Berle and Means, 1932).
28

Figure 14: Potential Tunneling Incentives κ > 1

Note: This reports the fraction of pairwise profit weights κf,g > 1 in each period under the assumption of proportional control.

The connection between common ownership and tunneling hinges on this second point. If
as the common ownership hypothesis maintains: (1) owners are sufficiently diversified and
(2) firms care about the effects of their decisions the entirety of their shareholders portfolios;
then firms may have an incentive to engage in tunneling even in the absence of a controlling
interest. On this point we can be precise: if κf g > 1 then firm f would, if it could, transfer
profits directly to firm g.
In Figure 14, we report the share of firm pairs for which κf g > 1 under the proportional
control assumption. Recall that, from equation (3’), since cos(βf , βg ) is bounded above by
1, κf g > 1 implies that κgf < 1 – i.e., that tunneling is in the interest of both firms. Because tunneling is necessarily unidirectional, the maximum amount of tunneling relationships
would be 50%. Therefore, twice the number described in the figure yields the fraction of
pairwise relationships among S&P 500 firms in which parties have an incentive to engage in
tunneling. We find a striking rise in this frequency between 1993 and 2002, and again in the
period following 2015.
There is a meaningful difference between the patterns of tunneling predicted by common
ownership and the prior literature. Whereas before, the key element was control rights, it
tended to be isolated within groups of firms that had a common controlling interest. For
example, Bertrand et al. (2002) offer econometric evidence of tunneling about documented

29

business groups in India. There the pattern of tunneling interest is sparse—firms possess few
tunneling “targets”. Tunneling arising from common
q ownership is driven patterns of retail
IHHIg
grows for all potential tunneling
share via IHHIf . When retail share is large,
IHHIf
“targets”. This suggests that the resulting patterns of tunneling will tend to be dense rather
than sparse—firms which have incentives to engage in tunneling may want to tunnel funds
to many partners.
Taken at face value, the finding implies that in the world of the widely-held firm, i.e. in
the absence of a controlling interest, the incentives for tunneling may be pervasive if firm
incentives reflect common ownership concerns. It is worth emphasizing that, unlike our
results in Section 3, in the later periods, the result depends heavily on our assumptions
about control rights. We document this in Appendix Section C.3. Moreover, in the presence
of strong minority shareholder protections, these incentives may not translate into behavior.

4.2

Quantifying the Common Ownership Channel

Eekhout and De Loecker (2017) document that average markups rise from 21% in 1980 to
61% in 2017 across a broad range of publicly traded firms. We conduct a simple calibration
exercise in order to measure how the rise in common ownership could be used to explain this
rise in markups.
We start with J symmetric firms, with marginal costs c, selling differentiated products and
competing in Nash-in-prices. We assume that each firm faces a logit demand such that its
market share is given by:
sj (pj , p−j ) =

ea−bpj
PJ
1 + k=1 ea−bpk

Each firm chooses its pj simultaneously in order to maximize:
π
e(pj , p−j , κ) = (pj − c)sj (pj , p−j ) +

J
X

κjk · (pk − c)sk0 (pj , p−j )

k=1

Given the parameters of the problem (a, b, c, J, κ) it is possible to solve the J × J system of

30

Figure 15: Simulated Markups: 1980–2017

Notes: This figure presents predicted markups for the calibration exercise. See the text for exact specification.

equations for the equilibrium prices pb(κ). Our goal is to hold fixed the (a, b, c, J) aspect of
the problem, and to re-solve the problem with all κf g set equal to the average value reported
in Figure 1 period by period. We then plot µ = p/c as Eekhout and De Loecker (2017) do
over time from 1980-2017.
We calibrate parameters as follows. First we set c = 1 without loss of generality. This means
that prices and markups are one in the same: p̂(κ) = µ. Next we choose the number of
firms J = 8 so that our HHI ≈ 1250 to match Grullon et al. (2018).24 Finally, we calibrate
a and b for 1980. We construct a markup of µ = 1.21 to match Eekhout and De Loecker
(2017) and an average own elasticity of −7.21 in line with the range of elasticities reported
in Eaton and Kortum (2002).25 This all but eliminates the outside good share. 26
Results for this calibration exercise are presented in Figure 15. The scale of the increase in
markups predicted by the rise in common ownership is substantial: from 1.21 to 1.56. But
while common ownership incentives can, by 2017, explain the bulk of the rise in markups
24

We can obtain nearly identical results varying the number of firms from 5-15.
Simonovska and Waugh (2014) obtain elasticities about half as large ≈ −4.0 which suggests demand too
inelastic to get markups as small as µ = 1.21 in 1980.
26
Alternatively, one could eliminate the parameter a as well as the outside good, but the existence of
even a very small outside good option substantially improves convergence of the simulated prices when
computing equilibrium. This computation is done with the freely available pyblp python package (Conlon
and Gortmaker, 2018).
25

31

found by Eekhout and De Loecker (2017), in the time series they appear to lag the biggest
changes. Common ownership predicts the largest price increases after 2000, while that paper
finds them in the late eighties and nineties. However, the two are largely consistent in finding
large price increases for the the period following 2015.
We caution that our simulation exercise merely shows that the common ownership channel
is quantitatively large enough to explain over 90% of the rise in markups from 1980-2017, it
is not meant to imply that the common ownership channel has caused the rise in markups.

5

Robustness and Alternative Overlap Measures

5.1

Alternative κ Weights

An alternative specification is offered in Crawford et al. (2018), who develop profit weights
in the different context of vertical incentives.27 There each investor constructs their ideal
β
weight β̃f s = P fβsgs , and firms form a γ weighted average of their investors’ desired weights.
g
γ
In construction of κf g we find it more transparent to normalize γ̃f s = P fβsgs so that:28
g

Y
κCLW
=
fg

βf0 · gf (β) · βg
hγ̃f , βg i
hγf , β̃g i
=
= 0
hγ̃f , βf i
βf · gf (β) · βf
hγf , β̃f i

(7)

The CLWY weights are just the common ownership weights, but with a different assumption
on control (γ). Investors with large diversified portfolios (such as index funds), have larger
P
values for g βgs and receive a smaller weight γ̃f s .29 One justification for this re-weighting
might be that investors with large portfolios may become inattentive (Van Nieuwerburgh
and Veldkamp (2010), Gilje et al. (2018a)).
An alternative measure which more explicitly addresses investor inattention is proposed by
Gilje et al. (2018b). Inattention is related to the portfolio share of firm f rather than the
27

It is important to note that Crawford et al. (2018) are not considering the common ownership hypothesis
directly but rather examining incentives for vertical integration and bargaining among MVPDs and content
providers where the former often have a partial ownership stake in the later.
28
gf (β) represents a diagonal S × S weighting matrix with entries P 1βgs
g
P
29
The Crawford et al. (2018) paper only considers firms within the same industry in g βgs (albeit in a
very different context). It is hard to understand what an equivalent assumption would be for the entire S&P
500 Index.

32

normalized cash flow. With a bit of work, one can show that their measure:
GGLf g = βf0 · gf (βs ) · βg

(8)

where gf (βs ) is a S × S diagonal matrix with entries which are a function of the portfolio
β v
share which f comprises in s’s portfolio: αf s (βs ) = Y +Pf s βfgs vg , where vf represents the
g
market capitalization of firm f . The authors consider a number of functional form choices
for gf (αf s ),30 which has the interpretation as the probability that investor s pays attention
to the actions of firm f . It important to note that while this overlap measure is a quadratic
form like (3’) it is not normalized by γf0 · βf and thus does not directly represent a change in
the profit weights but rather some other difference in f ’s objective function.31
Because both the CLWY and GGL measures have the effect of putting less weight γf s on
investors who are more diversified, we don’t apply them to our study of the entire S&P 500
index. These measures seem more appropriate when examining a single industry at a time
(such as the cable television industry).

5.2

Voting Authority

An objection that has been raised to the literature on common ownership is that many large
institutional owners do not have full discretion in voting the shares that they control. To the
extent that the Pareto weights γf represent control rights that derive from a voting game,
this would cause us to potentially over-represent common ownership concerns.
Fortunately, the 13(f) filings require investors to report not only total share holdings, but to
divide these among “sole”, “shared”, and “no” voting authority shares. Therefore, to show
the sensitivity of our results to alternative assumptions, we next recompute profit weights
under the assumption of proportional control (γf s = βf s ) where we limit attention to either
“sole” and “shared” voting authority shares, or only “sole” voting authority shares. We
restrict our attention the the period beginning in 2013 when we can relaibly scrape this
30

For example: linear, convex, etc.
We also caution against normalizing the GGLf g measure and interpreting it as a profit weight under any
circumstances. Consider the case of the breakfast cereal industry: Kellogg’s has a market cap of $21 Billion
and derives most of its revenue from its breakfast cereal business. Pepsi has a market cap of $165 Billion,
and derives only a small fraction of its revenue from its breakfast cereal business (Quaker Oats). An investor
holding the S&P 500 index would then value $1 of profits 8× as much for Pepsi as it would for Kellogg’s
even though they own the same fraction of each firm.
31

33

Figure 16: Alternative κ by Voting Authority

Note: This reports robustness checks where we compare the measure we report in our main results All Shares (blue-line) to
cases where we exclude shares marked as No Voting Rights or Shared Voting Rights from the investment manager’s portfolio.
These data are available in our Scraped data only for the period where we have XML filing (post 2013) and for the TR data
only after 1999.

information from XML 13(f) filings. We display the results in Figure 16 where we observe
that on average κ profit weights appear to be slightly higher when we exclude nonvoting
shares or shares with shared voting rights. In general, the differences between the average κ
measures appear to be miniscule.

34

6

Conclusion

This paper has endeavored to take the common ownership hypothesis seriously and work
through the economic implications at a macro level, taking the universe of firms in the
S&P 500 from 1980 do 2017. This began with a data challenge, and so in addition to the
sources already exploited by the literature, we manually recompiled investor holdings from
13(f) reports downloaded from the SEC. We are making the source code for this compilation
available for future researchers. From the exercise can draw a number of conclusions.
First, the implied common ownership incentives have risen substantially over the period,
more than tripling from an average of 0.2 in 1980 to almost 0.7 in 2017. This rise is economically significant. A simple calibration exercise suggests that much of the rise in markups
observed in Eekhout and De Loecker (2017) could, in principle, be explained through this
channel, however a closer look suggests that the rise in common ownership incentives tends
to substantially lag their rise in markups.
Second, even though large index funds such as BlackRock and Vanguard have dominated
the public debate on common ownership, much of the historic rise in common ownership
incentives predates them, and is driven not by concentration in asset management but rather
by a broader increase in diversification of investor portfolios. Indeed, the growth of these
firms has an ambiguous relationship to common ownership incentives.
Third, we find a strong relationship between common ownership and retail share. We see this
both in the theory, by decomposing the common ownership profit weights, as well as in the
cross-sectional variation of common ownership weights between firms. A large retail share
tends to inflate common ownership incentives by giving outsized control rights to a small
set of large, diversified institutional investors. In extreme cases, which are becoming more
common, this can even yield profit weights that exceed one. This is a necessary condition
for “tunneling,” and overturns the traditional defense of the “widely held firm,” that in the
absence of a controlling interest, investors are safe from expropriation.
It is important to emphasize that the goal here has not been to explicitly test the common
ownership hypothesis, but rather to articulate its implications in order to better form the
policy debate that is already underway. There is much more work to be done and we believe
that there are two important areas for future research in particular. The first is a forensic

35

question of understanding the mechanisms of corporate governance and the means by which
common ownership incentives are, or are not, manifested. The second is to develop tests to
detect common ownership. The literature so far, including our companion piece, Backus et al.
(2018a), has focused on pricing, however it remains to examine other strategic interactions,
from entry and location decisions to advertising and product development, to understand
the implications of common ownership more fully.

36

References
Anton, M., Ederer, F., Gine, M., and Schmalz, M. C. (2016). Common ownership, competition, and top management incentives. Ross School of Business Paper No. 1328.
Azar, J., Raina, S., and Schmalz, M. C. (2016). Ultimate ownership and bank competition.
Working Paper.
Azar, J., Schmalz, M. C., and Tecu, I. (2018). Anti-competitive effects of common ownership.
Journal of Finance, 73(4), 2018.
Backus, M., Conlon, C., and Sinkinson, M. (2018a). Common ownership and competition
in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Working Paper.
Backus, M., Conlon, C., and Sinkinson, M. (2018b). The common ownership hypothesis:
Theory and evidence. Brookings Working Paper.
Ben-David, I., Franzoni, F., Moussawi, R., and Sedunov, J. (2018). The granular nature of
large institutional investors. Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper Series.
Berle, A. and Means, G. (1932). The Modern Corporation and Private Property. MacMillan.
Bertrand, M., Mehta, P., and Mullainathan, S. (2002). Ferreting out tunneling: An application to indian business groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1]).
Bresnahan, T. F. (1987). Competition and collusion in the american automobile industry:
The 1955 price war. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 35(4):457–482.
Bresnahan, T. F. and Salop, S. C. (1986). Quantifying the competitive effects of production
joint ventures. International Journal of Industrial Organizatoin, 4:155–175.
Conlon, C. and Gortmaker, J. (2018). Best practices for differentiated products demand
estimation with pyblp. Working Paper.
Crawford, G. S., Lee, R. S., Whinston, M. D., and Yurukoglu, A. (2018). The welfare effects
of vertical integration in multichannel television markets. Econometrica.
Cremers, K. J. M. and Petajisto, A. (2009). How active is your fund manager? a new
measure that predicts performance. The Review of Financial Studies, 22(9):3329–3365.
Eaton, J. and Kortum, S. (2002).
70(5):1741–1779.

Technology, geography, and trade.

37

Econometrica,

Eekhout, J. and De Loecker, J. (2017). The rise of markups. Working Paper.
Fichtner, J., Heemskerk, E. M., and Garcia-Bernardo, J. (2017). Hidden power of the big
three? passive index funds, re-concentration of corporate ownership, and new financial
risk. Business and Politics, 19(2):298–326.
Friedman, M. (1953). Essays in Positive Economics, chapter The Methodology of Positive
Economics. University of Chicago Press. (unfinished citation).
Gilje, E., Gormley, T. A., and Levit, D. (2018a). The Rise of Common Ownership.
Gilje, E., Gormley, T. A., and Levit, D. (2018b). Who’s paying attention? measuring common ownership and its impact on managerial incentives. European Corporate Governance
Institute (ECGI) - Finance Working Paper No. 568.
Grullon, G., Larkin, Y., and Michaely, R. (2018). Are u.s. industries becoming more concentrated? forthcoming, Review of Finance.
Gutiérrez, G. and Philippon, T. (2016). Investment-less growth: An empirical investigation.
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Johnson, S., Porta, R. L., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., and Schleifer, A. (2000). Tunneling. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 90(2):22–27.
Kahan, M. and Rock, E. (2008). The hanging chads of corporate voting. The Georgetown
Law Journal, 96.
Lang, L. H. and Stulz, R. M. (1994). Tobin’s q, corporate diversification, and firm performance. Journal of Political Economy, 102(6):1248–1280.
Levy, N. (2018). Equity ownership in vertical relations. Working Paper.
López, A. and Vives, X. (2018). Overlapping ownership, r&d spillovers, and antitrust policy.
Working Paper.
Nevo, A. (2001). Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Econometrica,
69(2):307–342.
O’Brien, D. and Salop, S. (2000). Competitive effects of partial ownership: Financial interest
and corporate control. Antitrust Law Journal, 67(3):559–614.
Porta, R. L., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., and Schleifer, A. (1999). Corporate ownership around
the world. The Journal of Finance, 54(2):471–517.
38

Rotemberg, J. (1984). Financial transactions costs and industrial performance. Working
Paper.
Securities, U. and of Inspector General, E. C. O. (2010). Review of the sec’s section 13(f)
reporting requirements. Report No. 480.
Simonovska, I. and Waugh, M. E. (2014). The elasticity of trade: Estimates and evidence.
Journal of International Economics, 92(1):34–50.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S. and Veldkamp, L. (2010). Information acquisition and underdiversification. The Review of Economic Studies, 77(2):779–805.

Appendices
A

Main Appendix

A.1

Common Ownership and Oligopoly Models

Relationship to Cournot
Much attention in the common ownership literature has been paid to the Modified HerfindahlHirschman Index (MHHI) concentration measure, which is derived from a Cournot oligoopoly
model of competition in O’Brien and Salop (2000).32 MHHI extends the traditional concept
of HHI to incorporate common ownership, and is defined from the following firm objective
function:
max πf (qf , q−f ) +
qf

X

κf g πg (qf , q−f )

g

After taking the FOC (where η represents the elasticity of demand) we get:
1X
Pf − M C f
=
κf g sg
Pf
η g
32

Originally the MHHI was derived by Bresnahan and Salop (1986) in the context of a joint-venture.

39

Which gives the share weighted average markup of:
Pf − M C f
Pf

1 XX
κf g sg sf
η
g
f
f
|
{z
}
M HHI
X
XX
where M HHI =
s2f +
κf g sf sg

X

sf

=

f

f

| {z }

|

HHI

g6=f

{z

}

∆M HHI

Note that many of the papers that regress price on measures of ownership separately include
HHI and ∆M HHI as independent variables. It is important to point out that both measures vary only at the across markets while the incentive terms κf g vary across firms within
a market.
Relationship to Bertrand
The Price Pressure Index (PPI) is similarly defined for differentiated Bertrand competition.
We consider the objective function for firm f when setting the price pj holding fixed the
prices of all other products p−j . As firm f raises the price pj some consumers substitute to
other brands owned by f : k ∈ Jf on which it receives full revenue, and substitute brands
owned by competing firms g: k 0 ∈ Jg for which it acts as if it receives a fraction of the
variable profit κf g :

(pj − mcj )qj (pj , p−j ) +

X

(pk − mck )qk (pj , p−j ) +

X

κf g · 

(pk0 − mck0 )qk0 (pj , p−j ))

k0 ∈Jg

g

k∈Jf


X

∂q

When solving the FOC it is helpful to do two things: (1) divide through by − ∂pjj ; (2) define
the diversion ratio Djk = −

∂qk
∂pj
∂qj
∂pj

, this gives:


pj − mcj = −qj /

∂qj
+
(pk − mck )Djk +
∂pj k∈J
X

f

X
g

κf g · 


X
k0 ∈J

(pk0 − mck0 )Djk0 

(9)

g

This clarifies what common ownership does under differentiated Bertrand competition. It
raises the effective opportunity cost of selling product j. Now as pj rises, some customers
are recaptured by other products controlled by the same firm k ∈ Jf (this is the usual
multiproduct oligopoly effect), also by products controlled by competing (but commonly
owned firms) k 0 ∈ Jg with κf g > 0.

40

A.2

Alternative Similarity Measures

Our primary interest is how overlapping ownership relates to profit weights or cooperation
incentives among firms in the product market. The measure in Rotemberg (1984) or O’Brien
and Salop (2000) is shown in (3’) to be an L2 measure. We could construct alternative
measures of investor overlap, such as an L1 measure.
For example:
1
L1 (βf , βg ) =
2

!
X
s

βf s +

X
s

βgs −

X

|βf s − βgs |

s

P
It is important to point out that s βf s < 1. This is because the set of investors s ∈ S
contains only large institutional investors who provide a 13(f) form to the SEC. We can
P
think about s βf s = 1 − rf where rf represents the retail investor share in firm f . The L1
measure varies from [0, 1]. It is highest if we don’t have any retail investors, yet all investors
hold the same portfolio so that βf s = βgs . Likewise the L1 measure declines as portfolios
become more dissimilar |βf s − βgs | becomes large.

B

B.1

Data Appendix

Data Sources

Our main data source is the universe of 13(f) filings from 1980–2017. The 13(f) form is a
mandatory SEC filing for institutional investors with over 100M USD in assets. We compile
13(f) filings from two sources: for the period 1980–1999, we use the Thompson Reuters s34
database. For 2000-2017, we use our own proprietary dataset, for which we are making the
code publibly available, based on scraped and parsed source documents from the SEC. The
latter dataset is discussed below in Appendix B.2.
For many filings there are multiple filing dates (fdate) for the same report date (rdate). This
happens when filings are amended, often because of an error in the original submission or in
the case of a stock split. For an ordinary revision, e.g. in case of error, we would like to take
the last fdate for each rdate. However, revisions following a stock split are often retroactively
41

applied to report dates prior to the split event itself, and in these cases we want to use the
first filing date. This is a frequent issue in the data.
In order to resolve the problem, we identify the universe of stock splits for all S&P 500 firms
in our sample using the CRSP data CFACSHR multiplier, and from that identify a set of
quarter-firm pairs at which we use the first, rather than the last fdate for duplicate rdate
reports.
In addition, there is a notable exception: in several instances BlackRock holdings appear
to conflate the two dates, and so for BlackRock we use the filing date exclusively. This
resolves the otherwise inexplicable disappearance of BlackRock Inc. from the s34 in 2010q2
and 2010q3.
13(f) filings use investor-reported values and tallies of shares outstanding and these frequently
contain errors, so we use the CRSP monthly database, merged on contemporaneous CUSIP
codes (nCUSIP), to compute these figures.
From CRSP we also obtain historical data on membership in the S&P 500.
From Compustat we obtain additional fields: Aggregate short interest for each member firm
by quarter, and the number of business segments, as reported in the Compustat (North
America) Database. There are two limitations of this data. First, coverage is imperfect. Of
the 1,587 firms that ever appear in the S&P 500 between 1980 and 2017, we lack data on
business segments for 209 of them. Second, the data are self-reported. What constitutes a
“business segment” is an ill-defined notion, and may vary from firm to firm. Moreover, as
suggested by [where’s that citation again], there may be incentives for strategic misreporting
here.

B.2

Alternative Dataset

Given our concerns with the Thomson Reuters dataset, as well as the concerns voiced by
others such as WRDS and Ben-David et al. (2018), we also recreated a dataset of 13(f)
holdings directly from the source filings. This involved gathering approximately 25GB of
13(f) filings from the SEC, for the time period 1999-2017. (Mandatory electronic filing of
13(f) forms began in 1999; for earlier years, coverage is poor.) These files are then parsed
42

to extract holdings of S&P 500 firms. The parsing is handled slightly differently for filings
made before the third quarter of 2013, as starting then, the SEC mandated an XML filing
format. The code is written in Perl and uses regular expressions to match text patterns
corresponding to holdings. The code is freely available from the authors. Note that we do
not claim that every single one of the nearly 19M observations in our scraped and parsed
sample are correct; we have a number of examples of filings that are so irregular as to be
un-parsable. However, we believe this alternative dataset does capture many filings missing
from Thomson Reuters, and is more consistent over time in a number of measures.

B.2.1

Pre-XML Parsing

In these filings (covering January 31, 1999 through June 30, 2013), most reports are fixedwidth tables of holding name, holding CUSIP, value, number of shares, and then a possible
breakout of shares by voting rights. For each file, our code first extracts the reporting date,
filing date, CIK of the filing firm, and form type from the filing header. The code then looks
for any line of text that contains an S&P 500 CUSIP for that form’s reporting period. As
firms on occasion report derivative holdings for a CUSIP, we drop any records that match
any of the following words (case insensitive, with word boundaries on both sides): put, call,
conv bd, conv bond, opt. The code then attempts to match a pattern that is consistent
with most filings: a CUSIP, followed by a value, followed by a number of shares. As filings
are far from uniform, the code also attempts to correct a number of common problems: for
example, in some cases there is no space in between the value and the number of shares; the
code attempts to discern the correct breakdown based on the price and shares outstanding
for that holding in that quarter, as reported by CRSP. The code then outputs a list of share
holdings at the CIK-CUSIP-reporting date level.

B.2.2

XML Parsing

For filings beginning in the third quarter of 2013, our code exploits the XML structure when
parsing for filings. As before, we first extract the reporting date, filing date, CIK of the
filing firm, and form type from the filing header. We then separate the file into “infotable”
XML objects. We keep all such objects that have a CUSIP element that contains an S&P
500 CUSIP for that form’s reporting date. We further drop any records that have a “put”
or “call” element, or a “principal amount” element. We finally drop any where the title of
43

class contains “put” or “call” surrounded by word boundaries, or that begins with “opt”
or “war” (all case insensitive). The code also extracts the reported value from the value
element of the information table, and compares that to the extracted number of shares times
the CRSP-reported price at the reporting date. If the two values differ by less than 10%,
we also include a flag in the output that the data appear valid (we use this when there are
multiple filings per reporting date for a CIK-CUSIP).

B.2.3

Final Cleaning

We take the output of the parsing steps above and obtain a dataset of institutional holdings.
In the case of restated filings, we keep the initial filing unless the reported value and number
of shares appears impossible, in which case we keep the first rational report filed within 90
days of the mandatory reporting date. We consolidate all BlackRock entities into the same
entity and collapse their holdings (while the argument could be made for collapsing other
investment management firms’ sub-entities, we solely do this for BlackRock given the practice
in the literature). Finally, we drop 331 observations where the reported shareholdings are
greater than 50% of shares outstanding. Some of these observations are correct: for example,
Loews Corporation, an S&P 500 component, controlled more than 50% of common stock
of Diamond Offshore Drilling, another S&P 500 component, from 2009-2016. Other records
among these 331 observations appear to be either parsing errors or raw data errors. For
example, in 2014, Guardian Life (CIK: 901849) reported holdings in Noble Corp (CUSIP:
G6543110) of over 144 billion shares valued at $144 billion dollars, while Noble Corp had
a just over 250M shares outstanding and a market capitalization of $5.6B.33 The result is
a dataset of 18,968,596 observations of unique CIK-CUSIP-record date holdings across 75
reporting quarters.

B.2.4

Comparison to Thomson Reuters

We do two primary comparisons against the Thomson Reuters (TR) dataset, followed by
a deep-dive on some particular holdings where the TR dataset seems deficient. First, we
consider the number of 13(f) owners per S&P 500 firm. Second, we consider the number of
33

Guardian’s XML filing is available at:
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/901849/000072857214000014/xslForm13F X01/SepGLIC.xml

44

S&P 500 single-class of share firm that has over 100 owners in the dataset. In both cases we
indicate the TR data with solid lines and our scraped data with dashed lines.
Figure 17 plots the mean, median, 10th percentile, and minimum of the number of owners
of S&P 500 firms over time. Solid lines are the TR data, dashed are the scraped data. As
is clear, there appears to be an issue in the TR data where some firms show few owners, as
evidenced by the ”min” line. In addition, the “10th percentile” line shows that there is a
series of quarters beginning in 2011 where over 10% of S&P 500 firms have very few reported
owners. In contrast, the dashed lines show more consistent patterns in the scraped data.
Figure 17: Owners Per Firm

Notes: This figure depicts statistics of the number of investment managers per issue in the S&P 500 over time. The TR data
uses ”mgrno”, manager number, as a manager while the scraped data uses the SEC’s CIK number for a manager.

Figure 2 presents these data in a different way: for each quarter, it plots the number of singleclass of share firms held by 13(f) managers in the respective datasets, limited to issuances
held by at least 100 investment managers. Note that this should be below 500 as we omit
firms with multiple classes of shares. As is immediately clear, there is an issue with the TR
dataset beginning in 2011. If a firm appears to have very few owners, this directly impacts
κ through the IHHI, as shown in equation 3.
Finally, Appendix Figure 18 does a “deep dive” for three S&P 500 securities around the
2011 window where the TR dataset appears to have deficiencies. The plot shows, in solid
color lines, the percent of shares outstanding reported to be held by 13(f) managers for
three major firms: Alcoa, Xerox, and Coach in the TR dataset. The solid lines show that
45

prior 2011, 13(f) investment firms held between 60% and 90% of these firms. However, in
2011, that falls dramatically to under 10%, before reverting back in 2013 for one of the three
firms. In dashed lines are the percent of shares outstanding found in our scraped and parsed
dataset. The TR data seem unreliable while the scraped data present a reasonable time
series for institutional ownership.
Figure 18: Examples of TR Coverage Issues

Notes: This figure sums the holdings of all 13(f) managers for three firms: Alcoa (permno: 24643, CUSIP: 03965L10), Xerox
(permno: 27983, CUSIP: 98412110), and Coach (permno: 88661, CUSIP: 87603010). TR data series are plotted solid lines, the
authors’ scraped and parsed data in dashed lines.

To summarize the issue with the Thomson Reuters dataset, Appendix Figure 19 shows what
the average computed profit weights (the κ values) would be using the raw Thomson Reuters
data in solid lines, and our new dataset in dashed lines. As is clear, the Thomson Reuters
dataset has coverage deficiencies in several years that result in large swings of the average
κ, even reaching improbably high values starting in 2010.

B.2.5

Airline Sample

Most airlines are not S&P 500 constituents during this time period (one notable exception
is Southwest Airlines). Therefore, we began by assembling a set of CUSIPs for airlines from
CRSP and arrived at a set that consisted of major airlines (excluding foreign and regional).
We were careful to drop any reported holdings after any bankruptcy declaration: there are
many cases of institutional investors continuing to report holdings of non-existent securities.
46

Figure 19: Profit Weight Comparison , TR vs Scraped Data

Notes: Solid line denotes Thomson-Reuters dataset, Dashed line denotes scraped and parsed 13(f) dataset.

We also gather CUSIPs for entities that emerge from bankruptcy, or from mergers. The final
set of airlines consists of: AirTran, Alaska, American, Continental, Delta, Eastern, Hawaiian,
JetBlue, Northwest, Pan Am, Southwest, Spirit, Trans World, United, US Airways, and
Virgin America. Several of these have multiple CUSIPs over this time period. We do not
adjust for insider holdings in this exercise, although in practice this may be a good thing to
do if insider holdings are significant.

B.3

Short Interest

A known limitation of the 13(f) data for calculating institutional ownership is that short
interest is double-counted. When an investor takes a short position they borrow shares from
another investor and sell them, with a promise to repay the shares at a later date. These
shares are then double-counted, reported on form 13(f) by both the initial investor as well
as the investor to whom they are sold. It is for this reason that one can often observe
“institutional ownership,” as reported in online sources, in excess of 100%.
Data on short interest are obtained from the Compustat short interest supplemental dataset.
These data are available at the firm level, not the investor level. Moreover, evidence suggests
that even if we had data at the investor level, it is not clear how we should think about control
47

Figure 20: Coverage of Short Interest Data

Notes: Figure compares the number of firms in the sample against the number of firms for which we observe the level of short
interest in Compustat.

rights. While it seems intuitive that only the actual holder of the stock should cast votes in
corporate governance activities, in practice it seems that both the initial investor as well as
the current holder may end up voting the same shares, see Kahan and Rock (2008).
Appendix Figure 20 characterizes the coverage of the short interest data in our sample,
which improves dramatically after 2004. Appendix Figure 21 documents the degree of short
interest. We see that while short interest in excess of 2% is quite common, short interest in
excess of 20% is quite rare.

48

Figure 21: Short Interest Levels

Notes: Figure shows the distribution of short interest levels over time reported for our sample firms in Compustat.

C

C.1

Additional Tables and Figures

Correlations with Two-Digit SIC Divisions

Here we re-consider Table 3 without firm-level fixed effects, instead including fixed effects
for two-digit SIC divisions. Results are presented in Table 4.
The results concerning investor similarity, market cap, and retail share are similar to our
findings with firm fixed effects. What is new here is the inclusion of SIC division fixed
effects. Though there are statistically distinguishable differences in the mean profit weight
in different industries, they are small (on the order of 0.02 to 0.05) relative to the much larger
changes we observe in the time series and in the variation induced by differences investor
similarity, market cap, and retail share. We also note that, different from Table 3, now
49

Table 4: Correlations with κ, SIC FE
Quarter
Aggregate Investor Similarity

(1)
0.0046∗
(0.0002)
0.6339∗
(0.1101)

β-weighted Investor Similarity
log(Market Cap)
Retail Share
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation and Utilities
Retail Trade
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate
Services
Nonclassifiable

0.0587∗
(0.0041)
0.7060∗
(0.0339)
0.0215
(0.0309)
0.0443∗
(0.0200)
0.0315
(0.0182)
0.0272
(0.0148)
0.0486∗
(0.0172)
0.0452∗
(0.0227)
0.0340∗
(0.0162)
0.0331
(0.0183)
-0.0309
(0.0618)

(2)
0.0031∗
(0.0002)

(3)

(4)

(5)

1.2232∗
(0.0537)
0.0560∗
(0.0037)
0.5677∗
(0.0297)
-0.0069
(0.0294)
0.0462∗
(0.0199)
0.0246
(0.0220)
0.0274
(0.0159)
0.0292
(0.0177)
0.0420
(0.0228)
0.0300
(0.0169)
0.0442∗
(0.0188)
0.0387
(0.0484)

1.2981∗
(0.0575)
0.0588∗
(0.0039)
0.5525∗
(0.0301)
-0.0150
(0.0277)
0.0449∗
(0.0199)
0.0238
(0.0220)
0.0259
(0.0159)
0.0267
(0.0177)
0.0415
(0.0227)
0.0295
(0.0169)
0.0450∗
(0.0187)
0.0301
(0.0481)

1.2974∗
(0.0575)
0.0587∗
(0.0039)
0.5526∗
(0.0300)
-0.0160
(0.0279)
0.0449∗
(0.0199)
0.0232
(0.0220)
0.0257
(0.0159)
0.0265
(0.0178)
0.0419
(0.0226)
0.0293
(0.0169)
0.0450∗
(0.0187)
0.0375
(0.0482)
0.0002
(0.0009)

1.2972∗
(0.0574)
0.0588∗
(0.0039)
0.5510∗
(0.0301)
-0.0168
(0.0276)
0.0464∗
(0.0198)
0.0242
(0.0217)
0.0266
(0.0157)
0.0269
(0.0176)
0.0420
(0.0226)
0.0299
(0.0168)
0.0453∗
(0.0186)
0.0305
(0.0481)

no. Segments
Diversified Firm (2+)

-0.0094
(0.0079)
0.0076
(0.0069)

Highly Diversified Firm (5+)
Firm FE
Quarter FE
R2
N

0.3890
36355363

0.4286
36355363

X
0.4334
36355363

X
0.4335
36353863

X
0.4336
36355363

Notes: This table reports correlates of the common ownership profit weights. An observation is a pair of S&P 500 constituent
firms in a given quarter. The excluded industry is Wholesale Trade. Robust standard errors are clustered at the firm level and
reported in parentheses. * indicates significance at the 5% level.

the correlations with the number of business segments and dummies for being diversified or
highly diversified are identified using the within-division cross-sectional variation. However,
we still find no statistically significant relationship.
50

C.2

Pair-level Fixed Effects

Here we provide additional robustness for the regressions reported in Table 3. We include
λf,g fixed effects for each pair of firms (up to 250, 000 pairs in each period) as well as λt
quarterly fixed effects. This enables us to look within the pair of firms κf,g,t . We examine
only the periods from 2000-2017 so that we can include data on the “Big Three” institutional
investors. As a robustness check, we include the βf,s -weighted measure of how “indexed” a
firm’s investors are in polynomial form.
We report our results in Table 5. As before, we find that retail share and market cap are
positively correlated with κf,g,t . Once we control for investor concentration the correlation
with retail share changes sign. This makes sense as we expected the primary mechanism by
which retail share was associated with κ was through IHHIf measure. As one might expect
1
(by construction).
from (3’), there is a strong positive correlation between κf,g and IHHI
f,t
Also, as investors in f become more “indexed” κf,g is increasing though at a decreasing
rate. Finally, in-so-far as there is a direct relationship with the “Big Three” (or “Big Four”)
institutional investors and κf,g that relationship appears to be negative (though the “Big
Three” investors are also very indexed). This is at least suggestive of the possibility that the
rise of the “Big Three” may not be driving the rise in common ownership incentive terms.

C.3

Tunneling and Specifications of Control

Here we re-create figure 14 under alternative specifications of γ The results are depicted in
Figure 22. While the proportion of pairwise profit weights greater than one is insensitive to
specification from 1980 to the late aughts, it becomes very sensitive in the period following.
This coincides with the rise of the “big three” from Figure 7. If we place more weight on
the holdings of these large firms in constructing control rights, we find substatially greater
incentives for firms to engage in tunneling.

51

Table 5: Correlations with κ 2000-2017: Large Institutional Investors

1
1−retailsharef,t

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.313∗
(0.001)

0.282∗
(0.001)

0.287∗
(0.001)

0.287∗
(0.001)

0.080∗
(0.0003)
0.962∗
(0.004)

0.078∗
(0.0003)
1.198∗
(0.005)

0.078∗
(0.0003)
265.346∗
(1.152)
−66.431∗
(0.659)

−0.537∗
(0.007)
−0.404∗
(0.005)
−0.368∗
(0.016)
−0.635∗
(0.014)

−0.460∗
(0.007)
−0.382∗
(0.005)
−0.291∗
(0.016)
−0.542∗
(0.014)

0.077∗
(0.0003)
265.729∗
(1.153)
−68.826∗
(0.635)
−21.226∗
(0.514)
−0.475∗
(0.007)
−0.392∗
(0.005)
−0.287∗
(0.016)
−0.538∗
(0.014)

−0.174∗
(0.001)
45.313∗
(0.084)
0.029∗
(0.0003)
1.268∗
(0.004)

X
X
17,406,144
0.737

X
X
17,406,144
0.739

X
X
17,406,144
0.739

1
IHHIf,t

log(market capf,t )
Indexingf,t
Indexing2f,t
Indexing3f,t
βf,s,t BlackRock
βf,s,t Fidelity
βf,s,t Vanguard
βf,s,t StateStreet
Firm Pair (f, g) FE
Quarter FE
N
R2
Notes:

∗

X
X
17,406,144
0.736

denotes significant at the 1 percent level.

52

−0.307∗
(0.006)
−0.060∗
(0.004)
−1.230∗
(0.014)
−0.292∗
(0.012)
X
X
17,406,144
0.798

Figure 22: Potential Tunneling Incentives κ > 1, Alternative Control Specifications

Note: This reports the fraction of pairwise profit weights κf,g > 1 in each period under different control assumptions.

53

