                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ON THE DIRECT AND INDIRECT REAL EFFECTS OF CREDIT SUPPLY SHOCKS

                                        Laura Alfaro
                                    Manuel García-Santana
                                    Enrique Moral-Benito

                                      Working Paper 25458
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25458


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




We thank David Weinstein and Mary Amiti for kindly providing their codes and for comments
and suggestions, Stéphane Bonhomme, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Sergio Correia, Julian Di
Giovanni, Marco Di Maggio, Joseph G. Haubrich, Terry O'Malley, Victoria Ivashina, David
Martinez-Miera, Friederike Niepmann, Jose Luis Peydro, Andrew Powell, Sergio Vicente, and
participants in the First CEMFI - Banco de Espana Workshop, the MIT-Sloan seminar, the
Federal Reserve Board seminar, the University of Barcelona seminar, the IADB seminar, the
Kennedy School-LEP brown bag seminar, the UC3M seminar, the University of Groningen
seminar, the Workshop on Financial Intermediation and Risk at the Barcelona GSE Summer
Forum, the 1st Annual Workshop of the ESCB Research Cluster in Athens, the XX Workshop in
International Economics and Finance in Buenos Aires, the III Winter Macroeconomics Workshop
in Bellaterra, the Chicago Financial Institutions Conference, the Society for Economic Dynamics
in Mexico, CEBRA-Frankfurt, and the 26th Finance Forum in Santander. An earlier version of
this paper circulated under the title "Credit Supply Shocks, Network Effects and the Real
Economy". The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Laura Alfaro, Manuel García-Santana, and Enrique Moral-Benito. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Direct and Indirect Real Effects of Credit Supply Shocks
Laura Alfaro, Manuel García-Santana, and Enrique Moral-Benito
NBER Working Paper No. 25458
January 2019
JEL No. E44,G21,L25

                                         ABSTRACT

We consider the real effects of bank lending shocks and how they permeate the economy through
buyer-supplier linkages. We combine administrative data on all firms in Spain with a matched
bank-firm-loan dataset on the universe of corporate loans for 2003-2013 to identify bank-specific
shocks for each year using methods from the matched employer-employee literature. We
construct firm-specific exogenous credit supply shocks and estimate their direct and indirect
effects on real activity using firm-specific measures of upstream and downstream exposure.
Credit supply shocks have sizable direct and downstream propagation effects on investment and
output throughout the period, especially during the 2008-2009 global financial crisis. In terms of
mechanisms, trade credit extended by suppliers and price adjustments play a role in accounting
for downstream propagation of financial shocks.

Laura Alfaro                                    Enrique Moral-Benito
Harvard Business School                         Bank of Spain
Morgan Hall 263                                 Calle de Alcalá, 48,
Soldiers Field                                  28014 Madrid, Spain
Boston, MA 02163                                enrique.moral@gmail.com
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu

Manuel García-Santana
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Departament d'Economia i Empresa
Ramon Trias-Fargas 25-27
Barcelona, 08005
and CEPR
manuel.santana@upf.edu
1                Introduction
In this paper we examine the real effects of the bank lending channel and how bank-lending shocks
permeate the economy through buyer-seller interactions. Propagation through the production chain
may substantially amplify the aggregate impact of bank lending shocks on real activity. We show
that bank credit supply shocks do affect, and indeed permeate the real economy through input and
output relations.
    The Spanish economy witnessed an unprecedented boom-bust cycle over the 2003-2013 period,
both in terms of real activity and credit. The correlation between the growth rate of credit to
non-financial corporations and GDP throughout those different periods is 0.88, which points to
strong feedback effects between both variables.1 Interestingly, a simple look at the cross section of
industries in Spain shows that employment and real output fell the most during the crisis in industries
located downstream in the Spanish production network (see Figure 1). This implies that industries
more dependent on suppliers were hit relatively more by the global financial crisis. Downstream
propagation of the global financial shock rationalizes this negative association.

                                  Figure 1: Downstreamness vs employment and output growth by industry
                 .4




                                                                                         .5
                 .2
        Employment growth




                                                                                         0
                                                                             Output growth
          −.2       0




                                                                                         -.5
                 −.4




                             beta =   −0.48                                                          beta =        -0.72
                            tstat =   −2.24                                                         tstat =         -2.37
                 −.6




                                                                                         -1




                            .3        .4      .5          .6   .7   .8                         .3             .4            .5          .6   .7   .8
                                              Downstreamness                                                                Downstreamness



Notes. Output/Employment growth refers to the change in real value added/employment by industry over the 2006-
2010 period. Downstreamness refers to the downstream position of each industry in the production chain. In particular,
it is computed as the ratio of aggregate final direct use of industry’s output to aggregate use of industry’s output
as an input. Some examples of high downstream industries are Human Health Services (0.75) and Travel Agency,
Tour Operator (0.68). Some examples of low downstream industries are Electricity Services (0.38), Warehousing and
Support Services for Transportation (0.39), and Basic Metals (0.44). See discussion in Alfaro, Antrás, Chor, and
Conconi (Forthcoming).



    We analyze the direct and indirect effects of credit supply shocks on Spanish firms’ employment,
    1
        See Section 2 for details on this correlation and Figure 3.

                                                                         1
output, and investment over the 2003-2013 period. The exercise of quantifying the consequences of
financial shocks on real variables and buyer-supplier (input-output) relations is very demanding. Firm
firm-level data linking credit information to outcome variables (employment, investment, output,
etc.) is required as well as a plausibly exogenous source of variation in credit growth.2 To address
this challenge, we identify bank-year-specific credit supply shocks through differences in credit growth
between banks lending to the same firm as in Amiti and Weinstein (2018).3 Importantly, we illustrate
that the estimated shocks remain very similar when also accounting for bank-firm specific factors as
shown by Amiti and Weinstein (2018).
    We validate our bank-supply-shocks in several ways. First, we divide the sample into healthy
and weak banks ones, as in Bentolila, Jansen, and Jimenez (2018).4 We find that weak banks
experienced stronger supply shocks until 2006 and weaker afterwards. We interpret this evolution as
clear evidence favoring the plausibility of our estimated bank supply shocks. Second, if our identified
bank-specific credit shocks capture meaningful supply factors, a bank that experiences a greater
shock should grant more loans to a given firm, conditional on the firm applying for a loan. Using
loan application information, available in the credit registry dataset, we show this to be the case.
    To estimate the real effects of banks’ credit supply shocks and their propagation through input-
output linkages, we combine the Spanish Input-Output structure and firm-specific measures of down-
stream and upstream exposure. Based on di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Mejean (2018), we measure
whether firms are indirectly affected by the fact that industries in which their suppliers operate are
hit by the shocks (downstream effects). Similarly, we also measure whether firms that sell goods
to industries whose firms are hit by the shocks are indirectly affected (upstream effects). Crucially,
our dataset, which combines administrative data for all firms in Spain with matched bank-firm-loan
information on the universe of corporate loans (Spanish Credit Registry, CIR), replicates to a nearly
complete picture the Spanish economy.
    We find both the direct effects and propagation effects on real variables to be sizable. Our es-

   2
      An important concern in the literature has been identifying plausible exogenous shocks to disentangle the bank
lending-channel (or bank-specific shock) from the firm borrowing-channel (i.e., a firm’s ability, or lack thereof, to
borrow from alternative sources). Firms may be able to undo a particular negative bank supply shock by resorting
to another bank or other sources of funds. Kashyap, Stein, and Wilcox (1993) and Adrian, Colla, and Shin (2012)
find that firms are able to substitute to other forms of credit in the presence of loan supply shocks. Klein, Peek, and
Rosengren (2002) stress the difficulties of substituting loans from one bank with loans from another. Midrigan and
Xu (2014) emphasize the role of self-financing; see Khwaja and Mian (2008), and Jimenez, Mian, Peydro, and Saurina
(2014) for further discussion.
    3
      To be more concrete, we use matched employer-employee techniques that enable us to recover multiple time-
varying firm and bank fixed effects (see Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999)). This approach overcomes limitations
faced by previous work that restricted analysis to smaller samples of firms or particular bank-specific supply shocks,
such as the 2007 liquidity drought in interbank markets.
    4
      Bentolila, Jansen, and Jimenez (2018) define weak banks as those that were bailed out by the Spanish government
as part of the restructuring process during the financial crisis.

                                                          2
timates imply that a one standard deviation increase in firms’ credit supply generates increases of
0.30 pp., 0.10 pp., and 0.80 pp. in the change of employment, output and investment, respectively.
In terms of the indirect effects, our estimates corroborate the importance of downstream propaga-
tion from suppliers to customers in quantifying the real effects of credit shocks. A one standard
deviation increase in our downstream effects measure (how much firms buy inputs from industries in
which credit supply expands) generates increases of 0.30 pp., 0.35 pp., and 0.69 pp. in the change
of employment, output and investment. In contrast, evidence of the importance of the upstream
propagation shock from customers to suppliers is mixed, in terms of both the significance and size
of the effect. Finally, it is worth highlighting that our estimates point to significantly larger effects
around the Global Financial Crisis.
   In order to rationalize the downstream propagation of credit supply shocks we explore the role of
two possible mechanisms, namely, trade credit and price adjustments in general equilibrium. Trade
credit chains provide a channel through which credit shocks can propagate downstream. Affected
suppliers, for example, may reduce the trade credit offered to their customer firms which might then
cut production if they are financially constrained (Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)). Indeed, Costello
(2017) documents that U.S. firms more exposed to a large decline in bank lending during the Global
Financial Crisis reduced substantially the trade credit extended to their customers. In order to
explore this mechanism, we include in our regressions accounts payable (trade credit received from
suppliers) and find that our downstream coefficient decreases in magnitude but remains significant
and quantitatively relevant. We thus conclude that trade credit adjustment plays a significant role
but it is not able to explain our estimated downstream propagation of credit shocks.
   Another possible channel of propagation is through changes in relative prices. A negative credit
shock to a particular supplier/industry may induce an increase in the price of its product affecting
customer decisions (Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012)). If a firm gets hit by a
negative credit supply shock, its relative supply will fall, implying a higher price of the good produced
by this firm in equilibrium. This will imply a higher production cost for this firm’s customers, which
will end up reducing their demand for the good produced by the affected firm and decreasing their
total output. In order to check whether this channel is empirically plausible, we first construct
changes in price indexes between 2007 and 2010 for several Spanish industries and correlate them
with our estimated direct and downstream shocks. As predicted by the standard GE models with IO
linkages, we find that industries that were hit harder by negative direct and indirect shocks suffered
higher increases in their price indexes.
   To further evaluate the extent to which the Spanish production structure may have amplified the
effects of our estimated financial shocks, we quantify the aggregate impact of the price adjustments
channel by using a general equilibrium model with buyer-supplier relations under the presence of

                                                   3
financial frictions, as in Bigio and La’o (2017). The model predicts, for instance, that during the
financial crisis, -0.60 pp. of annual employment growth between 2009 and 2010 was due to a negative
credit supply shock (actual growth was -3.28%), with -0.29 pp. due to direct effects, and -0.31 pp. to
propagation effects. Finally, we use the model to investigate the relative importance of each sector
in accounting for the aggregate effects during the financial crisis period. In particular, we compute
counterfactual economies in which we only shock one industry at a time. Perhaps not surprisingly,
we find that the sector that generates the highest output drop is the real estate sector. Our model
predicts that shocking just the real estate sector would generate an aggregate output loss of 0.24%.
While being particularly hit by the credit supply shock at the time of the crisis, the real estate
is intensively used by other sectors. Indeed, we find that shocking other central sectors, such as
electricity services and wholesale, also generated large output losses.

Related Literature: Our paper contributes to the research that identifies the economic effects of
credit supply shocks by isolating the bank lending channel. Papers in this strand include Khwaja
and Mian (2008), Chodorow-Reich (2014), Jimenez, Mian, Peydro, and Saurina (2014), Greenstone,
Mas, and Nguyen (2015), Cingano, Manaresi, and Sette (2016), and Bentolila, Jansen, and Jimenez
(2018). In relation to this literature, instead of observed supply shocks (e.g., liquidity in Khwaja and
Mian (2008) or Huber (Forthcoming), securitization in Jimenez, Mian, Peydro, and Saurina (2014),
or higher capital requirements in Blattner, Farihan, and Rebelo (2017)), we estimate time-variant
bank credit shocks and study their real effects on employment, output, and investment. Employment
effects, for example, substantially differ during the expansion period and the financial crises.5 We
also contribute to this strand of the literature by considering the propagation of bank lending shocks
through input-output linkages.
    Methodologically, our paper is closest to Amiti and Weinstein (2018). The authors estimate
the direct effect of credit supply on firms’ investment by exploiting a sample of around 150 banks
and 1,600 listed firms in Japan over a 20-year period (1990-2010). By using methods from the
matched employer-employee literature, we are able to estimate year-by-year supply shocks for a
broader sample (more than 200 banks and demand shocks for more than 700,000 firms). As our data
covers the quasi-population of Spanish firms, aggregation bias is less of a concern.6

   5
     Greenstone, Mas, and Nguyen (2015) and Gilchrist, Siemer, and Zakrajsek (2018) find small or no effect of credit
supply shocks during the boom period in the United States. Our analysis, similarly to their work, expands the sample
beyond the Global Financial Crisis while including all firms in the economy, including small and medium-size firms.
Their identifications strategy exploits geographical differences in the origin of business lending- loans (Greenstone,
Mas, and Nguyen (2015)) or mortgages (Gilchrist, Siemer, and Zakrajsek (2018)).
   6
     Amiti and Weinstein (2018) methodology also accounts for general equilibrium constraints such that micro and
macro features of the data are mutually consistent. In particular, aggregation of their estimated bank- and firm-specific
shocks exactly replicates the aggregate evolution of credit (even accounting for new lending relationships).

                                                           4
    In terms of literature on the importance of input-output linkages, Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr
(2016) quantify the propagation effects of different types of supply and demand shocks, relying on
instrumental variables for identification, showing their transmission effects to the aggregate economy
to be of first order importance. Our paper contributes to this literature by investigating the effects
of a well defined shock, that is, firm-level credit supply shocks, and quantify the direct and indirect
effects on other firms through connections in the production network.7 Recent work also investigates
the role of propagation in accounting for the effects of financial shocks. Dewachter, Tielens, and Hove
(2017), using mostly single bank-firm relations in Belgium and exploiting value added information,
analyze the propagation effects of shocks. Demir, Javorcik, Michalski, and Ors (2018) show that
a negative shock to the cost of import financing of liquidity constrained firms gets propagated to
their customers. Giannetti and Saidi (2017) analyze the extent to which the propagation of credit
market shocks depends on the structure of the banking system and the lenders’ share of the loans
outstanding in an industry.
    Turning to the mechanisms explaining propagation of financial shocks through buyer-seller rela-
tions, Costello (2017) documents that firms with greater exposure to a large decline in bank lending
reduced the trade credit extended to their customers resulting in negative effects on their real out-
comes. Trade credit may also explain upstream propagation of financial shocks if debtor (customer)
failure triggers supplier’s losses through both credit losses and demand shrinkage (see for instance
Jacobson and Schedvin (2015)). While we provide evidence in favor of the downstream propagation
mechanism in Costello (2017), it does not explain the whole effect of our estimates.
    Price and quantity adjustments in general equilibrium may also play a role as shown in a series
of recent papers that have investigated the aggregate effects of shocks that propagate through the
economy’s IO network, such as Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012). Our paper
relates to recent work by Bigio and La’o (2017), who quantify the effects of financial shocks in a
general equilibrium model in which industries are connected through the IO network. Instead of
credit spreads, we use credit registry data to identify financial shocks at the firm level. We then
aggregate these shocks at the industry-level to show that industries experiencing negative financial
shocks suffered higher price increases, and use the model to quantify the implied aggregate effects
over time.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3
disentangles the banking-lending channel from the firm-borrowing channel and discusses the empirical
specification. Section 4 presents the direct real effects of the bank lending shocks as well as our

   7
    A series of papers in the literature have exploited natural disasters as exogenous shocks, finding input-output
propagation to account for sizable effects, see Carvalho, Nirei, Saito, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2016), Barrot and Sauvagnat
(2016) and Boehm, Flaaen, and Pandalai-Nayar (2016).

                                                          5
estimates for downstream and upstream propagation effects of the credit shocks. Section 5 explores
the mechanisms rationalizing our main findings and quantifies the aggregate effects of the credit
shocks. Section 6 concludes.


2     Data
We use three data sets: loan-level data on credit in the domestic banking sector from the Cen-
tral Credit Register (CIR) of Banco de España, administrative data on firm-level characteristics
from the Spanish Commercial Registry, and IO tables provided by the INE (“Instituto Nacional de
Estadı́stica”).

Credit Registry The Central Credit Register (CIR), maintained by the Bank of Spain in its role
as primary banking supervisory agency, contains detailed monthly information on all outstanding
loans exceeding 6,000 euros granted to non-financial firms by all banks operating in Spain since 1984.
Given the low reporting threshold, virtually all firms with outstanding bank debt appear in the CIR.
    The CIR identifies the parties involved in each loan, enabling us to match loan-level data from
CIR with administrative data on firm-level characteristics. While the CIR data are available at
the monthly frequency, firm-level characteristics are only available on a yearly basis. Therefore, we
collapse the monthly loan-level data to the annual frequency in order to merge the two datasets. At
the monthly level, each bank-firm relationship is understood as a loan by aggregating all outstanding
loans from each bank-firm-month pair. Annual bank-firm credit exposure is computed as the average
value of monthly loans between bank i and firm j. We end up with a bank-firm-year database
covering 12 years from 2002 to 2013, 235 banks, 1,555,806 firms, and 18,346,144 bank-firm-year pairs
(our so-called loans). Multibank firms represent nearly 75% of bank-firm-year relationships.
    The CIR also contains loan application data. Banks receive borrower information (e.g. total
indebtedness or defaults) from the CIR monthly. Because banks can obtain this information for
any firm that makes a genuine attempt to secure credit, any requested information from a bank
about a given firm can be interpreted as a loan application. Matching the monthly records on loan
applications with the stock of credit enables us to infer whether a loan materialized. If not, either
the bank denied it or the firm obtained funding elsewhere. We use this information in Section 3.1.2
to validate our estimated bank-specific credit shocks.

Quasi-Census Administrative Data For firm-level characteristics, we use administrative data
from the Spanish Commercial Registry, which contains the balance sheets of the universe of Spanish



                                                  6
companies which firms are legally obliged to report.8 Included, among other variables, is information
on: name, fiscal identifier; sector of activity (4-digit NACE Rev. 2 code); 5-digit zip code location;
annual net operating revenue; material expenditures (cost of all raw materials and services purchased
by the firm for the production process); number of employees, labor expenditures (total wage bill
including social security contributions); and total fixed assets.

                       Figure 2: Micro-aggregated output and employment growth

                                              Output growth                                            Employment growth
                        20




                                                                                     20
                        10




                                                                                     10
                        0




                                                                                     0
                        −10




                                                                                     −10



                                     corr = 0.96                                                  corr = 0.94
                        −20




                                                                                     −20




                              2003     2005        2007     2009   2011   2013             2003     2005        2007   2009   2011   2013


                                                          National Accounts                         BdE Micro Dataset




   Our final sample includes balance sheet information for 1,801,955 firms, with an average of 993,876
firms per year. The firm-level database covers 85%-95% of firms in the non-financial market economy
for all size categories in terms of both turnover and number of employees. Moreover, the correlation
between micro-aggregated employment (and output) growth and the National Accounts counterparts
is approximately 0.95 over the 2003-2013 period (see Figure 2). Almunia, Lopez-Rodriguez, and
Moral-Benito (2018) provide an in-depth analysis of this database.

Input-Output Tables We use the Input-Output tables provided by INE and constructed at the
64-industry-level of disaggregation (see Table J.1 for a list of industries). In order to use the most
detailed IO that is available, and because prior year IO tables rely on an industry classification differ-
ent from that used in our firm-level data, we use the IO table provided for the year 2010 throughout


   8
     We combine two databases independently constructed from the Commercial Registry, Central de Balances In-
tegrada (CBI) from the Banco de España and SABI (Spain and Portugal Business Registry). The resulting database,
which includes approximately 1,000,000 firms in each year from 2000 to 2013, is available only to researchers under-
taking projects for the Banco de España.

                                                                                 7
the paper.9 Some examples of industries that are used intensively by many other industries (central
sectors) are Real Estate Services (44), Wholesale (29), Electricity Services (24), Security and In-
vestigation Services; Services to Buildings and Landscape; Office Administrative, Office Support and
Other Business (53) or Basic Metals (15).

Time Coverage To explore whether the real effects of credit supply shocks might vary depending
on the state of the economy, we divide the sample into three sub-periods: 2003-2007 (expansion),
2008-2009 (financial crisis), and 2010-2013 (recession). This division is based on the FRED recession
indicators. We think of 2003-2007 as a boom-expansion era of easy access to credit, 2008-2009 as
a crisis period driven by the collapse of the banking sector during the Global Financial Crisis, and
2010-2013 as the post crisis period of sluggish recovery but still under recession of the Spanish
economy.10
    As mentioned, Figure 3 shows a strong correlation between bank credit and real variables during
these periods. As noted in the introduction, an investigation of the link between credit shocks and
real variables, however, poses several challenges. Crucial steps taken to address these challenges are
discussed in the next sections.


3       Identification Strategy and Empirical Models
In this section, we first estimate bank-specific credit supply shocks by exploiting the richness of our
dataset. We also discuss various ways in which we validate the estimated shocks in 3.1.1 and 3.1.2.
Armed with the identified credit supply shocks, Section 3.2 presents the empirical model considered
to estimate the real effects of credit shocks, both direct and indirect. Note also that Appendices A
and B quantify the impact of bank lending shocks on credit at the loan- and firm-level, respectively.


3.1     Estimating Bank-Specific Credit Supply Shocks
Consider the following decomposition of credit growth between bank i and firm j in year t:

                                            ∆ ln cijt = δit + λjt + ijt                                         (1)

where cijt refers to the yearly average of outstanding credit of firm j with bank i in year t. δit and λjt
can be interpreted as supply and demand shocks, respectively, and δit captures bank-specific effects
    9
      Measured at a higher industry-level of disaggregation, we can show that input-output tables in Spain have
remained quite stable over time.
   10
      Financial crises tend to be characterized by deep recession and slow recovery (Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)). The
evolution of the Spanish economy broadly fits this pattern.

                                                         8
                                Figure 3: Credit and output growth in Spain




                          30




                                                                                                10
                          20




                                                                                                5
                          10




                                                                                                0
                          0




                                    corr = 0.88
                          -10




                                                                                                -5
                           2002q1    2004q1       2006q1   2008q1   2010q1    2012q1   2014q1

                                                   GDP growth         Credit growth



Notes. Credit (on the left-scale) refers to bank credit to non-financial corporations taken from Banco de España and
output (on the right scale) refers to nominal GDP taken from the National Statistics Institute (INE). The shaded area
represents the financial crisis (2008-2009) period.



identified through differences in credit growth between banks lending to the same firm.11
    Imagine one firm and two banks in year t − 1. If the firm’s credit grows more between t − 1
and t with the first bank, we assume credit supply of the first bank to be larger than that of the
second bank. This is because demand factors are held constant by the inclusion of firm-specific effects
(λjt ). This identification strategy resembles that of the bank lending channel by Khwaja and Mian
(2008), but instead of considering observed bank supply shocks (e.g., liquidity shocks), we consider
unobserved shocks estimated by means of bank-specific effects. Finally, ijt captures other shocks to
the bank-firm relationship assumed to be orthogonal to the bank and firm effects. Note that this
identification scheme implies reliance on multi-bank firms, which represent approximately 75% of the
bank-firm-year relationships in our sample.
    We resort to matched employer-employee techniques (see Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999))
in order to estimate the model.12 Given the sparsity of typical matrices involved in the estimation

  11
      Since the credit registry data has a monthly frequency, we could estimate equation (1) with quarterly or even
monthly data. Using annual data allows us to have have more firms per bank and better estimate the bank effects.
However, using quarterly/monthly data, allows to better control for demand shocks because firm effects are allowed
to vary within a year. With this trade-off in mind, we have finally decided to use annual data in order to merge the
estimated effects with the dataset on firm-level characteristics available at a yearly frequency.
   12
      Consistent with the matched employer-employee methods, banks and firms in our data correspond to firms and
workers in typical matched employer-employee panels. Also, for each firm in our data we have the number of banks
as the time dimension in standard matched employer employee datasets.

                                                                9
of high-dimensional fixed effects, the methods used in this literature consider an efficient storage
of these matrices in compressed form so that the “FEiLSDVj” approach —combining fixed-effects
(FE) and the least-squares dummy variable (LSDV)— is feasible with standard computers (see for
instance Cornelissen (2008)).13
    Turning to identification, the bank- and firm-effects are identified only in relative terms within
each group.14 A group is understood to be a set of banks and firms connected such that that the
group contains all firms that have a credit relationship with any of the banks, and all banks that
provide credit to at least one firm in the group. In contrast, a group of banks and firms is not
connected to a second group if no bank in the first group provides credit to any firm in the second
group, nor any firm in the first group has a credit relationship with a bank, in the second group.
In practice, we identify 11 groups in our data using the algorithm in Abowd, Creecy, and Kramarz
(2002). Each group corresponds to a calendar year in our data because all firms and banks are
connected within a year but there are neither banks nor firms connected across years. Therefore,
the estimated shocks depend not only on this bank’s credit supply evolution but also on the credit
supply of the omitted category/bank. In section 5.2, we present a methodology for interpreting the
evolution of the effects. In Appendix C we also discuss an approach that allows identifying a time
varying indicator of aggregate credit supply. This methodology estimates bank-specific time trends
but does not identify bank-year fixed effects required to isolate time-varying credit supply shocks.

3.1.1    Threats to Identification

A concern when using equation (1) is that it does not allow for bank-firm-time interactions. As
noted by Jimenez, Mian, Peydro, and Saurina (2014) and Paravisini, Rappoport, and Schnabl (2017),
these interactions may be relevant in the context of bank-lending specialization. That is, an implicit
assumption in this strategy is that firms’ credit demand is the same for all lenders, and thus firm-
time fixed effects (λjt ) account for demand effects. However, in our case, three points alleviate this
concern.
    First, Amiti and Weinstein (2018) show that the bank-time fixed effects estimated from equation
(1) are identical to those resulting from a specification accounting for bank-firm-time-specific factors
(see Amiti and Weinstein (2018) for a formal proof). As they explain, although bank-firm interac-

  13
      A common approach for estimating the model in (1) is to include the bank effects as dummy variables and
to sweep out the firm effects by the within transformation, typically labeled “FEiLSDVj” because it combines the
fixed-effects (FE) and the least-squares dummy variable (LSDV) methods. The dimension of our dataset contains
24,490,973 bank-firm-year observations and 2,820 bank-years. Assuming that one cell of the data matrix consumes 8
bytes, storing the matrix of bank dummies would consume 552 GB, making the problem computationally intractable.
This is the case when working in high-precision mode in STATA.
   14
      To be more concrete, we fix the omitted category to be BBVA, so that individual bank dummies can be interpreted
relative to BBVA.

                                                         10
tions enable us to understand a particular firm’s demand, bank and firm shocks can be consistently
estimated from equation (1). Intuitively, the effect of bank-firm-year factors is only identifiable if
some component is orthogonal to the bank- and firm-year fixed effects, and this orthogonal variation
is precisely the one identified in our bank-year fixed effects.
   Second, our estimates, as demonstrated in Amiti and Weinstein (2018), remain broadly unaltered
when accounting for idiosyncratic bank-firm-year factors in equation (1), as discussed in Appendix A
for the effects on credit as well as in the robustness section 4.3 for the effects on real outcomes. Along
these lines, specialization in housing by some banks may be a source of concern in the presence of
firm attachment to those banks given the housing boom and bust cycle experienced by the Spanish
economy. However, our findings are robust to the exclusion of construction and real estate firms
from the sample (see also Section 4.3).
   Third, at the frequency of our analysis, the variation in maturity at the bank-firm level in our
data is mostly explained by variation across firms for a given bank (59%) while the variation across
banks for a given firm explains very little (7%) of the total variation. We interpret this pattern as an
indication that firms’ loans characteristics are similar across banks, at least in terms of maturity, so
the assumption of firms’ constant credit demand across banks is not sharply at odds with our data.

3.1.2   Validating the Bank-specific Credit Supply Shocks

We provide further validation of the estimated credit supply shocks. First, in order to assess the
plausibility of the δ̂it estimates, we divide our sample into healthy and weak banks, as in Bentolila,
Jansen, and Jimenez (2018). Figure 4 shows the time evolution of the average difference in credit
supply shocks between healthy and weak banks as identified by the bank dummies (δ̂it ). Weak banks
had higher supply shocks until 2006 and lower ones afterwards, which coincides with the narrative
in Bentolila, Jansen, and Jimenez (2018). We interpret this evolution as clear evidence in favor of
the plausibility of our estimated bank supply shocks.
   We also validate our estimates as follows. If our identified bank-specific credit shocks capture
supply factors, a bank with a larger dummy (δ̂it ) should grant more loans to the same firm. Loan
application data enables us to test this hypothesis. We regress a loan granting dummy on the
estimated bank shocks and a set of firm fixed effects to account for demand factors. As mentioned
above, the identification of our bank-year dummies relied on multi-bank firms. However, the firms
used in this validation exercise cannot have any credit exposure to the banks in the regression used
to estimate the bank-year shocks as otherwise they would not be observed in the loan application
data. The bank-firm pairs exploited in this exercise are thus not used in the identification of the
bank dummies in (1). In particular, for each year from 2003 to 2013, we run the following regression:



                                                   11
                    Figure 4: Average difference in bank supply shocks (weak - healthy)




                               .1
                               .05
                               0
                               −.05
                               −.1




                                      2003    2005      2007        2009     2011       2013



Notes. This plot is based on year-by-year regressions of the estimated bank-level shocks on a constant and a dummy
that takes value of one if the bank is classified as “weak” in Bentolila, Jansen, and Jimenez (2018). For each year, we
plot the coefficient on the weak bank dummy, which estimates the average difference in supply shocks by type of bank
(weak or healthy).




                                             Loan grantedij = γ δ̂i + λj + ij                                      (2)

where Loan grantedij is a dummy variable taking the value 1 if firm j has at least one loan granted by
bank i (conditional on having applied for a loan) and zero if no loans originated from loan applications
from firm j to bank i. δ̂i refers to our estimated bank supply shock for bank i, and λj captures firm-
specific effects to account for demand. The γ parameter captures the effect of credit supply shocks
on the probability of loan acceptance. A positive and significant estimate can be interpreted as
evidence that our bank dummies capture credit supply. Intuitively, a firm applying to two different
banks—with no previous credit relationship with the firm—has a higher probability of securing the
loan from the bank with the larger bank dummy if γ is positive. Figure 5 plots the estimated γ
coefficient for each year. The effect of the bank-specific shocks is positive and significant in all years,
which we interpret as further evidence of the validity of our identified bank supply shocks.
    Following Amiti and Weinstein (2018), we further explore how well our predicted bank’s credit
growth explains the bank’s actual credit growth. Specifically, we compute the R-squared of a regres-
sion of the banks’ actual credit growth (∆ ln cit ) on the bank’s credit growth predicted by our model
(∆ ˆln cit ).15 The R2 for the entire 2003-2013 period is 52%, which indicates that the estimated bank-

  15
       We construct ∆ ˆln cit as a weighted average of the change in credit at the bank-firm (loan) level, where weights

                                                               12
                           Figure 5: Effect of the bank shocks on loan granting




                            .06
                            .04
                            .02
                            0
                            −.02




                                   2003       2005         2007        2009     2011   2013



Notes. This plot is based on year-by-year regressions of the loan granted dummy on the bank-level dummies and
a set of firm fixed effects. The γ parameter plotted estimates the effect of the bank dummies on the probability of
acceptance of a loan request. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level.



and firm-specific effects explains a significant fraction of the variation in bank lending as illustrated
in Figure 6. Note that Figure 6 refers to the intensive margin without including new lending re-
lationships from both credit growth variables, ∆ ln cit and ∆ ˆln cit . Indeed, the R-squared drops to
30% when including the extensive margin in actual credit growth. All in all, the estimated R2 s are
relatively large in both cases.16


3.2     Empirical Specifications
We now discuss the specification used to estimate the real effects of the identified credit supply
shocks. To estimate the effects of the bank lending channel on real outcomes, we match the credit
registry information with annual, firm-level administrative data on different firm characteristics. We
consider the effects of credit supply on firms’ annual employment and output growth as well as
investment as follows:


                                                     Yjt = θδ jt + πXjt + νjt                                  (3)


are computed as the amount ofPcredit extended to firm j by bank i as a fraction of total credit granted by bank i
                                    c
(computed in t − 1): ∆ ˆln cit = j P ijt−1     ˆ               ˆ
                                      cijt−1 ∆ ln cijt where ∆ ln cijt = δ̂it + λ̂jt .
                                          j
  16
     In any case, they are significantly lower than those in Amiti and Weinstein (2018), which are equal to one by
construction.

                                                                  13
                            Figure 6: Explanatory power of our estimated shocks




                                          2
                                          1
                              Actual bank loan growth
                                   −1     −2  0




                                                                                                                 R2 = 0.52
                                          −3




                                                        −3   −2               −1              0              1               2
                                                                  Fixed effects estimate of bank loan growth



Notes. This graph plots the relationship between the bank’s actual credit growth (∆ ln cit ) (y-axis) and that predicted
by our estimates (∆ ˆln cit ) (x-axis). ∆ ˆln cit is constructed as a weighted average of the change in credit at the bank-
firm (loan) level, where weights are computed as the amount of credit extended to firm j by bank i as a fraction of
                                                                    P c
total credit granted by bank i (computed in t − 1): ∆ ˆln cit = j P ijt−1           ˆ               ˆ
                                                                           cijt−1 ∆ ln cijt where ∆ ln cijt = δ̂it + λ̂jt .
                                                                                                 j




where Yjt refers to annual employment growth (in terms of log differences of number of employees),
annual output growth (in terms of log differences of Euros), or investment (capital stock in year t
minus capital stock in year t − 1 as a share of total capital stock in t) of firm j in year t.17 Also, Xjt
represents a vector of firm-specific characteristics including the firm-specific credit demand shocks
(λ̂jt ) as well as size dummies, lagged loan-to-assets ratio, and lagged productivity. Finally, we also
include a set of sector × year dummies.18
    Finally, δ j represents a firm-specific credit supply shock constructed as a weighted average of the
supply shocks estimated for all banks in a relationship with firm j. The weights are given by the
share of credit of each bank with this firm in the previous period:
                                                                           X       c
                                                                  δ jt =          P ij,t−1 δ̂it                                  (4)
                                                                              i     i cij,t−1


    Crucially, firms not directly hit by a credit supply shock may be affected through buyer-supplier
relations. For instance, if a supplier of firm j is hit by a negative credit supply shock, the reaction

   17
      Results considering ∆ ln(1 + Ej ) and (Ej − Ej,−1 )/(0.5 × (Ej + Ej,−1 )) as dependent variables remain unaltered.
These alternative definitions are considered by Bentolila, Jansen, and Jimenez (2018) and Chodorow-Reich (2014),
respectively.
   18
      Note that our main findings remain robust when separately including sector and year fixed effects (to conserve
space these estimates are left unreported).

                                                                                  14
of this supplier may also affect production of firm j. Indeed, the negative association between
employment growth and downstreamness depicted in Figure 1, as mentioned in the introduction,
resembles this pattern.19
    We exploit our firm-level information combined with input-output linkages relations to study the
propagation effects of our identified bank-credit supply shocks. Specifically, following di Giovanni,
Levchenko, and Mejean (2018), we combine firm-specific measures of usage intensity of material
inputs and domestic sales with the sector-level Input-Output matrix, as in Alfaro, Antràs, Chor
and Conconi (2017).20 We use IO relations for Spain for both propagation downstream (i.e., shocks
from suppliers) and upstream (i.e., shocks from customers). In practice, we include two additional
regressors in the empirical model in (3) to capture the indirect effects of credit shocks through
input-output relations.
    Provided credit supply shocks have direct real effects (see below), if a negative credit supply
shock hits firms operating in a given industry, the production in this industry will decrease. Viewed
through the lens of standard general equilibrium models with IO linkages, the fall in production will
be associated with an increase in the price of the directly affected industry. Customer firms will then
be forced to decrease production. DOW Njt,s , a proxy for this effect, measures the indirect shock
received by firm j operating in sector s from its suppliers (downstream propagation). In addition,
when a negative credit supply shock hits firms operating in a given industry, their revenue and, hence,
their demand for intermediate goods, is likely to go down. This will affect their supplier industries,
which will be forced to scale down production. U Pjt,s proxies for this indirect shock received by firm
j operating in sector s from its customers (upstream propagation).
    To be more concrete, we define these proxies as follows:

                                                                  X
                                                     IN
                                        DOW Njt,s = ωjt               IOps ∆jt,p                                  (5)
                                                                  p

                                                           X
                                                      DO
                                           U Pjt,s = ωjt          IOsp ∆jt,p                                      (6)
                                                              p

where s and p index sectors, and firm j belongs to sector s. ∆jt,p is the credit supply shock hitting
sector p computed as a weighted average of firm-specific shocks (δ jt ) using credit exposure as weights.
Note that this shock is firm-specific because firm j is excluded from the computation of sector-specific

  19
      Employment losses during the global financial crisis were larger in those industries more dependent on suppliers
(higher downstreamness). This type of indirect effects of credit supply shocks can operate through different channels,
from purchases/sales of intermediate inputs by the directly hit firms to changes in factor and goods prices.
   20
      di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Mejean (2018) construct proxies for indirect linkages between French firms and
foreign countries inspired by the propagation terms in Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2016). Alfaro, Antràs, Chor, and
Conconi (forthcoming) use input-output linkages to establish upstream and downstream relations.

                                                         15
shocks in the case that s = p. IOps is the domestic direct requirement coefficient of the 2010 Spanish
Input-Output matrix, defined as the share of spending on domestically-produced sector p inputs for
                                  IN
production in sector s. Finally, ωjt refers to total input usage intensity of firm j in year t, defined
                                                                                            DO
as the total material input spending divided by material input spending plus wage bill and ωjt
domestic sales intensity, defined as the domestic market share of firm j’s sales, that is total sales
minus exports divided by total sales.
     Armed with these indirect credit supply shocks, we estimate the following empirical model:


                              Yjt = θδ jt + θD DOW Njt,s + θU U Pjt,s + πXjt + νjt                                   (7)

where all elements are defined as in equations (3), (5), and (6).21


4        Results
In this Section, we first present the baseline results for direct and indirect real effects of credit shocks
(subsection 4.1). Then, we show the estimated effects for different subperiods in subsection 4.2 and
discuss several robustness exercises in subsection 4.3.


4.1      Baseline Estimates
Table 1 presents our baseline estimates for the direct and indirect effects for the 2003-2013 period
on employment growth, output growth, and investment.

Direct Effects: Table 1 (columns (1)-(3)) reports the results of estimating equation (3) for the
2003-2013 sample. Column (1) reports the results using employment changes of firm j in year t as
the left hand side variable Yjt . Columns (2) and (3) use output changes and investment instead.
     We find positive and statistically significant effects of credit supply shocks across all specifications,
and all estimated coefficients are significant at 1%. Our estimated coefficients are also economically
sizable. Let us focus first on discussing the magnitude of the estimated coefficients for employment.
Our estimates from columns (1) imply that a one standard deviation increase in the firm’s credit
supply shock is associated with increases in firm employment growth of around 0.29 percentage
points. These number represents approximately 93% of the average firm-level annual employment


    21
      It is worth highlighting that our main conclusions are robust when (1) separately including sector and year fixed
effects instead of sector × year as in our baseline specification and (2) including the shares of domestic sales (not
interacted) as a control. For the crisis period (2007-09), the estimated direct and indirect downstream effects are 0.477
(se 0.156) and 0.665 (se 0.257) in the former case, and 0.475 (se 0.165) and 0.852 (se 0.490) in the latter.

                                                           16
                          Table 1: Direct and Indirect real effects of credit shocks

                                         Direct                                          Direct + Indirect
                     Employment         Output         Investment         Employment         Output           Investment
                          (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)              (5)               (6)
  Credit Shock         0.292∗∗∗         0.103∗∗∗         0.802∗∗∗           0.284∗∗∗         0.107∗∗∗          0.798∗∗∗
  (s.e.)                (0.097)          (0.030)          (0.069)            (0.098)          (0.029)           (0.075)
  DOWN                                                                      0.301∗∗          0.354∗∗∗          0.690∗∗∗
  (s.e.)                                                                     (0.119)          (0.069)           (0.174)
  UP                                                                          0.061          0.209∗∗∗            0.174
  (s.e.)                                                                     (0.120)          (0.077)           (0.209)
  # obs                4,064,376       3,873,003        3,938,238          3,827,042        3,744,353         3,737,540
  # banks                 216             216              216
  # firms               812,067         779,500          782,872
  R2                     0.050           0.057            0.028              0.053            0.067              0.030
  Sample firms            All             All              All                All              All                All
  Fixed effects      sector × year   sector × year    sector × year      sector × year    sector × year      sector × year

Notes. This table reports the effect of credit supply shocks on employment (columns (1) and (4)), output (columns
(2) and (5)), and investment (columns (3) and (6)) estimated using equation (3) (direct effects, columns (1)-(3)) and
equation (7) (indirect effects, columns (4)-(6)) for the 2003-2013 period. The dependent variables are employment
growth in %, output growth in %, and investment as a share of capital stock. Credit Shock refers to the firm-specific
credit supply shock estimated in equation (4), normalized to have zero mean and unit variance. DOWN and UP
have been constructed according to equations (5) and (6) respectively. All regressions include the following control
variables: firm-specific credit demand shocks (λ̂jt ), size dummies, lagged loan-to-assets ratio, and lagged productivity.
We denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% with ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ , respectively. Standard errors clustered at the main
bank level are reported in parentheses.



growth rate of 0.31% over the 2003-2013 period.22
    With respect to output, the estimated coefficients reported in column (2) implies that a one
standard deviation increase in firm credit supply shock is associated with an average increase in firm
output growth of around 0.10 pp., approximately 20% of the observed firm-level annual value added
growth of 0.5% over the same period.
    When looking at investment, the estimated coefficients reported in column (3) implies that a
one standard deviation increase in firm credit supply shock is associated with an increase in firm
investment of 0.80 pp. This number represents 10% of the average observed investment rate over the
2003-2013 period. Finally, it is worth highlighting that these effects are quantitatively and statisti-
cally significant for small- and medium-sized firms while effects for larger firms are not statistically
significant.23


  22
      Average firm-level annual growth refers to the simple average of the change of a variable as measured in our
final sample of firms for a particular period. These are the variables that we refer to when comparing the size of our
estimates throughout this section.
   23
      Appendix G reports the real effects estimated for firms of different size.

                                                           17
Indirect Effects: We also find strong evidence of the propagation of real effects of firms’ credit
supply shocks (Table 1, columns (4)-(6)). In fact, we find, depending on the specifications, that
the coefficients associated with our measure of downstream propagation, DOW Njt,s , are similar or
larger in magnitude than the estimated coefficients for direct effects. We find mixed evidence for
the case of upstream propagation, U Pjt,s , with our estimated coefficients having different signs and
significance depending on the left hand side variable used.24
   Regarding employment regressions, the estimated coefficients for the direct credit shock and
indirect downstream propagation shock (DOWN ) are similar in magnitude. In particular, these
estimates imply that an increase of one standard deviation in the DOWN variable is associated
with an increase of approximately 0.30 pp. in the change in employment, which compares with the
estimated 0.28 pp. for the direct effect. These numbers represent approximately 96% and 91% of the
actual average annual change in firm-level employment over the same period (0.31%). We find an
insignificant effect for the indirect upstream propagation shock (UP ).
   Turning to output regressions, the coefficients associated with the two indirect propagation shocks
are significant at 1%. In fact, the indirect effects dominate the direct effects in terms of magnitude.
The downstream (upstream) effect is 0.35 (0.21), which is significantly larger than the direct effect
of 0.10 pp.
   Finally, in the case of investment regressions, the indirect downstream shock is significant at the
1% level. As in the employment case, the direct and indirect downstream effects are relatively similar
in magnitude, 0.80 pp. and 0.69 pp. respectively. These effects represent around 10% and 9% of the
actual average investment rate over the period.


4.2     Expansion, Financial Crisis, and Recession
As mentioned above, an advantage of our methodology is that it enables us to estimate year-by-year
supply shocks. We now investigate how the real direct and indirect effects of firms’ credit supply
shocks change with the state of the macroeconomy. To that end, we break down our sample into
three periods. Tables 2 and 3 report our estimated direct and indirect effects for employment, output,
and investment.25

Employment: We find that aggregate economic conditions contribute to the understanding of the
effects of credit supply shocks on employment. For example, the estimated effect is not significant
in the regressions run for the expansion period of 2003-2007, but is positive and significant in the

  24
      Carvalho, Nirei, Saito, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2016) show theoretically that negative upstream propagation effects
are possible under low substitution elasticities between labor and intermediate inputs.
   25
      Note also that Appendix E reports the year-by-year estimates.

                                                        18
regressions run for the financial crisis of 2008-2009.26 In particular, our estimates suggest that an
increase of one standard deviation in the credit supply shock is associated with an increase in the
employment growth rate of 0.5 pp. (column (2)). The average annual change in firm-level employment
for the 2008-2009 period was -2.17%, which implies that the estimated effect represents 18% of the
mean change in absolute value. We also find a significant effect in the regressions run for the recession
period (2010-2013), whose results are reported in column (3). The estimated effect implies that an
increase of one standard deviation in the credit supply shock is associated with an increase in firm’s
employment growth of approximately 0.24 pp. which represents around 10% of the actual change
over the period in absolute value (-2.24%).
    Turning to indirect effects in Table 3, the effects of credit shocks are not significant either when
focusing on the expansion period (2003-2007). Note that the insignificant effect on employment of
the direct shock was present before when not including the indirect shocks (column (1) of Table 2).
In fact, the estimated coefficients for the direct shock are similar across the two specifications (0.251
vs 0.218). For the financial crisis 2008-2009 period, we find the effect of the indirect downstream
propagation shock (DOWN ) to be particularly strong relative to the direct shock (see column (2)
in Table 3). The estimates imply that an increase of one standard deviation in the DOWN variable
is associated with an increase of approximately of 0.69 pp in the change in employment, which
represents close to 27% of the absolute value of the average annual change in employment over the
period (-2.76%). The magnitude of the estimated effect for the direct shock is significantly smaller
at 0.48 pp, which represents approximately 17% of the absolute value of the average annual change.
The effect of the indirect upstream propagation shock remains insignificant. Running the regressions
for the 2010-2013 period, the effect for the DOWN variable is insignificant. Additionally, we find a
negative and marginally significant effect of the upstream propagation shock (UP ) of -0.23 pp.

Output: The effects of credit supply shocks on output are always significant. However, the effect
is particularly strong during the financial crisis of 2008-2009: an increase of one standard deviation
in the shock implies an increase in output growth of 0.15 pp. (column (5)), approximately 9% of the
absolute value of the actual change in output over the period (-1.75%). The estimated effects for
the expansion period (2003-2007) are significantly smaller (0.06 pp.) representing close to 3% of the
actual annual growth over the period (2.12%).
    Turning to the indirect effects in Table 3, we find that the effects of the downstream and upstream
propagation shocks are only strongly significant during the financial crisis 2008-09 period. In partic-
ular, the estimated effects are 0.64 pp. and 0.46 pp, respectively. These two values represent around

    26
       The estimated effect is also not significant when restricting the analysis to multi-bank firms (coefficient of 0.201,
s.e. 0.179) during the expansion.

                                                            19
                              Table 2: Direct real effects of credit shocks by period

                             Employment                             Output                             Investment
                    (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)
                 2003-07      2008-09     2010-13     2003-07       2008-09    2010-13     2003-07      2008-09     2010-13
  Credit Shock     0.251      0.503***    0.243**     0.060**       0.152***   0.109***    0.821***     0.625***    0.711***
  (s.e.)          (0.153)      (0.149)    (0.111)     (0.028)        (0.032)    (0.024)     (0.173)      (0.087)     (0.080)
  # obs          1,823,859     810,335    1,430,182   1,765,665     764,699    1,342,639   1,763,184    783,316     1,391,738
  R2               0.042        0.055       0.035       0.040        0.075       0.042       0.034       0.016        0.011

Notes. This table reports the effect of credit supply on employment, output and investment for the 2003-2007 period
(columns (1), (4), (7)), 2008-2009 (columns (2), (5), (8)), and 2010-2013 (columns (3), (6), (9)) estimated from
equation (3). Dependent variable is employment growth in % in columns (1)-(3); output growth in columns (4)-(6);
and investment in columns (7)-(9). Credit Shock refers to the firm-specific credit supply shock estimated in equation
(4), normalized to have zero mean and unit variance. All regressions include a set of industry × year fixed effects as
well as the following control variables: firm-specific credit demand shocks (λ̂jt ), size dummies, lagged loan-to-assets
ratio, and lagged productivity. We denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% with ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ , respectively. Standard
errors clustered at the main bank level are reported in parentheses.




                             Table 3: Indirect real effects of credit shocks by period

                             Employment                             Output                             Investment
                    (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)
                 2003-07      2008-09     2010-13     2003-07       2008-09    2010-13     2003-07      2008-09     2010-13
  Credit Shock      0.218     0.482***    0.255**     0.069**       0.155***   0.108***    0.845***     0.576***    0.708***
  (s.e.)          (0.151)      (0.156)    (0.111)     (0.027)        (0.031)    (0.020)     (0.177)      (0.101)     (0.085)
  DOWN             -0.077     0.697***     0.129      0.204*        0.646***     0.184       0.266      1.263***      0.110
  (s.e.)          (0.076)      (0.258)    (0.392)     (0.106)        (0.166)    (0.251)     (0.281)      (0.320)     (0.552)
  UP                0.062       -0.187    -0.233*      0.086        0.459***     -0.014     0.403**       0.085       -0.402
  (s.e.)          (0.078)      (0.291)    (0.123)     (0.086)        (0.141)    (0.125)     (0.172)      (0.352)     (0.401)
  # obs          1,727,803     759,170    1,340,069   1,704,934     739,238    1,300,181   1,687,930    739,729     1,309,881
  R2               0.040        0.059       0.036       0.051        0.086       0.049       0.036       0.018        0.012

Notes. This table reports the effect of credit supply on employment, output and investment for the 2003-2007 period
(columns (1), (4), (7)), 2008-2009 (columns (2), (5), (8)), and 2010-2013 (columns (3), (6), (9)) estimated from
equation (7). Dependent variable is employment growth in % in columns (1)-(3); output growth in columns (4)-(6);
and investment in columns (7)-(9). Credit Shock refers to the firm-specific credit supply shock estimated in equation
(4), normalized to have zero mean and unit variance. DOWN and UP have been constructed according to equations
(5) and (6) respectively. All regressions include a set of industry × year fixed effects as well as the following control
variables: firm-specific credit demand shocks (λ̂jt ), size dummies, lagged loan-to-assets ratio, and lagged productivity.
We denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% with ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ , respectively. Standard errors clustered at the main
bank level are reported in parentheses.




                                                               20
36% and 26% of the observed average annual growth rate of -1.75% over the period, in comparison to
an estimated effect of the direct shock of 0.15 pp., which represents approximately 9% of the actual
change.

Investment: Turning to investment, we find that the estimated coefficients are significant at 1%
across all specifications. In terms of magnitude, we find that a one standard deviation increase in
credit supply shock generates an increase in investment rates that varies from 0.6 pp. to 0.8 pp. The
magnitude of the effect varies across the different periods. For the expansion period (2003-2007),
the estimated effect represents approximately 6% of the actual average investment rate of 12.89%
over the period. The estimated effect represents around 12% of the average investment rate of 5.11%
during the financial crisis. During the recession period (2010-2013), the effect more than doubled
the average investment rate of 0.59% observed in the data over the same period.
   When focusing on the indirect effects in Table 3, the downstream effect is stronger than the direct
effect in the financial crisis. The estimated effect for the former is 1.26 pp. which compares to the
0.57 pp. for the latter. These numbers represent approximately 24% and 11% of the observed average
investment rate.

Summary: Over the entire sample period 2003-2013, indirect credit shocks through IO propagation
have a significant effect on the evolution of firm-level employment, output and investment. This
effect is driven by the financial crisis period (2008-2009), where the downstream propagation effect
systematically dominates the direct effect of credit shocks in magnitude. Note also that the difference
in the coefficients estimated for employment and value added for the boom period (2003-2007) and
the financial crisis period (2008-2009) are statistically significant with p-values below 0.1, both for
the direct and the downstream indirect effects. For the case of investment, coefficients are different
only for the downstream indirect effect. However, the differences in the estimates for the financial
crisis (2008-2009) and the recession (2010-2013) are not statistically significant. Finally, evidence of
the importance of the upstream propagation shock is mixed, in terms of both the significance and
size of the effect.


4.3     Robustness Checks
Appendix F reports a battery of exercises that confirm our main findings to be robust along several
dimensions.
   As discussed in Section 3, Amiti and Weinstein (2018) show that the bank-time fixed effects
estimated from equation (1) are identical to those resulting from a specification accounting for bank-
firm-time-specific factor. In Table F.2, we show this to be the case. We first include in equation

                                                  21
(1) the lagged exposure between bank i and firm j in order to account for bank-firm idiosyncratic
factors (see table F.1). As expected from the findings in Amiti and Weinstein (2018), the results are
not affected by inclusion of these bank-firm-specific factors (see Table F.2).
     To further alleviate concerns, we split our sample in two subsamples, one for bank shock es-
timation, the other for the regressions. Concretely, we randomly divide firms’ fiscal IDs into two
subsamples of equal size. Firms used in the identification of the bank credit shocks are thus not
included in the subsequent regressions on real outcomes. The aim of this exercise is to ensure exo-
geneity of the bank shocks with respect to firms’ decisions as relationship lending is fully absent in
these results. This robustness exercise resembles the Bartik (1991) identification strategy popular-
ized by Blanchard and Katz (1992) in which local employment growth is predicted by interacting
local industry employment shares with national industry employment growth rates.27 Analogously,
we combine bank fixed effects identified from a group of firms with the firm-bank shares of a differ-
ent group of firms. Table F.3 in Appendix F shows our baseline results to remain unaltered when
considering these exercises thereby corroborating the exogeneity of our baseline bank credit shocks.
     As an additional robustness, we restrict our sample of multibank firms for bank shock identifica-
tion to those with at least 5 banks per year, to ensure that results are not driven by a handful of firms
whose fixed-effects estimates can be noisy consequent to being identified by too few observations.
Table F.4 illustrates the main conclusions to be robust to this exercise. In Table F.5 we exclude
construction and real estate firms from our sample to ensure that the Spanish boom-bust housing
cycle is not driving our results. In the presence of bank specialization in real estate, construction
firms may turn to specific banks for credit (housing banks) during the boom and to non-housing
banks during the bust. Then, credit demand would also determine our so-called bank supply shocks.
The estimates in Table F.5 indicate that our findings remain present when considering a sample of
non-housing loans (i.e. excluding construction and real estate firms).
     Finally, Appendix G reports the real effects estimated for firms of different size. Overall the main
patterns are quantitatively and statistically significant for small- and medium-size firms while effects
for larger firms are not statistically significant.28


5        Channels
In the previous section, we estimated the direct and indirect relationship between credit supply
shocks and real variables to be statistically significant and economically sizable in particular during
    27
      Indeed, the “China shock” instrument of Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) is also based on the same idea as it
interacts local industry composition with the growth of Chinese imports to European countries.
   28
      Note also that industries that rely on larger number of suppliers are not industries characterized by greater
number of larger firms with the relation between the share of large firms and downstreamnes being flat.

                                                        22
the financial crisis. Firms, conditional on their own credit supply shock, are also affected through
buyer-supplier relations. To be more concrete, we found that credit shocks affect real outcomes of
the firms directly hit and of their customers, i.e. downstream propagation.
   In this section, we consider two different mechanisms that may rationalize these reduced form
findings. On the one hand, liquidity shocks can be propagated in the economy via trade credits
(Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)).
   On the other hand, a negative credit shock to a particular supplier/industry may induce an
increase in the price of its product and thus affect the customers’ optimal decision in general equi-
librium (Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012)). We first show that the trade
credit channel explains part but not the whole downstream propagation effect. We then show some
evidence that is consistent with the price adjustment in general equilibrium and calibrate a model
similar to Bigio and La’o (2017) that allows us to quantify the extent of that channel.


5.1     The Role of Trade Credit

                     Figure 7: Evolution of accounts payable growth (%) over time
                              6
                              3
                              0
                              −3
                              −6
                              −9




                                   2003   2005      2007        2009     2011      2013




Notes. This figure plots the evolution of average growth of accounts payable from our sample of Spanish firms.



   While bank lending generally represents the main source of firms financing, trade credit is also
important. This type of credit is extended by suppliers to their clients in the form of the delay of the
payment for the delivered goods by the supplier. Costello (2017) documents that firms more exposed
to a large decline in bank lending reduced the trade credit extended to their customers resulting
in negative effects on their real outcomes. This mechanism would thus rationalize our estimated



                                                           23
downstream effects.29
    Fortunately enough, we have information on accounts payable from the firms balance-sheet in-
formation in our data. The evolution over time of trade credit received by customer firms from their
supplier firms is precisely measured by this item of the balance-sheet. Figure 7 shows a large drop
in the average growth in accounts payable in 2008, which confirms that the negative bank lending
shock implied by the global financial crisis was indeed reflected in the form of a reduction in extended
trade credit. Also, according to our data, only around 10% of the firms in our sample do not receive
trade credit from their suppliers (zero accounts payable), and the average share of accounts payable
over total credit is 47.6%.
    In order to explore the role of trade credit in explaining our findings on downstream propagation
of credit supply shocks, we include an additional control variable (the growth of accounts payable by
firm j) in our baseline specification from equation (7). The estimated coefficient on the DOW Njt,s
regressor would capture the effect of suppliers credit shock on firm j’s outcomes beyond the trade
credit channel.
    Table 4 shows the results.30 When compared to the baseline estimates, the magnitude of the
downstream propagation in 2008-2009 is significantly lower once we account for trade credit. For
instance, the 1.26 effect for investment is reduced to 0.81 when controlling for the change in accounts
payable (trade credit). Additionally, the effect of accounts payable is always statistically significant
and large, which corroborates the findings in Costello (2017) that trade credit shocks affect real
outcomes of customer firms (buyers).31 However, our estimated effect of the suppliers credit shock
(DOW Njt,s ) is even larger than that of the trade credit effect. Therefore, we conclude that some
additional mechanism must be at work in order to explain the downstream propagation of credit
shocks.


5.2       The Role of Price Adjustments and Propagation in General Equi-
          librium
The recent work by Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012), Acemoglu, Akcigit,
and Kerr (2016), building on earlier work by Long and Plosser (1983), emphasize the role of input-
output linkages in propagating sectoral shocks to the macroeconomy. The intuition is the following:
   29
      Alternatively, trade credit may also explain upstream propagation of financial shocks if debtor (customer) failure
triggers supplier’s losses through both credit losses and demand shrinkage (see for instance Jacobson and Schedvin
(2015)). However, we focus here in downstream propagation because our evidence for upstream effects is rather mixed.
   30
      We focus in the 2008-2009 sub-period because accounts payable are only available for a small subsample of around
10,000 firms in 2003-2007. This is so because firms were not obliged to report this information to the Mercantile
Registries before 2008.
   31
      Costello (2017) scales receivables by total sales and finds an estimated coefficient of -0.003 (s.e. 0.001) compared
to -0.395 (s.e. 0.096) when not considering demand effects.

                                                           24
                                 Table 4: Indirect effects — the role of trade credit

                                     Employment                       Output                         Investment
                                 (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)                (5)            (6)
                              2003-2013     2008-2009         2003-2013    2008-2009          2003-2013      2008-2009
             Bank shock          0.20**         0.39***         0.08***         0.09***         0.61***         0.37***
                                 (0.08)          (0.10)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.06)          (0.07)
             DOWN                0.47*           0.59*          0.41***         0.55***         0.66***         0.81***
                                 (0.24)          (0.34)          (0.11)          (0.17)          (0.17)          (0.22)
             UP                   0.28            0.28            0.14           0.27*            0.14            0.32
                                 (0.30)          (0.42)          (0.12)          (0.14)          (0.32)          (0.36)
             Trade credit       0.33***         0.37***         0.12***         0.22***         0.89***         0.75***
                                 (0.05)          (0.07)          (0.04)          (0.08)          (0.18)          (0.24)
             # obs             1,175,489        225,549        1,149,871        221,186        1,152,278        221,140
             R2                   0.04            0.04            0.06            0.09            0.01            0.01
             Fixed effects   sector × year   sector × year   sector × year   sector × year   sector × year   sector × year

           Notes. All regressions include the following control variables: firm-specific credit demand
           shocks (λ̂jt ), lagged loan-to-assets ratio, and lagged productivity. We denote significance at
           10%, 5% and 1% with ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ , respectively. Standard errors multi-clustered at the
           main bank and sector level are reported in parentheses. Trade credit refers to the growth of
           accounts payable of the firm, i.e., the growth of trade credit received from the firms’ suppliers.
           All regressors are normalized to have zero mean and unit variance.



imagine that a negative supply shock affects an industry producing good i. Its output decreases,
which implies an increase in the price of the good i. Industries that use good i as an intermediate
input now decrease their demand for that good, and as a consequence their production goes down
and their price goes up. This affects industries that use their goods as inputs an so on and so forth.
The total effect to an economy is then the overall direct and indirect effects of the initial negative
supply shock. Our estimates are consistent with this type of propagation.

5.2.1    Price Adjustments

In order to check if this mechanism is at work in our estimates, we construct changes in prices across
different industries between 2007 and 2010 and correlate them with our estimated shocks credit
supply for the year 2007.32 To compute changes in prices, we calculate the growth rate of industrial
price indexes reported by the Spanish National Statistical Institute over that period. We then run
a regression of the computed changes in prices against our direct “credit shock” and the indirect
“downstream shock” as defined in equation (5).
    Figure 8 shows the partial correlations implied from running such regression. The left panel
shows the correlation between the log change in price and the direct shock. The right panel shows
the correlation with the indirect downstream shock. We find that both the direct and indirect shocks
are negatively related to the change in prices. First, the price in a given industry increases when
   32
      Price indexes are provided only for a limited number of industries. In particular, price indexes are not reported
for service industries.

                                                                 25
the industry faces a direct negative shock. Second, the price of that industry also increases when
supplier industries face a negative shock. Notice that these relationships are not robustly statistically
significant, so one has to take them with a grain of salt.

                                                                 Figure 8: Change in industrial price indexes and credit supply shocks
                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                  24                                                                                      5                                               24
                                                                                        4 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
     log change in price index




                                                                                                                                                       log change in price index
                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                                                                                        25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                22
                                                                                              11                                      22                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                             10                                                                                           5                            6        22
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                   16   4 5
                                                                                        15                                                                                                                                             15       19
                                                                        13                                                        6   22                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6                                                        10
                                                                                                        8             19                                                                                                               6                  8          4
                                                                  21          20                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                        12                        6
                                                                             18                                                   6                                                                       5                                 7                       20         12
                                                                                          5                       7                                                                                                                             18                       21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                        14                                            9                                                                                                         14                            17
                                                                                                                                      17
                                 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                   -.1
                                       -.002                           -.001                        0                      .001            .002                                          -.004                    -.002                          0                            .002       .004        .006
                                                                                   estimated direct credit supply shock                                                                                                                estimated indirect credit supply shock
                                        coef = -14.35, (robust) se = 12.73, t = -1.13                                                                                                     coef = -6.19, (robust) se = 8.24, t = -.75




Notes. This figure shows the partial correlation between the log change in industrial price indexes between 2007 and
2010 and our estimated direct and indirect credit supply shocks in 2007. The partial correlation has been computed
from running a regression of the log change in prices against the two types of shocks. The source of the price indexes
is Indice the Precios Industriales, INE.




5.2.2                                    Propagation: Aggregate Effects and Counterfactuals

In order to provide further evidence on the strength of this mechanism, we plug our estimated shocks
into a general equilibrium model that enables us to quantify the aggregate industry- and macro-level
effects of the credit supply shocks estimated above. As already mentioned, we use the model recently
developed by Bigio and La’o (2017), which delivers input-output propagation of shocks that affect
firms’ access to finance (see Appendix H).
    To quantify the aggregate propagation effects through price adjustments in general equilibrium,
we consider a two-step strategy. First, we calibrate the model to the Spanish economy for the year
2003. Second, we discipline the over time changes in the financial friction parameters using our
estimated real effects of credit shocks at the industry level. With respect to the calibration for
2003, we proceed as follows: (i) we take the parameter governing decreasing returns to scale in every
industry and the parameters governing the household labor supply from outside the model; (ii) then
we calibrate the remaining parameters to match important statistics of the Spanish economy (see
Appendix (I) for details).
    The parameters governing the IO structure of the economy are inferred using the Spanish IO direct

                                                                                                                                                  26
requirement matrix. Information provided in this matrix enables us to measure, in each industry,
the expenditure on each intermediate good as a fraction of total expenditure on intermediate goods.
For the “initial” level of financial frictions, that is, financial frictions in 2003, we target the ratio of
industries’ expenditures to revenue. In the model, this is given by the degree of financial frictions
and the parameter governing decreasing returns to scale. Given our predetermined value for the
decreasing returns to scale parameter, we can easily recover the parameter that governs the degree
of financial frictions for each industry. Labor share in each industry is pinned down by matching
the industries’ expenditures in labor as a fraction of total expenses on inputs. Finally, we identify
the different industries’ shares in the household’s utility function by matching the final consumption
expenditure shares measured in the data.
    Turning to the second step, we use our reduced form estimates of the direct real effects of credit
supply shocks to discipline the changes in financial frictions that we plug into the model. We
find values for the parameter governing the financial frictions in each industry (i.e. the parameter
influencing the collateral constraint) such that a horizontal economy version of the model is able to
generate the changes in employment implied by our reduced form estimates of the direct real effects
described below. This is, if there were no indirect effects at work, our economy would deliver the
same effects on employment as the direct effects implied by our reduced form estimates.33
    For instance, we identify the changes in financial frictions (i.e. credit supply shocks) for the year
2004 by employing a horizontal economy version of the model that generates changes in employment
between 2003 and 2004 that correspond to those estimated from our predicted direct real effects.
With new values for the parameters governing financial frictions in 2004, we can proceed in similar
manner for the years 2005-2013.

Aggregate Effects We first analyze the quantitative importance of the propagation effects by
“shocking” all the industries of the economy at once. We use the “estimated” financial frictions
parameters for each year to solve the full economy with IO linkages and thereby quantify the prop-
agation effects of credit supply shocks.
    Figure 9 presents the aggregate effects of our estimated financial shocks on output in the Spanish
economy. The figure contains two panels. In the left panel, we plot the total effect (direct+network )
in output in percentage changes implied by the model against that observed in the data for each
year. We find a strong correlation between the two variables, which is driven by the fact that the
shocks we plug into our model strongly correlate with the real direct effects that we estimate year
by year.
  33
     Instead, Bigio and La’o (2017) proxy financial frictions using sectoral credit spreads (difference in yields between
various corporate (private) debt instruments and government securities of comparable maturity not accounted for by
default risk) from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012).

                                                           27
    The full model accounts for significant fractions of the observed increases in output over the boom
period (2003-2007), although it tends to under-predict the changes.34 For instance, the change in
output predicted by the model is 2.02% between 2005 and 2006, which is around 62% of the 3.23%
observed in the data. This means that even with the network channel at work, the model is not able
to replicate the big increases in output observed in the Spanish economy during the boom.
    For the financial crisis (2008-2009), the model over-estimates the fall in output. For example,
the model (data) predicts a fall in output of -3.18% (-0.39%) between 2008 and 2009. Moreover, for
the recession period (2010-2013), the model predicts negative changes in output, while the changes
are positive in the data. For example, the model (data) predicts a fall in output of -2.16% (0.70%)
between 2010 and 2011. The reason for this is that we are identifying changes in financial frictions
by matching the observed changes in employment, which are negative during this part of the sample.
Hence, and not surprisingly, the model is not able to replicate the fact that output started recovering
earlier than employment in the Spanish economy.
    In the right panel, we plot the direct effect against the network effect, both as implied by the
model. As we can observe, the size of the network effects is significantly larger in magnitude than that
of the direct effect. Following Bigio and La’o (2017), we construct a measure of the importance of the
network propagation effects in our calibration, the network multiplier. In particular, we calculate the
ratio of the total (direct+network ) effects on output to the effects implied by a horizontal (direct).
We find this multiplier to be very stable over the years, and ranging between 4.5 and 5.35

Counterfactuals We now quantify the aggregate effects of shocking one industry at a time. This
exercise allows us to analyze the relative importance of different sectors in accounting for the aggre-
gate effects. We focus on the financial crisis (2008-2009), which is the period in which the estimated
credit supply shocks are largest. Our starting point is the calibrated economy for 2008. We compute
a number of counterfactual economies in which we shock each of the 62 different industries at a time.
We then compare the implied level of output of these economies with that of the 2008 economy. We
decompose this effect into the direct effect and the propagation effect. The right panel of Figure 10
shows the results of this exercise. Each dot represents a different counterfactual economy in which
we only shock the labeled industry. The left panel shows shows the IO direct requirement matrix of
the Spanish economy.
    We find that the shock that generates the largest output loss is the one that affects the Real
  34
      Changes in the data here refer to the change in aggregate real value added as measured in Spanish National
accounts. Notice that these changes are different from those used for the quantification of the reduced form estimates,
which refer to simple average growth rates across the firms present in our sample.
   35
      In their calibration for the US, Bigio and La’o (2017) network multipliers that are smaller, ranging between 1.7
and 2.4. These differences may be due to the different calibration strategies, the use of different parameter values and
differences between the IO structure in the US and Spain.

                                                          28
                                                                        Figure 9: Aggregate effects of credit supply shocks on output




                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2003-2004
                           4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004-2005
                           3




                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                    2003-2004                                                                                                                                                             2006-2007
                                                                                                                                                     2005-2006
                           2




                                                                                                                                                       2004-2005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                            1




                                                                                                                                                    2006-2007




                                                                                                                                                                                         model network effect (%)
     model total effect (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007-2008
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2009-2010
                                                                                                                                                        2007-2008                                                                                                                    2012-2013
              -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2010-2011
                                                                                                2009-2010




                                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                       2012-2013
       -2




                                                                                                            2010-2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008-2009
                           -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                              -3
                                                                                                    2008-2009
                           -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                              -4
                           -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2011-2012




                                                                                                                                                                                                              -5
                                                                                                               2011-2012
                                  -5         -4              -3           -2            -1           0                1            2           3             4                                                        -1.6         -1.4           -1.2             -1       -.8      -.6       -.4              -.2         0         .2    .4
                                                                                      data total effect (%)                                                                                                                                                                   model direct effect (%)




Notes. Left panel of this figure shows the relationship between the total output loss as measured in the data (x-axis)
and that implied by the model. Right panel shows the relationship between the output losses implied by the direct
effects (x-axis) and that implied by the network indirect effects (y-axis), both as measured in the model.


Figure 10: IO structure (left panel) and output losses of isolated industry specific shocks (right panel)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         24    Electricity, etc.
                                  61




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                  56




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   27 Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5   Food products, beverages, etc
                                  51




                                                                                                                                                                         % output loss (propagation effect)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .15
                                  46




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             53 Security serv. 29 Wholesale
        industry using the good

                                  41




                                                                                                                              Real State Services (44)                                                                                                                                                     44
                                  36




                                                                               Wharehousing for transp. (34)                                                                                                                                                                                                 Real State Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Warehousing for transp.
                                  31




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1134
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4           Land transport serv.
                                                                        Construction (27)
                                  26




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              45       31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Telecommunications serv.
                                  21




                                                                                                 Wholesale (29)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                             Basic Metals (15)                                                                                                                                                               15          Coke and refined pretr.
                                  16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             46
                                  11




                                                                   Electricity (24)                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13                                                 Retail trade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             91826                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19
                                  6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17 206                                                            36   Accommodation and food serv.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             737
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             35    1228
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2259
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3338  58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              42
                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             260
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3  52 62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     56
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                57 55 54
                                       1      6         11         16        21        26        31        36        41       46       51          56      61
                                       Ag.         Manufacturing                                                   Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                                   .05                                .1                         .15                      .2
                                                                                   industry producing the good
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        % output loss (direct effect)


Notes. The left panel shows the IO structure of the Spanish economy for the year 2010 (direct requirement matrix).
Element {i, j} represents the amount of euros spent by industry i in goods from industry j as a fraction of gross
output in industry i. A contour plot method is used, showing only those shares greater than 1%, 2%, 5%, 10% and
20%. Source: INE. The right panel shows the output loss due to the direct (x-axis) and propagation effect (y-axis)
between 2008 and 2009 of applying our industry-specific shocks one by one.



Estate (44) sector. The implied output loss is around 0.24%, of which 0.11% is explained by the
direct effect and 0.13% by the propagation effect. There are several reasons why the counterfactual
economy in which we shock only this sector is the one that produces the largest output loss. First,
this sector accounted for a high share of the Spanish economy in 2008 (around 13%). Second, our


                                                                                                                                                                    29
estimated credit supply shock in that year was the highest among all industries. And third, this
sector is one of the most connected to others through the IO network. In particular, it is a sector
whose output is produced intensively by many other sectors.
    Perhaps more interestingly, we find that shocking central sectors in the IO structure of the
economy implies large output losses even if the shocks are not particularly high. Take for instance
the sectors for which the negative direct effect on output is between 0 and 0.5. Across these sectors,
however, there is significant variation in the estimated propagation effects, which translates into
large differences of the implied total output loss. Some examples of sectors in which the propagation
effect is much larger than the direct effect are Electricity,etc (24), Construction (27) and Wholesale
(29). Shocking each of these sectors at a time would imply aggregate output losses of 0.22%, 0.19%
and 0.17% respectively. Out of these total effects, 0.20, 0.18, and 0.14 are accounted for by the
propagation effect. These results show the importance of IO linkages in explaining the aggregate
effects of a credit supply shock to a given industry.


6     Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we study the direct and indirect real effects of the bank lending channel. Using the
quasi-census of firms’ loans and economic activity for Spain and input-output linkages, we analyze
the real effects of bank-lending shocks during the period of 2003-2013. This period allows us to study
firms’ responses to different shocks during times of boom (expansion) and contraction (financial crisis
and recession).
    We bring to this analysis new methods from the matched employer-employee literature, which
accommodate handling large data sets, combined with a methodology that enables analyzing the
evolution of credit shocks over time. Specifically, we construct firm-specific, exogenous credit supply
shocks and estimate their direct effects on firm credit, employment, output, and investment over
a decade. We find sizable effects of credit supply shocks on real outcomes, particularly during the
Global Financial Crisis.
    Combining the Spanish Input-Output structure and firm-specific measures of upstream and down-
stream exposure, we find the estimated bank credit supply shocks to have strong downstream prop-
agation effects, especially during the the Global Financial Crisis. The massive reduction in trade
credit extended by suppliers as well as price adjustments in general equilibrium seem to explain the
downstream propagation of credit shocks.
    Our results show that credit supply shocks affect the real economy through sizable direct and
indirect effects that affect investment and output primarily. Loan, firm, direct, and indirect effects
are quantitatively important during the financial crisis but the impact cannot be generalized to other

                                                  30
episodes. Overall, our results corroborate the importance of network effects in quantifying the real
effects of credit shocks. In terms of the channels, we find evidence which is consistent with both
trade credit and general equilibrium adjustments being quantitatively relevant.




                                                31
References
Abowd, J., J. Creecy, and F. Kramarz (2002): “Computing person and firm effects using
  linked longitudinal employer–employee data,” Technical Report U.S. Census Bureau.

Abowd, J., F. Kramarz, and D. Margolis (1999): “High wage workers and high wage firms,”
  Econometrica, 67, 251–333.

Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, and W. Kerr (2016): Networks and the Macroeconomy: An Em-
  pirical Exploration, vol. 30. NBER Macro Annual 2015.

Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012): “The Net-
  works Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 80(5), 1977–2016.

Adrian, T., P. Colla, and H. S. Shin (2012): “Which Financial Frictions? Parsing the Evidence
  from the Financial Crisis of 2007-09,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 27, 159–214.

Alfaro, L., P. Antrás, D. Chor, and P. Conconi (Forthcoming): “Internalizing Global Value
  Chains: A Firm-Level Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy.

Almunia, M., D. Lopez-Rodriguez, and E. Moral-Benito (2018): “Evaluating the Macro-
  Representativeness of a Firm-Level Database: An Application for the Spanish Economy,” Occa-
  sional Paper Banco de España 1802.

Amiti, M., and D. E. Weinstein (2018): “How Much do Idiosyncratic Bank Shocks Affect In-
  vestment? Evidence from Matched Bank-Firm Loan Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 126(2),
  525–587.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. Hanson (2013): “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects
  of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review, 103(6), 2121–2168.

Baqaee, D. R., and E. Farhi (2016): “The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic Shocks:
  Beyond Hulten’s Theorem,” Working Paper.

Barrot, J.-N., and J. Sauvagnat (2016): “Input Specificity and the Propagation of Idiosyncratic
  Shocks in Production Networks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(3), 1543–1592.

Bartik, T. (1991): “Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?,” W.E.
  Upjohn Institute.

Bentolila, S., M. Jansen, and G. Jimenez (2018): “When Credit Dries up: Job Losses in the
  Great Recession,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 16(3), 650–695.

                                              32
Bigio, S., and J. La’o (2017): “Distortions in Production Networks,” Working Paper.

Blanchard, O., and L. Katz (1992): “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 1, 1–75.

Blattner, L., L. Farihan, and F. Rebelo (2017): “When Losses Turn Into Loans: The Cost
  of Undercapitalized Banks,” Working Paper.

Boehm, C., A. Flaaen, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2016): “The Role of Global Supply Chains
  in the Transmission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake,” Working
  Paper.

Cameron, C., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller (2011): “Robust Inference With Multiway Cluster-
  ing,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29(2), 238–249.

Carvalho, V. M., M. Nirei, Y. U. Saito, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2016): “Supply Chain
  Disruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake,” Working Paper.

Chodorow-Reich, G. (2014): “The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-level
  Evidence from the 2008-9 Financial Crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 1–59.

Cingano, F., F. Manaresi, and E. Sette (2016): “Does credit crunch investments down? New
  evidence on the real effects of the bank-lending channel,” The Review of Financial Studies, 29(10),
  2737–2773.

Cornelissen, T. (2008): “The Stata command felsdvreg to fit a linear model with two high-
  dimensional fixed effects,” Stata Journal, 8, 170–189.

Costello, A. (2017): “Credit Market Disruptions and Liquidity Spillover Effects in the Supply
  Chain,” mimeo.

Demir, B., B. Javorcik, T. K. Michalski, and E. Ors (2018): “Financial Constraints and
  Propagation of Shocks in Production Networks,” Working Paper.

Dewachter, H., J. Tielens, and J. V. Hove (2017): “Credit Supply Shock Propagation and
  Amplification in the Real Economy: Firm–Level Evidence,” Working Paper.

di Giovanni, J., A. Levchenko, and I. Mejean (2018): “The Micro Origins of International
  Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Review, 108, 82–108.

Giannetti, M., and F. Saidi (2017): “Shock Propagation and Banking Structure,” Working
  Paper.

                                                 33
Gilchrist, S., M. Siemer, and E. Zakrajsek (2018): “The Real Effects of Credit Booms and
  Busts,” Working Paper.

Greenstone, M., A. Mas, and H.-L. Nguyen (2015): “Do Credit Market Shocks Affect the
  Real Economy? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Great Recession and ’Normal’ Economic
  Times,” Working Paper.

Huber, K. (Forthcoming): “Disentangling the Effects of a Banking Crisis: Evidence from German
  Firms and Counties,” American Economic Review.

Jacobson, T., and E. Schedvin (2015): “Trade Credit and the Propagation of Corporate Failure:
  An Empirical Analysis,” Econometrica, 83, 1315–1371.

Jimenez, G., A. Mian, J.-L. Peydro, and J. Saurina (2014): “The Real Effects of the Bank
  Lending Channel,” Working Paper.

Kashyap, A. K., J. C. Stein, and D. W. Wilcox (1993): “Monetary Policy and Credit Condi-
  tions: Evidence from the Composition of External Finance,” American Economic Review, 83(1),
  78–98.

Khwaja, A., and A. Mian (2008): “Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from
  an Emerging Market,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1413–1442.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Chains,” Discussion Paper 118, Edinburgh School
  of Economics, 118.

Klein, M. W., J. Peek, and E. S. Rosengren (2002): “Troubled Banks, Impaired Foreign
  Direct Investment: The Role of Relative Access to Credit,” American Economic Review, 92(3).

Long, J., and C. Plosser (1983): “Real Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 91(1).

Midrigan, V., and D. Xu (2014): “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant Level Data,”
  American Economic Review, 2(104), 422–58.

Murphy, K., and R. Topel (1985): “Estimation and Inference in two Step Econometrics Model,”
  Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 3(4), 370–379.

Paravisini, D., V. Rappoport, and P. Schnabl (2017): “Specialization in Bank Lending:
  Evidence from Exporting Firms,” mimeo.

Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoff (2009): This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial
  Folly. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.


                                                34
A       Bank Lending Channel at the Loan-Level
We estimate the magnitude of the so-called bank lending channel at the bank-firm (loan) level.
In particular, quantifying the bank lending channel amounts to estimating the β coefficient in the
following model:
                                            ∆ ln cijt = β δ̂it + ηjt + vijt                                          (8)

where ∆ ln cij refers to the credit growth between bank i and firm j in year t, δ̂it represents the
estimated bank-specific supply shock,36 and ηjt accounts for firm-year demand shocks. The lending
channel corresponds to the parameter β. Crucially, the availability of firms borrowing from different
banks enables us to include in the regression time-varying firm-fixed effects (ηjt ) to control for the
demand side (see Khwaja and Mian (2008)). Bank supply shocks δit are proxied by exogenous changes
in deposits in Khwaja and Mian (2008), or access to securitization in Jimenez, Mian, Peydro, and
Saurina (2014). In our case, we exploit the bank supply shocks estimated above (see section 3.1),
standardized to have zero mean and unit variance. In contrast to previous literature, because we
have estimated bank credit supply shocks for each year,37 we can also estimate the evolution of the
bank lending channel over time.
    Note that equation (8) can only be estimated for the sample of multibank firms given the inclusion
of firm-year fixed effects. However, the availability of time-varying firm fixed effects (λ̂jt ) estimated
in section 3.1 enables us to estimate the bank lending channel parameter in the sample of all firms
as follows:38
                                           ∆ ln cijt = β δ̂it + γ λ̂jt + vijt                                        (9)

    Table A.1 reports the estimates of the bank lending channel at the bank-firm (loan) level. Column
(1) presents the results of estimating equation (8) using the entire period (2003-2013). We find a
positive and significant effect: conditional on firm fixed effects, higher estimated bank shocks imply
higher growth in credit at the bank-firm level. In terms of magnitude, our estimates imply that a
one standard deviation increase in the credit supply shock of bank i generates a 5.1 pp. increase in
credit growth between bank i and firm j. It is worth mentioning that when we re-estimate column
  36
      The shocks are standardized to have zero mean and unit variance in order to ease interpretation and enhance
comparability across specifications (and time periods) of the estimated effects magnitudes. Note that without such
standardization the estimated β should be equal to 1.
   37
      Since our regressor of interest is estimated in a first step, standard errors in equation (8) should be adjusted in
order to account for the sampling error from the first step. However, the adjustment factor in linear models resembles
the traditional sandwich formula that depends on the variance of the estimated parameters in the first step (see
Murphy and Topel (1985)). Give the huge sample sizes we are using in the first step, the correction factor for the
second step tends to have a negligible effect on our second-step inferences because the first-step variance is close to
zero.
   38
      Note that firm-specific shocks are recovered for firms without multiple bank relationships by subtracting the
bank-specific component λ̂jt = ∆ ln cijt − δ̂it .

                                                           35
(1) without firm-specific effects on the same sample of multibank firms, the bank lending channel
is less important, the effect dropping from 5.1 pp. to 4.2 pp. This reduction indicates that banks’
supply and firms’ loan demand shocks are negatively correlated in the cross-section as also found by
Khwaja and Mian (2008).

                  Table A.1: Estimates of the bank lending channel at the loan-level

                                       2003-2013                         2003-2007       2008-2009      2010-2013
                           (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)            (6)
  Credit Shock          5.058∗∗∗        5.218∗∗∗        5.272∗∗∗          5.401∗∗∗        5.320∗∗∗       5.181∗∗∗
  (s.e.)                 (0.088)         (0.037)         (0.025)           (0.021)         (0.062)        (0.063)
  # obs                12,216,375      12,216,375     17,954,745          7,624,590       3,682,414     5,124,886
  # banks                  221             221           221                 209             192           192
  # firms                700,722        700,722       1,511,767           1,183,558       1,049,208     1,019,567
  R2                      0.350           0.349         0.522               0.543           0.503         0.484
  Fixed effects       firm × year          λ̂jt           λ̂jt               λ̂jt            λ̂jt          λ̂jt
  Sample firms         Multibank       Multibank          All                All             All           All
Notes. This table reports the estimates of the bank lending channel parameter at the loan level (β). Column (1) is
based on equation (8) for a sample of multibank firms. Columns (2) are (3) are based on equation (9), controlling
for the firm-year estimated fixed effects. The dependent variable is credit growth between firm j and bank i. Credit
Shock refers to the bank-specific credit supply shock (δ̂it ) estimated in equation (1), normalized to have zero mean
and unit variance. We denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% by ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ , respectively. Standard errors
clustered at the bank level are reported in parentheses.



    Column (2) of Table A.1 repeats the estimation of column (1) but substitutes our firm-year effects
(λ̂jt ) estimated in section 3.1 for the firm-year dummies. As expected, the estimates of the bank
lending channel remain very similar as both approaches are equivalent (see Cingano, Manaresi, and
Sette (2016)). In column (3), we repeat the estimation for the sample including all firms, not only
multibank firms, which is possible because of the availability of firm-specific effects (λ̂jt ) for all firms
in the sample. Finally, columns (4)-(6) show the magnitude of the bank lending channel at the loan-
level to be stable over time. Figure D.1 in Appendix D presents the year-by-year estimates of the
loan-level effect. Finally, all the figures in Table A.1 remain very stable when controlling for bank-
firm idiosyncratic factors in the indentification of bank supply shocks (see discussion in Robustness
Section 4.3 and Table F.1 in the Appendix).


B      Bank Lending Channel at the Firm-Level
The bank lending channel appears to be quantitatively and statistically important given the loan-
level estimates reported in section A. Moreover, the magnitude of the effect is similar for multibank

                                                         36
and single bank firms. However, firms may be able to undo a negative bank supply shock by resorting
to other banks, especially in the case of multibank firms. If this is the case, a large drop in the credit
of a client firm with a bank affected by a negative supply shock would not capture the actual effect of
credit supply on annual credit growth. In order to obtain such an estimate, we consider the following
regression at the firm level:


                                     ∆ ln cjt = β F δ jt + γ F λ̂jt + ujt                            (10)

where δ j represents a firm-specific credit supply shock constructed as a weighted average of the
supply shocks estimated for all banks in a relationship with firm j. The weights are given by the
share of credit of each bank with this firm in the previous period:

                                                   X    c
                                          δ jt =       P ij,t−1 δ̂it                                 (11)
                                                   i     i cij,t−1

   Given this specification, the bank lending channel at the firm-level can be estimated from β F , as
in Khwaja and Mian (2008) and Jimenez, Mian, Peydro, and Saurina (2014). As in the loan-level
case, however, we can obtain time-varying estimates of the bank lending channel.
   We also account for demand shocks at the firm-level. In the case of loan-level data, the inclusion
of firm unobserved heterogeneity is possible due to the circumstance of firms borrowing from different
banks. This approach is no longer possible when using firm-level data. Under these circumstances,
Khwaja and Mian (2008) and Jimenez, Mian, Peydro, and Saurina (2014) take recourse to the
correlation between supply and demand effects implied by differences between the OLS and FE
estimates at the loan-level to correct the biased OLS estimate of β F . In particular, they exploit the
fact that differences between the OLS and FE estimates at the loan-level in equation (8) provide a
quantification of the covariance between δit and ηjt given the formula for omitted variable bias. In
our case, we include, in the firm-level regression, the firm-level demand shocks (λ̂jt ) estimated in
section 3.1 by means of matched employer-employee techniques. Both approaches are equivalent but
including the estimated demand shocks enables us to easily compute appropriate standard errors
(see Cingano, Manaresi, and Sette (2016)).
   Table B.1 reports the estimates of the bank lending channel at the firm-level. The effect is positive
and significant. The magnitude is smaller than that estimated at the loan-level, which indicates that
firms are able to partially offset bank supply shocks. Not surprisingly, multibank firms can better
undo bank shocks: a one standard deviation increase in the credit supply of firm j generates an
overall increase of 3.2 pp. in credit growth (see column (2)), whereas the effect is 1.1 pp. in the case
of multibank firms, as reported in column (1). Turning to the evolution of the bank lending channel
at the firm-level, columns (3)-(5) illustrate that the effect of bank shocks on firm credit growth is

                                                       37
significantly larger during the 2008-2009 financial crisis. In particular, a one standard deviation
increase in credit supply generates a 4.8 pp. increase in credit growth during those years (average
firm credit growth during 2008-2009 was -6.2%), which is significantly larger than the effect during
2003-2007 and 2010-2013. Figure D.1 in Appendix D presents the year-by-year estimates of this
effect. Note also that these estimates are robust to the inclusion of bank-firm controls as well as
the exclusion of construction and real estate firms from the sample (see Section 4.3 for more details
these robustness exercises in the case of real outcomes).
   Interestingly enough, the magnitude of the bank lending channel at the firm-level varies signif-
icantly over the cycle (see Table B.1) while it does not vary at the loan-level (Table A.1). Since
loan-level effects are very similar across the different subperiods, the larger effects at the firm-level
during the financial crisis points to a more limited capacity of firms to substitute credit across banks
during this period. This finding may also be at the root of the larger real effects of credit shocks
during the global financial crisis discussed below.

                   Table B.1: Estimates of the bank lending channel at the firm-level

                                         2003-2013                   2003-2007        2008-2009        2010-2013
                                   (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)             (5)
       Credit Shock             1.158∗∗          3.207∗∗∗             3.414∗∗∗         4.846∗∗∗         2.162∗∗∗
       (s.e.)                   (0.515)           (0.278)              (0.197)          (0.483)          (0.564)
       # obs                  4,424,519         8,743,459            4,122,017         1,920,723       2,700,719
       # banks                   220               220                  208               191             193
       # firms                 924,441          1,481,377            1,183,558         1,049,208       1,019,567
       R2                       0.330             0.501                0.525             0.521           0.412
       Sample firms           Multibank            All                  All               All             All

     Notes. This table reports the estimates of the bank lending channel parameter at the firm level (β F )
     estimated from equation (10). The dependent variable is the credit growth of firm j in year t. Credit Shock
     refers to the firm-specific credit supply shock (δ̂jt ) estimated in equation (4), normalized to have zero mean
     and unit variance. All specifications include a set of firm-year effects (λ̂jt ). We denote significance at 10%,
     5%, and 1% with ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ , respectively. Standard errors clustered at the main bank level are reported
     in parentheses.



   Finally, it is worth mentioning that including firm-year demand shocks in the model has a crucial
effect on the estimates. Re-estimating the model in (10) by OLS without firm-level effects (λ̂jt ), the
2003-2013 estimate of β F drops from 3.2 pp. to 0.7 pp., indicating that banks’ supply and firms’ loan
demand shocks are negatively correlated in the cross-section, as found in the loan-level case.
   In terms of comparisons with the literature, although Jimenez, Mian, Peydro, and Saurina (2014)
find credit supply shocks to have had no significant effects on credit growth at the firm-level between


                                                            38
2004 and 2007, both results are not strictly comparable given differences in the nature of the bank
supply shocks and data sample. On one hand, they analyze supply shocks identified through greater
access to securitization of real estate assets. The sample in Jimenez, Mian, Peydro, and Saurina
(2014) covers loans in excess of e60,000, mainly corresponding to larger multibank firms that may
be better able to undo bank supply shocks by borrowing from other banks as our estimates suggest.


C      A Time-varying Credit Supply Indicator
The aggregate estimates reported in section 3 clearly suggest a positive credit supply shock during
the boom period (2004-2007) and a negative one afterwards. In this appendix, we present an alter-
native approach and estimate a time-varying indicator of credit supply that confirms this pattern.
Intuitively, we use the loan-level data to estimate bank-specific time trends of credit supply after
accounting for demand shocks (i.e., firm fixed effects). The resulting bank-specific time trends can
then be aggregated to construct an aggregate indicator of credit supply over time.
    Consider the following model:

                                       ∆ ln cijt = µjt + ζi + Ki0 × T + ξijq                                        (12)

where ∆ ln cijt refers to credit growth between bank i and firm j in quarter t, Ki0 × T captures a
bank-specific time trend intended to identify the evolution of bank-specific credit supply. For our
baseline quartic trend, we define Ki = (κ1,i , κ2,i , κ3,i , κ4,i )0 and T = (t, t2 , t3 , t4 ). Bank-specific time
trends in credit supply can be estimated as K̂i0 × T .
    The identification of bank-specific credit supply time trends is based on the inclusion of firm-
quarter effects (µjt ) that account for time-varying demand shocks as well as time invariant bank-
specific effects (ζi ) that account for constant heterogeneity in supply factors at the bank level. Note
that we use now quarterly data to get a better identification of the time trends that are now the focus
of our analysis. Matched employer-employee techniques employed above enable to accommodate the
firm-quarter (µjt ) and bank dummies (ζi ). However, the bank-specific time trends also represent
a challenge from a computational perspective given the use of quarterly data, which multiplies by
a factor of four the number of annual observations.39 We therefore restrict the analysis to the 30
largest banks in the sample, which account for 88% of total credit.
  39
     This is because each bank-specific time trend must be stored as an additional set of variables to be included in the
regression. For instance, in the case of a quartic trend, quarterly loan-level data up to 2013 includes approximately
70 million bank-firm-quarter observations. The inclusion of a quartic trend for each bank in the sample implies
that 180 × 4 = 720 variables must be included in the regression in addition to the firm-quarter and bank dummies
handled by the FEiLSDVj approach. This estimation requires around 350 GB of memory which makes the problem
computationally intractable.

                                                           39
                                Figure C.1: Aggregate credit supply over time




                               .05
                               0
                               −.05
                               −.1
                               −.15




                                 2004q1      2006q3          2009q1              2011q3   2014q1

                                                      Quartic trend (30 largest banks)
                                                      Cubic trend (30 largest banks)



Notes. This figure plots the aggregate credit supply indicator that result from averaging the bank-specific trends given
by K̂i0 × T . Quartic and cubic trend are plotted. The value in the first quarter is normalized to 0.



    Figure C.1 plots the indicators of credit supply when considering cubic and quartic time trends.
Interestingly, credit supply in both cases indicate an increase during 2004-2007, and a dramatic
reduction starting in 2008. This pattern fully coincides with our aggregate quantification in section
5.2.2. These exercises illustrate that the type of trend (cubic or quartic) does not alter the aggregate
pattern of credit supply over time.




                                                             40
D      Annual Estimates of the Bank Lending Channel
The left panel in Figure D.1 plots year-by-year estimates of the bank lending channel at the loan-level.
Despite including only multibank firms, our sample consists, on average of 1,632,249 loans in each
year. Therefore, the coefficients are very precisely estimated (note that standard errors are multi-
clustered at the bank and firm level—see Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011)). The magnitude of
the bank lending channel is sizable: an increase of one standard deviation in bank supply generates
an average increase of 5.2 percentage points in the growth of each bank-firm credit (∆ ln cij ). The
highest average bank-firm credit growth is 6.25% in 2007. Moreover, Figure D.1 also points to an
increase in the relevance of the bank lending channel during the crisis.

    Figure D.1: Time-varying estimates of the bank lending channel at the loan- and firm-level
         8




                                                               8
                                                               4
         6




                                                               0
         4
         2




             2003   2005    2007     2009     2011     2013        2003   2005   2007   2009     2011     2013



Notes. The left panel plots the β estimates from year-by-year regressions using equation (8). Standard errors used to
construct the confidence bands are multi-clustered at the bank and firm level. The right panel plots the β F estimates
from year-by-year regressions given by equation (10), which identify the bank lending channel at the firm level.



    The right panel in Figure D.1 plots time-varying estimates of the bank lending channel at the
firm level. In this case, our sample comprises, on average, 870,734 firms per year. The magnitude
of the bank lending channel is still sizable at the firm level: an increase of one standard deviation
in bank supply generates an average increase of 2.6 percentage points in credit growth at the firm
level (∆ ln cj ). The highest firm-level credit growth in our data is 5.9% in 2006, underscoring that
the bank lending channel still operates at the firm level.




                                                          41
E     Annual Estimates of Real Effects
Figure E.1 plots the estimated direct and indirect effects of credit supply shocks on firm growth in
terms of employment (upper panel), output (middle panel), and investment (bottom panel). We find
a positive and statistically significant direct effect of credit supply shocks on employment growth
at the firm level for all years in our sample. However, note that the statistical significance is only
marginal during the years 2004-2007. An increase of one standard deviation in bank supply generates
an average increase of 0.3 percentage points in annual employment growth at the firm level while
annual employment growth in our sample is, on average, 2.9%. These estimates confirm the larger
real effects of the credit channel during the 2008-2009 credit collapse. Downstream effects are only
positive and significant during 2008-2009 as reported in the main text while upstream effects are
statistically indistinguishable from zero in all years. The magnitude of these propagation effects is
larger than that of the direct effects.
    The effects of firm-level credit supply shocks on output growth are positive and statistically
significant on output growth for most years in the sample. A one standard deviation increase in the
credit supply shock generates an average increase of 0.2 pp. in firm output growth, which accounts for
20% of the average output growth of 1.0% observed in the sample. Regarding propagation, there is
a positive and significant downstream effect during 2007-2009. The effects are not significant before
and after that period. In contrast to employment, there is a positive upstream effect during the
global financial crisis.
    The direct effects are larger and always significant in the case of investment, as reported in the
main text. In line with the findings for employment and output, the magnitude of the indirect effects
is also larger than that of the direct effects, but insignificant in the case of upstream propagation.
The estimated downstream effects are larger and more precisely estimated around the global financial
crisis in 2008-2009.




                                                  42
                              Figure E.1: Reduced-form effects of the bank lending channel on firm growth


                                                                                              Employment
                                           Direct                                                    Downstream                                                Upstream




                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                  −1−.5 0 .5 1
         −.20 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                      1
                                                                      −1 0
                            2003   2005   2007   2009   2011   2013                    2003   2005    2007   2009   2011   2013                  2003   2005   2007   2009   2011   2013



                                                                                                     Output
                                           Direct                     −1−.50 .5 11.5                 Downstream                                                Upstream
         −.1 0 .1 .2 .3




                                                                                                                                  −.5 0 .5 1
                            2003   2005   2007   2009   2011   2013                    2003   2005    2007   2009   2011   2013                  2003   2005   2007   2009   2011   2013



                                                                                               Investment
                                           Direct                                                    Downstream                                                Upstream
         1 1.5




                                                                      −4 −2 0 2 4




                                                                                                                                  −2 −1 0 1 2
         .5
         0




                            2003   2005   2007   2009   2011   2013                    2003   2005    2007   2009   2011   2013                  2003   2005   2007   2009   2011   2013




Notes. This figure plots the estimated direct and indirect effects of credit supply shocks from year-by-year regressions.
Specifically the figure plots the effect of a one standard deviation increase in the credit supply shock on annual
employment and output growth as well as investment in percentage points. The estimation samples includes, on
average, 347,913, 340,396 and 339,776 firms in each year. Standard errors used to construct the confidence bands are
multi-clustered at the main bank and industry level.



F      Robustness Checks
The following tables summarize the estimated effects of a series of robustness to the main analysis
considering different samples for identification of the shocks and for estimation of the real effect,
additional controls at the bank-firm-year level, and excluding construction and real estate firms.
The tables report estimates for the entire period (2003-2013) and the financial crisis (2008-2009).




                                                                                                       43
Table F.1: Robustness I — Estimates of the bank lending channel controlling for bank-firm charac-
teristics

                                        2003-2013                       2003-2007     2008-2009    2010-2013
                             (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)           (6)
       Credit Shock        5.341∗∗∗      5.201∗∗∗      5.163∗∗∗         5.225∗∗∗       5.329∗∗∗     5.276∗∗∗
       (s.e.)               (0.122)       (0.102)       (0.083)          (0.098)        (0.107)      (0.081)
       # obs              12,216,375    12,216,375    17,954,745        7,624,590     3,682,414     5,124,886
       # banks                221           221           221              209           192           192
       # firms              700,722      700,722      1,511,767         1,183,558     1,049,208     1,019,567
       R2                    0.353         0.349         0.524            0.542         0.502         0.484
       Fixed effects     firm × year        λ̂jt          λ̂jt             λ̂jt          λ̂jt          λ̂jt
       Sample firms       Multibank     Multibank         All              All           All           All

     Notes. This table reports the estimates of the bank lending channel parameter at the loan level (β)
     controlling for bank-firm idiosyncratic factors (lagged credit exposure) in the identification of the bank
     lending shocks. See notes to Table F.1 in the main text for more details.



G      Results by Firm-Size
The richness of our sample and identified shocks enables us to run our specification from equation
(7) for three size bins: 0-10, 10-500, ≥ 500. Table G.1 reports the regression outcomes. Our main
result from these regressions is that the largest firms do not seem to be affected either directly or
indirectly by the estimated credit supply shocks. In particular, when we run the regression for firms
with more than 500 employees, the coefficients associated to credit supply shocks and downstream
and upstream propagation of these shocks are not statistically significant. This is the case for both
employment growth, output growth, and investment when the direct shock is considered. Turning
to downstream propagation (shock from suppliers), the effect is only significant in the case of output
growth for large firms while it is not significant in the case of employment growth and investment.
Note, however, that the sample for larger firms is substantially smaller.




                                                        44
  Table F.2: Robustness II — Shock identification including bank-firm controls in the regression.

                                          Employment                    Output                  Investment
                                         (1)       (2)              (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
                                      2003-2013 2008-2009        2003-2013 2008-2009       2003-2013 2008-2009
    mean annual growth (%)                0.312       -2.764        0.508       -1.755        7.572        5.111

    Credit Shock coefficient (θ)      0.299***     0.568***      0.106***     0.167***     0.786***     0.632***
    |θ/mean annual growth (%)|             0.96         0.21         0.21         0.10         0.10          0.12

    DOWN coefficient (θD )              0.276**      0.674**     0.408***     0.627***     0.875***     1.239***
    |θD / mean annual growth (%)|          0.88         0.24         0.80         0.36         0.12          0.24

    UP coefficient (θU )                  0.055       -0.178     0.229***     0.447***        0.219        0.094
    |θU /mean annual growth (%)|           0.18         0.06         0.45         0.25         0.03          0.02
  Notes. This table summarizes the estimated effects when including bank-firm controls in the shock identification
  regression. We focus on the estimates for the entire period (2003-2013) and the financial crisis (2008-2009).
  Mean annual growth (%) refers to the average annual growth rate of the variable as measured in the sample of
  firms in a particular period. Credit Shock coefficient (θ), DOWN coefficient (θD ), and UP coefficient (θU ) are
  the estimated coefficients reported in tables ??, ?? and ??. We denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% with ∗ ,
  ∗∗
     , and ∗∗∗ , respectively. |θ/mean annual growth (%)| is the absolute value of the estimated coefficient divided
  by the mean annual growth (%).



Table F.3: Robustness III — Different subsamples for shock identification and real effects estimation

                                          Employment                    Output                  Investment
                                         (1)       (2)              (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
                                      2003-2013 2008-2009        2003-2013 2008-2009       2003-2013 2008-2009
    mean annual growth (%)               0.312        -2.764        0.508       -1.755        7.572        5.111

    Credit Shock coefficient (θ)      0.277**      0.594***      0.115***     0.175***     0.784***     0.617***
    |θ/mean annual growth (%)|            0.89          0.21         0.23         0.10         0.10          0.12

    DOWN coefficient (θD )            0.316**        0.663**     0.344***     0.622***     0.662***     1.230***
    |θD / mean annual growth (%)|         1.01          0.24         0.68         0.35         0.09          0.24

    UP coefficient (θU )                 0.065        -0.186      0.200**     0.458***        0.147        0.084
    |θU /mean annual growth (%)|          0.21          0.07         0.39         0.26         0.02          0.02
  Notes. This table summarizes the estimated effects when considering different samples for identification of the
  shocks and for estimation of the real effects. We focus on the estimates for the entire period (2003-2013) and the
  financial crisis (2008-2009). Mean annual growth (%) refers to the average annual growth rate of the variable
  as measured in the sample of firms in a particular period. Credit Shock coefficient (θ), DOWN coefficient (θD ),
  and UP coefficient (θU ) are the estimated coefficients reported in tables ??, ?? and ??. We denote significance
  at 10%, 5%, and 1% with ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ , respectively. |θ/mean annual growth (%)| is the absolute value of the
  estimated coefficient divided by the mean annual growth (%).



                                                         45
      Table F.4: Robustness IV — Sample of firms working with at least 5 banks per year

                                        Employment                   Output                  Investment
                                       (1)       (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
                                    2003-2013 2008-2009       2003-2013 2008-2009       2003-2013 2008-2009
  mean annual growth (%)                0.312       -2.764        0.508       -1.755       7.572        5.111

  Credit Shock coefficient (θ)          0.143    0.513***     0.124***     0.175***     0.649***     0.587***
  |θ/mean annual growth (%)|             0.46         0.19         0.24         0.10         0.09         0.11

  DOWN coefficient (θD )            0.286***     0.770***     0.197***     0.709***        0.132     1.399***
  |θD / mean annual growth (%)|          0.92         0.28         0.39         0.40         0.02         0.27

  UP coefficient (θU )                  0.059       -0.191        0.097    0.514***        0.131        0.107
  |θU /mean annual growth (%)|           0.19         0.07         0.19         0.29         0.02         0.02
Notes. This table summarizes the estimated effects when restricting the sample to those firms with at least five
banks per year. We focus on the estimates for the entire period (2003-2013) and the financial crisis (2008-2009).
Mean annual growth (%) refers to the average annual growth rate of the variable as measured in our sample of
firms in a particular period. Credit Shock coefficient (θ), DOWN coefficient (θD ), and UP coefficient (θU ) are
the estimated coefficients reported in tables ??, ?? and ??. We denote significance at 10%, 5% and 1% with ∗ ,
∗∗
   and ∗∗∗ , respectively. |θ/mean annual growth (%)| is the absolute value of the estimated coefficient divided
by the mean annual growth (%).



            Table F.5: Robustness V — Excluding construction and real estate firms.

                                        Employment                   Output                  Investment
                                       (1)       (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
                                    2003-2013 2008-2009       2003-2013 2008-2009       2003-2013 2008-2009
  mean annual growth (%)                2.382        1.179        0.686       -0.749       6.764        5.964

  Credit Shock coefficient (θ)      0.306***     0.589***     0.119***     0.207***     0.927***     0.811***
  |θ/mean annual growth (%)|             0.13         0.50         0.17         0.28         0.14         0.14

  DOWN coefficient (θD )              0.308*      0.659**     0.284***     0.454***     0.459***     0.681***
  |θD / mean annual growth (%)|          0.13         0.56         0.41         0.61         0.07         0.11

  UP coefficient (θU )                  0.019       -0.309     0.151**     0.319***        0.144        0.123
  |θU /mean annual growth (%)|           0.01         0.26         0.22         0.43         0.02         0.02
Notes. This table summarizes the estimated effects when excluding construction and real estate firms both in
the shock identification step and the network regressions. We focus on the estimates for the entire period (2003-
2013) and the financial crisis (2008-2009). Mean annual growth (%) refers to the average annual growth rate
of the variable as measured in the sample of firms in a particular period. Credit Shock coefficient (θ), DOWN
coefficient (θD ), and UP coefficient (θU ) are the estimated coefficients reported in tables ??, ?? and ??. We
denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% with ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ , respectively. |θ/mean annual growth (%)| is the
absolute value of the estimated coefficient divided by the mean annual growth (%).



                                                       46
            Table G.1: Real directs and indirect effects of credit shocks by firm size 2008-2009
                                 employment                                              output                                       investment
                      (1)             (2)            (3)                (4)                (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)            (9)
                     0-10           10-500          +500               0-10              10-500          +500            0-10           10-500          +500
 Credit Shock      0.447***         0.638*           1.063           0.065***          0.305***           0.268        0.460***        0.438***           3.106
 (s.e)              (0.133)         (0.319)         (0.894)           (0.013)           (0.049)          (1.247)        (0.098)         (0.148)         (2.807)
 DOWN              1.016***           0.480          -1.028          0.515***          2.183***           4.407        1.497***         0.925**           0.061
 (s.e)              (0.336)         (0.663)         (1.309)           (0.170)           (0.343)          (1.598)        (0.266)         (0.407)         (1.917)
 UP                  0.312           -0.219          1.455            0.328**            0.246            1.834          0.242           0.134           -0.212
 (s.e)              (0.392)         (0.609)         (0.838)           (0.153)           (0.224)          (1.218)        (0.348)         (0.402)         (1.215)
 # obs              289,327          98,522          1,036          279,098              97,389          1,015          280,285          97,939          1,050
 R2                  0.042           0.051           0.058           0.116               0.096            0.10           0.012           0.015           0.013
 Sample firms         All             All             All             All                 All             All             All             All             All
 Fixed effects   sector × year   sector × year   sector × year   sector × year       sector × year   sector × year   sector × year   sector × year   sector × year
Notes. This table reports the direct and indirect effects of credit supply on employment, output, and investment over the 2008-2009
period, estimated using equation (7), for firms of different size. Columns (1), (4), and (7) refer to firms with between 0 and 10 employees.
Columns (2), (5), and (8) refer to firms with between 10 and 500 employees, and columns (3), (6), and (9) to firms with more than 500
employees. Credit Shock refers to the firm-specific credit supply shock estimated in equation (4), normalized to have zero mean and unit
variance. DOW Njt,s measures the indirect shock received by firm j operating in sector s from its suppliers (downstream propagation).
U Pjt,s proxies for the indirect shock received by firm j operating in sector s from its customers (upstream propagation). All regressions
include the following control variables: firm-specific credit demand shocks (λ̂jt ), lagged loan-to-assets ratio, and lagged productivity. We
denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% with ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ , respectively. Standard errors clustered at the main bank level are reported
in parentheses.




H        A Description of Bigio and La’o (2016)
Technology and market structure: There are n industries in the economy. In each of these
industries i = 1, ..., n, there is a representative perfectly competitive firm that has access the following
Cobb-Douglas production function:
                                                                 
                                                                              n
                                                                                            !1−αi ηi
                                                                                     w
                                                                              Y
                                                         yi = liαi                 xijij                                                                   (13)
                                                                              j=1

where yi is the amount of units produced in industry i, xij is the amount of goods produced in industry
j used as inputs by industry i, li is the amount of labor used by industry i, ηi ∈ (0, 1) ∀i governs the
fraction of revenue devoted to cover input expenditures, i.e., labor plus intermediate goods, αi ∈ (0, 1)
∀i determines the share of labor in total input expenditures. Finally, wij determines the share of
intermediate good j in total expenditure in intermediate goods of industry i, with nj=1 wij = 1.
                                                                                  P


Financial constraints We assume the existence of working capital, which implies that firms must
pay wages and the cost of intermediate goods before production takes place. Firms must borrow for
this purpose. Financial markets are subject to some imperfection and thus firms can borrow up to
a fraction χi of their revenue. A firm operating in industry i maximizes its profits subject to:

                                                                     n
                                                                     X
                                                              li +         pj Xij ≤ χi pi yi                                                                 (14)
                                                                     j=1



                                                                                47
Preferences Assume that the economy is populated by a representative household whose prefer-
ences are represented by the following utility function:

                                                     C 1−γ    l1+
                                           u(C, l) =       −                                     (15)
                                                     1−γ 1+
            Qn      vj
                         with vj ∈ (0, 1) and nj=1 vj = 1 is the composite consumption good and l the
                                              P
where C =      i=1 cj
amount of labor supplied by the household, γ ≥ 0 captures the wealth effect on labor supply, whereas
 > 0 captures the inverse of the substitution effect, i.e., the Frisch elasticity.

Firms’ profit maximization A firm operating in industry i solves the following maximization
problem:

                                                                           n
                                                                           X
                                                        
                                           max              pi yi − li −         pj xij
                                          li ,xij ,∀j
                                                                           j=1


                                                                  
                                                                           n
                                                                                         !1−αi ηi
                                                                                   w
                                                                           Y
                                subject to: yi = liαi                           xijij        
                                                                           j=1
                                         n
                                         X
                                  li +         pj xij ≤ χi pi yi
                                         j=1


This problem can be solved in two stages. In the first stage, for a given level of firm’s expenditure
Ei , the firms decides how to allocate this expenditure across the different production factors. The
solution of this problem is given by:



                                                    li = αEi                                          (16)
                                               pj xij = (1 − αi )wij Ei                               (17)

In the second stage, the firm decides the level of expenditure Ei , which must satisfy:

                                                                                            χi
                                Ei = φi ηi Ri                where         φi = min{           , 1}   (18)
                                                                                            ηi
Note that under decreasing returns to scale, the firm would always like to borrow an amount equal
to ηi pi yi = ηi Ri . When ηi ≤ χi , the firm will be able to borrow optimally. However, when ηi > χi ,
the firm will borrow less than optimally.



                                                                  48
Household’s maximization problem The representative household maximizes the following
problem:

                                                          C 1−γ   l1+
                                                     max        −
                                                      C,l 1 − γ   1+

                                                                         n
                                                                                   v
                                                                         Y
                                            subject to: C =                    cj j
                                                                         i=1
                                                     n
                                                     X                                 n
                                                                                       X
                                                           pj cj ≤ wl +                    πi
                                                       j                               i

                                                                         Pn
where wl measures the household’s labor income and                             i   πi the income from firms’ profits. This
problem can also be solved in two stages. In the first stage, given a total amount of consumption of
the composite good, the household minimizes its associated expenditure across the different goods
i. This stage implies an ideal price index for the composite good. Given this price index and the
wage, the household decides how much to spend on total consumption and how much to work. The
solution of this problem is given by:


                                                        cj p j
                                                               = vj                                                   (19)
                                                         p̄C
                                                        C −γ     p̄
                                                            
                                                               =                                                      (20)
                                                          l      w
                         vj
               Qn        pj
where p̄ =        j=1    vj
                                is the ideal price index. Equation (19) implies that the household’s con-
sumption expenditure share on a particular good j is constant and given by the share parameter
j. Equation (20) implies that the marginal rate of substitution of consumption for leisure must be
equal to the ratio of prices.

Equilibrium An equilibrium in this economy is defined as a set of prices {p1 , ..., pn } and allocations
{l1 , ...; ln }, {c1 , ..., cn } and {xi1 , ..., xin }, ∀i, such that:

   1. Firms solve their maximization problem, i.e., equations (16), (17), and (18) are satisfied.

   2. Households solve their optimization problem, i.e., equations (19) and (20) are satisfied.

   3. Markets clear:




                                                               49
                                                   n
                                                   X
                                           yi =          xji + ci          ∀i                       (21)
                                                   j=1
                                                              n
                                                              X
                                                       l=           li     ∀i                       (22)
                                                              i=1


Aggregate effects of financial frictions

                                                              Lη̄
                                     real GDP = z̄ (z) Φ (φ) |{z}                                   (23)
                                                | {z }
                                                          efficiency        labor


where z̄(z)Φ(φ) depends on sectoral productivities and financial frictions, L is the endogenous amount
of labor in the economy, and η̄ is a constant that reflects the decreasing returns in firms’ technology.
Bigio and La’o (2017) refer to the term z̄(z)Φ(φ) as the efficiency wedge and to the term Lη̄ as the
labor wedge.


I    Calibration and Predicted Real Effects
Calibration: Details For our baseline results, we set η = 0.99 for all sectors i. We report results
using a different value for η in the appendix. We further set to some predetermined values the
parameters governing the household labor supply. In particular, following Bigio and La’o (2017), we
set γ = 0 and  = 2.
    We identify the 2003 level of financial frictions for each sector i (φi ) by exploiting the fact that
in the model the ratio of firms’ expenditures to revenue satisfies:
                                              Pn
                                      wli +     j=1    pj xi,j
                                                                 = φi η         ∀i                  (24)
                                              pi y i
Given our assumed value of η and data on sectoral gross output, labor and intermediate goods
expenses measured from the input-output tables, we can obtain a value of φ for each industry. We
identify the labor share in each sector i (αi ) in the production function by exploiting the fact that
in the model firms’ expenditure in labor as a fraction of total expenses in inputs satisfies:

                                                       wl
                                      αi =             Pni                      ∀i                  (25)
                                              wli +       j=1    pj xi,j
    Finally, we identify the industry shares in the Cobb-Douglas consumption aggregator by matching
the final consumption expenditure shares:

                                                         50
                                                p i ci
                                         vi = Pn               ∀i                                  (26)
                                               j=1 pj cj

provided by the IO tables. The parameters governing the IO structure of the economy use the
information provided by the Spanish direct requirement matrix. In particular, with the information
provided in this matrix we can measure, in each industry i, the expenditure on each intermediate
good j as a fraction of total expenditure on intermediate goods:

                                                pj xij
                                       wi,j = Pn               ∀i, j                               (27)
                                               j=1 pj xij


Predicted Direct Effects To estimate the employment effects of credit shocks that are compa-
rable over time, we compute the effects in employment at the firm-level that are predicted by the
direct credit supply shocks and aggregate them to the industry-level. Armed with these direct effects
estimated from the data, we quantify the real effects of the financial shocks over time according to
the calibration strategy described in Section 5.2.2.
   We first estimate the strength of the credit channel at the firm level by regressing employment
firm growth on credit growth instrumented with our firm-specific credit supply shocks:

                                 ∆ ln Ej = φ∆ ln cj + πIV Xj + uj                                  (28)
                                  ∆ ln cj = ψδ j + ΦIV Xj + vj

where ∆ ln cj refers to the credit growth of firm j, δ j is the bank supply shocks at the firm level
defined in equation (4), and Xj are firm level controls. The identification assumption is that bank
credit supply (δ j ) affects firm growth only through its effect on credit. Note that the first stage is
similar to the bank lending channel at the firm level estimated in (10). Moreover, the reduced form
effect in (3) is equal to the bank lending channel multiplied by the pass-through of credit to firm
growth: θ = ψ × φ. We then estimate year-by-year counterfactual employment growth at the firm
level in the absence of credit supply shocks using the estimates from (28). More specifically, we first
estimate the firm-level credit growth due to the bank supply shocks:

                                             ^
                                             ∆ ln cj = ψ̂δ j                                       (29)

                                                     ^
   With the credit growth induced by supply factors (∆ ln cj ), we can estimate the counterfactual
employment growth that would have been observed in the absence of credit supply shocks as follows:

                                     ^
                                     ∆ ln E j = ∆ ln Ej − φ̂∆
                                                            ^ ln cj                                (30)

                                                   51
where Ej refers to employment of firm j, and φ̂ refers to the estimate obtained from (28).
   Firm-specific employment growth measures (both observed and counterfactual) can be aggregated
as follows:
                                                X
                                    ^
                                    ∆ ln E =           ^
                                                    ϕj ∆ ln E j                                  (31)
                                                j
                                                X
                                     ∆ ln E =        ϕj ∆ ln Ej                                  (32)
                                                j


                                                                                 E
where ϕi refers to the employment weight of firm i in the previous year (ϕi =   P i(−1) ).
                                                                                 j Ej(−1)

   We apply this formula at the industry level to obtain sector-specific credit supply shocks in terms
of employment. The estimated effects point to positive credit supply shocks over the 2003-2007 period
for all the 64 (NACE rev2 classification) sectors. In contrast, the shocks appear to be negative in
the 2008-2009 period.




                                                    52
J   List of Industries

                                                Table J.1: List of industries
      Number   Industry
         1     Crop and animal production, hunting and related service activities
         2     Forestry and logging
         3     Fishing and aquaculture
         4     Mining and quarrying
         5     Manufacture of food products, beverages and tobacco products
         6     Manufacture of textiles, wearing apparel and leather products
         7     Manufacture of wood and of products of wood and cork, except furniture
         8     Manufacture of paper and paper products
         9     Printing and reproduction of recorded media
        10     Manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products
        11     Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products
        12     Manufacture of basic pharmaceutical products and pharmaceutical preparations
        13     Manufacture of rubber and plastic products
        14     Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products
        15     Manufacture of basic metals
        16     Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment
        17     Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products
        18     Manufacture of electrical equipment
        19     Manufacture of machinery and equipment n.e.c.
        20     Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers
        21     Manufacture of other transport equipment
        22     Manufacture of furniture; other manufacturing
        23     Repair and installation of machinery and equipment
        24     Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
        25     Water collection, treatment and supply
        26     Sewerage; waste collection, treatment and disposal activities; materials recovery;
        27     Construction
        28     Wholesale and retail trade and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles
        29     Wholesale trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles
        30     Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles
        31     Land transport and transport via pipelines
        32     Water transport
        33     Air transport
        34     Warehousing and support activities for transportation
        35     Postal and courier activities
        36     Accommodation; food and beverage service activities
        37     Publishing activities
        38     Motion picture, video and television programme production, sound recording and music publishing activities
        39     Telecommunications
        40     Computer programming, consultancy and related activities; information service activities
        41     Financial service activities, except insurance and pension funding
        42     Insurance, reinsurance and pension funding, except compulsory social security
        43     Activities auxiliary to financial services and insurance activities
        44     Real estate activities
        45     Legal and accounting activities; activities of head offices; management consultancy activities
        46     Architectural and engineering activities; technical testing and analysis
        47     Scientific research and development
        48     Advertising and market research
        49     Other professional, scientific and technical activities; veterinary activities
        50     Rental and leasing activities
        51     Employment activities
        52     Travel agency, tour operator reservation service and related activities
        53     Security and investigation activities; services to buildings and landscape activities; business support activities
        54     Public administration and defence; compulsory social security
        55     Education
        56     Human health activities
        57     Social work activities
        58     Creative, arts and entertainment activities; libraries, archives, museums and other cultural activities; gambling activities
        59     Sports activities and amusement and recreation activities
        60     Activities of membership organisations
        61     Repair of computers and personal and household goods
        62     Other personal service activities




                                                                     53
