NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HYSTERESIS IN IMPORT PRICES:
THE BEACHHEAD EFFECT

Richard Baldwin

Working Paper No. 2545

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1988

I gratefully acknowledge the coments and suggestions of Paul Krugman, Avinash
Oixit, Gene Grossman, Jeff Sachs, Rob Feenstra, Ron Jones, Alan Stockrnan, Steve
Ambler, Sue Collins, Cathy Mann, Harry Foster, Nils Gottfries, Assar Lindbeck,
Rich Lyons, Jim Levinshon, Alberto Giovannini, and Bill Helkie.
The research reported
here is part of the NBERs research program in International Studies.
Any opinions
are
those
of
the
author
and
not
those
of
the
expressed
National Bureau of Economic
Research. Support from The Andrew 14. Mellon Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.

NBER Working Paper #2545
March 1988

Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead Effect

ABSTRACT
International
economists typically assume that temporary real exchange rate shocks can
have only temporary real effects — and no effect at all on the underlying structure of the
economy. This paper shows that even in a simple "off—the—shelf' industrial orgaxrization model,
this assumption is unfounded; if market—entry costs are sunk, exchange rate shocks can alter
domestic market structure and thereby have lasting real effects. In other words, a sufficiently
large exchange rate shock ran cause hysteresis irs import prices and quantities. This simple idea
has strong implications for exchange rate theory (Baldwin and Krugman 1986 shows this), for

trade policy (Dixit 1987a discusses this), and for the estimation of trade equations as the present
paper shows.
To show that the theoretical point is not just empirically empty theorizing, we present
evidence which suggests that the recent dollar overvaluation is an exaniple of a
hysteresis—inducingshock. To this end we demonstate that the pass—throughrelationship shifted
in

a manner that

is consistent with the nature and timing of

the market structure changes

predicted by the model. In particular, we find evidence that the structural break occurred during
the rising dollar phase rather than in 1985 as is commonly asserted. A direct test of the model is

not performed due to data limitations.

Richard Baldwin
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
(212) 280—3491

INTRODUCTION
International economists typically assume that temporary real exchange rate shocks can
have only temporary real effects— and no effect at all on the underlying structure of the
economy. For instance, in the well—known Dornbusch (1976) overshooting model, a one time
money stock !ncrease leads to a temporary real depreciation. However, in the long run the shock
is assumed

to be neutral, i.e., to have no real effects. In the empirical trade literature,

researchers implicitly assume that their trade volume and price equations are stable through
time.

In particular, they

ignore the possibility that exchange rate shocks might themselves cause

structural breaks in the equations.
This paper shows that, even in a simple 'oft—the--shelf" industrial organization model, this
assumption is unfounded; if market—entry costs are sunk, exchange rate shocks can alter
domestic market structureand thereby have persistent real effects. In other words large,
temporary exchange rate shocks may result in hysteresis in import prices and quantities.1 This
simple idea has strong implications for exchange rate theory (Baldwin and Krugman 1986 shows

this), for trade policy (Dixit 1987a discusses this), and for the estimation of trade equations as
the present paper shows.

to show that the theoretical point is not just empirically empty theorizing, this
paper presents evidence which suggests that the recent dollar overvaluation is an example of a
Moreover,

hysteresis—inducing shock. The real US dollar exchange rate (based on wholesale price data) rose

about 20 percent in the 18 quarters leading up to 1985:1, and fell almost as much in the
subsequent ten quarters, This dollar cycle has had rather puzzling effects on import prices. The
appreciation lowered real import prices, and the depreciation has partially forced them back up.
However since the early 1980s, import prices appear to have been below the level predicted by
the historical relationship. This paper formally shows that the pass—through relationship (of real
exchange

rates to real import prices) has indeed shifted in the 198, and that the nature and

timing of the shift is consistent with the market structure changes predicted by the model. A
direct test of the model is not performed due to data limitations.
The notion that large exchange rate changes have a qualitatively different impact on trade

2

than do small changes is not novel. Orcutt (19.50) conjectures that large price changes have a

quantum effect on import volume. Krugman (1986) conjectures that the strong dollar induced
hysteresis in the US trade balance due to dynamic economies of scale.
A preliminary draft of this paper, Baldwin (1986), presents three versions

of a model (the

beachhead model) which display hysteresis in import quantities. The present paper extends the
latter by allowing for an infinite horizon,

a more general demand structure, and the presence

of

home firms. Moreover, it shows that hysteresis can occur in import prices, as well as quantities.
A number of papers have extended the original beachhead framework. Baldwin and

Krugman (1986) allows for a stochastic exchange rate process, and more importantly shows that
hysteresis in imports leads to hysteresis in the equilibrium exchange rate, Dixit (1987a, 1987b)
uses a related setup to show that quantity hysteresiscan occur when the exchange rate follows
continuous—time random walk. Foster and Baldwin (1986) examines

a model

a

of marketing

capacity constraints in which hysteresis in quantities occurs, Bean (1987), using a modified
beachheadmodel, finds evidence that the

1978—1981 sterling overvaluation had

hysteretic effects

on British exports.
The paper is organized in four sections. The first presents the model. The second studies
the positive effects of exchange rate changes. The third presents some empirical evidence. The
last section presents some conclusions.

I. The Beachhead Model

The basic economia of the model consists of two assertions: (i) real exchange rate shocks
can alter a country's market structure, and (ii) market structureaffects import prices and
volumes. We use a modified Spence (1976) and Dixit and Stiglitz (1977)

(S.—D—S)

framework

to

model the industry structure and imperfect competition in a partial equilibriumsetting. Foreign
and home firms engage in Cournot competition in the domestic market for a particular good
with each firm selling a different S—D—S variety.
*

Home and foreign production costs (c measured in home currency and c measured in

foreign currency) are linear homogeneous in output. Firms must also incur a fixed, sunk
market—entry cost, F, which reflects the cost of the firm—specific and market—specific assets that

are required to sell in the market. For example F could represent the costs of setting up a
distribution and service network,of establishing a brand name through advertising, or of
bringing the foreign product into conformity with domestic health and safety regulations. The
results would go through as long as at least part of F' is sunk.
EaLh period the firm is active the sunk

invsfment requires maintenance represented by a

fixed maintenance cost, G. For 'xample if F represents the cost of a brand name introduction

advertising blitz, G would represent the brand name maintenance advertising. F and G are
incurred in the home country and so are independent of the exchange rate.2 If G
sunk asset disappears, i.e. the firm exits3 We assume that F

is

not spent the

> C.

Since firms are making intertemporal decisions, the exact nature of firms exchange rate

expectations are crucial to the mechanicsof the model. The most complete approach would be to
specify

a macro model (endogenizingthe real exchange rate) with which firms would form their

expectations. In many such macro models, persistent changes in domestic (or foreign) monetary
and fiscal policies can result in perfectly anticipated real exchange rate shocks.4 This paper
omits the macro model, simply assuming that firms perfectly anticipate the exchange rate path.
This assumption is not crucial to the hysteresis result.5

We limit our attention to shocks where the exchange rate equals e° in period zero, jumps
in period

Ito E, remains there for T—1 periods, and returns to e° in period T for all future

periods. We refer
an

to this stylized shock

as V(E,T). An overvaluation is denoted as V(A,T), and

undervaluation as V(D,T).
Chamberlain (1933) argues that an increase in the number of varieties in an industry shifts

down and makes more elastic the demand curve for each variety. We therefore include the
total number of S—D—S varieties sold by home and foreign firms in the domestic market,
mt,
as an argument in the inverse demand functions. In the spirit of the S—D—S model, the inverse
demand function for each firm is identical although each
Formally a typical foreign firm chooses sales,

t

is for a different variety.

(all t), to maximizer

*
r is a constant discount rate, and et is the
R"(P{mt,yt}Yt_Ctetyt__G)._F, where R=1f(1+r).

t=0

exchange rate (domestic currency per foreign currency). Since e, is deterministic, the issue of

whether the foreigners maximize profits in home or foreign currency is moot. By S—D—S
symmetry, y

is

identical for all foreign firms. Home firms chose sales

x (all t) to

We assume the demand curve is such that marginal
=0 Rt(P[mt,xt]xttxt)_F.
revenue is decreasing in sales so that the second order condition is met. Clearly the home
maximize:

T

operating profit function (the profit functions exclusive of F), OH, has
foreign operating profit function, OH*[et,mt, has

as its argument. The

m and e as arguments. We assume

OH and

Ofl are smooth and decreasing in their respective arguments.
The period zero equilibriumis taken as given and plays the role of an initial condition. A
prospective entrant calculates what its discounted profits would be if it entered (choosingsales
optimally, based upon a period—by—periodCournot—Nash equilibrium) allowing of course for the
possibility that it may exit in the future, If discountedprofits are sufficient to cover F, the firm
enters. Incumbant firms choose sales optimally, and if the anticipated revenues are enough to
cover variable costs, they remain in the market. Since the period—by—periodsequential entry
equilibrium concept is Cournot—Nash, the multi-period equilibrium is sub—game perfect.
Ignoringinteger constraints, defining

S__ER'(Ofl+i[e7+,m7+j),

E Ri(OIlr+itmr+i]), and
S.=i=O

the entry and exit conditions for home and foreign firms in

period T are, respectively:

Sr>F S>F

(1)

S<O, S.<O

(2)
Clearly there

is

a gap between the entry and exit conditions. The gap implies that there is

not a unique number of firms in the period-by-period equilibria. This multiplicity of equilibria is
the key to hysteresis. As we shall see below, a large enough V(E,T) will permanently change the
market structure, resulting in permanent real effects.

II. The Euuiibrium
Before studying the effects of exchange rate shocks, we calculate the equilibrium for

constant, or benchmark, exchange rate, e°. For convenience, we assume that e0
c=e

c

o

For this e ,

*

.

S and S equal Sb which is in turn a function

is such

a

that

only of a constant rn

constant since e is). Figure 1 facilitates the determination of mb.
is
in
Sb[ml decreasing
sincp OU and OH* are. For m < md, (I) holds so firms would enter. For m > m, (2) holds so

(m

is

some firms would exit. Any m between

m and md constitutes an equilibrium since neither (1)

nor (2) is binding.

Foreign and home firms' sales,

b and xb respectively, are the solutionsto the Euler

equations:

0 = P[myj

yt[mb,yt]/t — cet,

0 = P[m,x) + xtdPtmb,xtl/Oxt —ci,
The benchmark prices,
A.

and

b are equal to P[mb,ybj and

P[mh,xbJ, respectively.

Competitivene Effects of Exchange Bate Shocks

Next we study the link between exchange rate fluctuations and m. As we shall show,
V(E,T) fall into two types: V(E,T) which cause no entry or exit (we define these as small
exchange rate changes), and those which do (we call these large exchange rate changes). Large

V(E,T) themselves fall into two categories: those where m° changes in period 1 and stays
permanently at the new level, and those where m° jumps up in period 1 and then falls
back to m.
To facilitate the characterization of the exchange shock—market structure link, we define

S. during an undervaluation and overvaluation as S.(D,T) and S.(A,T) respectively.Several
properties of S.(A,T) and SXD,T) are of interest: (i) they are monotonicallydecreasing in A
and D respectively (for all r<T), (ii) S.(A,T) is increasingin T, and S.(D,T) is decreasing in T,
and (iii) S(A,T) is non—increasing, and S(D,T) is non—decreasing through time (for all r>1).
Properties (i) and (ii) follow directly from the definition of V(E,T) and the properties of

Ofl*(et,mt). To demonstate (iii), suppose on the contrary,
eT., the supposition can hold only if rnT<

cTil

in period T—i, so ST(AT)=O, or
implies that

ST;l(A.T)tor 5T

i

41(AT) < S(A,T). Since
mTl. This in turn implies exit occurs
But then the supposition (or mT< mTl)

is negative. This is a contradiction, since exit insures that

they remain non—negative. A symmetrIc argument shows

that S7(D,T) is nonecreasing

with

time.

We consider first the set of small V(E,T). We can ignore S, since VE.T) affects it only
through changes in the mts. The set1s end points A and D, are given by S(A,T)=F, and
D1 depend on m0 as well as on T. Specifically by (i) and (ii), the
S(D',T)=O for m1=m°. A

d

longer the overvaluat ton is,

the closer is

A1 (D')

the closer are A and ti to e

, and the closer m is to m0 (md),

to eu.

Property (i) implies that for all V(E,T), where A1<E<D1, neither the entry nor exit
condition are binding in period 1. For any small A<e°, S.(A,T) falls over time up to r=T where

S(A,T)=Sb(mo), For small D>e° S1D,T) rises over time to Sb(m°). Clearly then neither (1)
nor (2) ever binds, so m will not change. This finishes our characterization of small exchange

rate shocks.
Next we characterize the first type of large V(A1T). Figure 1 shows an example.
S1
depends only on mb so Sl=Sb. The V(A,T) shiftsS up to S, thus driving m° to m1. By (iii),
S. shifts bark to Sb, yet m remains at m1 since neither (1) nor (2) holds after T=l. We shall
show that any V(E,T) which causes m° to jump to an
within the
is a member
m1
md—rn0 range
of this first type. If m is to jump to
m1 and stay there, then (1) and (2) must not bind after r=1.
By definition of a large V(A,T), S(A,T)=F. By (iii), S.(A,T)<F after r=1, so (1) does not hold
regardless of the size of rn1 By definition of V(A,T), ST(A,T)=Sb Thus if mlezmu, 5(A,T)>0
for all T, so (2) never binds. When rn1=m0, then
S,,(A,T)=O with m=m1. Similar reasoning
indicates that for all V(D,T) where mlmd, rn jumps down to m1 and remains there. In both
cases, home firms never enter or exit since m stays in the md—mU range *
We shall show that the second category of large shocks involves V(A,T) which cause
he greater than mu. If
m1>m0, then

m must fall to m0 by period T. OtherwiseS(A,T)

to

m1

would

be negative. Property (iii) implies that m falls from m1 to

m, and then remains there.

For such

V(A,T) all home firms exit, since with m1>m0 Sr<O Note that no V(D,T) can drive m1 below
of home firm entry.
md because
B. Price Effects of Small and Large Exchange Rate Changes

To summarize,small V(E,T) cause no change

in market structure, while large V(E,T) do

0 or very

An exchange rate shock can be large when it is very big (E is very different from e

(T is larg) Large shocks can change the size and home/foreign composition
next to the effects of exchange rate movements on the price of imports.
long

of m. We turn

Rearranging (3) implies import prices are related to e by:
(4)

I

The perceived elasticity,

—

E, is a function of

l/E[myj

cet.

m (due to the Chamberlain assumption) and y (to

allow for the non—constantancy of the demand elasticity).

The time paths of F, e and m are depicted in figure 2a for a small exchange rate shock. At
time zero all firms realize that e will follow the path shown.

In response they lower import

prices. Since the shock is small (i.e., A'czE<e°) there is no change in m so that when the
exchange rate returns

to e0, P returns to its original value.

Figure 2b shows the time paths for

a

large shock. Upon announcement of the overvaluation, m jumps up. The price falls due to the
marginal cost reduction (lower e reduces foreign costs measured in home currency), and to the
market structure change (more competition forces down profits margins). After the
overvaluation passes, the marginal costs return to their original level. However m is still higher
so the post_shock price is permanently lower than the

111.

pre—shock price.

This is hysteresis.

Empirical Evidence

The beachhead model argues that a large enough appreciation can induce entry and that
the presence of additional entrants can affect pricing behavior.In a standard time series
regressionof the relationship between the exchange rate and import prices this event would

8

appear as a structural break. The unprecedented magnitude and duration of the 1980s reai dollar
shock provides one opportunity to test the predictionsof the model.

Clearly, earlier real exchange rate shocks could conceivably have induced hysteresis.
However

the 1980s shock

dwarfs previous swings; lending support to the notion that it is the first

large (as defined above shock since the breakdownof Bretton Woods. Figure 3 shows that
between (971 and 1980 the real dollar depreciated relatively steadily, apart from a number of
swings which are small compared to the 1980s swing. lKrugman and Baldwin (1987i argue that

the 1970s dollar decline does not reflect a shift in competitiveness(which would be required to

rather a bias in foreign productivity growth. Regardless of the cause,
Mann (1986) finds that the US pass—through relationship has been quite stable prior to the
induce hysteresis) but

1980s. For these reasons, we test only for hysteresis during the 1980s.

The evidence in this section does not directly test the model. It is simply intended to
establish 1) that the historical relationship between the exchange rate and US aggregate, non—oil
import prices has shifted in the 1980s, and 2) that the nature of the shift is not inconsistent with

the predictions of

the model. Mann (1986), (1987a), (1987b), Foster (1986), and Feinberg (1987)
find strong evidence of parameter shifts in import price pass.-4hrough equations at both the
aggregate and industry level. These studies are ad hoc in that they contain no formal

explanation for the cause, timing or exact nature of the parameter shifts. Related literature
supports the beachhead model by showing that market structure affects foreign firm& pricing
behavior (Dornbusch 1987, Feinberg 1986 and Masus 1987a).
A. Three Testable Implications
Before turning to the data, we discuss three testable implications of the model. Section
shows

that

2

rn and therefore E, should jump up upon "announcement of the overvaluation. The

structural break should therefore occur upon announcement.Operationally, we assume that
firms realized sometime in the early 1980s that persistent changes in the international mix of
fiscal and monetary policies would lead to

a.

prolonged dollar overvaluation,Thus:

Implication 1: A structural break in the pass—through equation should have occurred sometime
in the early 1980s.

9

This implication is robust to the exact details of the imperfect competition model chosen.
As long as there is a multiplicity of equilibria and real exchange rate shocks can shift the
economy between these equilibria, then implication I would hold in the broad class of models

where pricing is affected by market structure.
To formulate more specific implications about the structural break, we extend the section
two model to account for lagged exchange rate effects and aggregation. All section

assumpttons

are maintained. Additionally w assume foreign firms face delivery lags and stochastic demand
curves. Foreign firm j's problem is to:
max E{ E Rt

(5)

{J}

where ti

t—Q

[

RP[mt+0, 4, v1jy
j

—

cey ci] —

}

is the variety—specific random demand shock, Note that

is its delivery lag and

is a function of v and m from

t+n and y from period t. Adopting the notation that
is the expectation of formed at time t—1, the typical Euler equation for is:
x
y

x
(6)

t+fl.It

Here we have assumed a

function

=

constant elasticity demand curve, where the & is a non—stochastic

of industry h's m. Assuming firms face a variety of delivery lags ranging from 0 to N

periods, the log of the aggregate import price index,
9)

1

I

P=fl

(I is the number of firms,

is firm j's weight in the index) will be related to current and lagged values of an index of

firms' marginal costi, C

=fl[ceti1?1whereW1 is the set of firms with a delivery lag

of i periods.
Assuming rational expectations, and using standard macroeconornetricarguments, it is
easy to derive the time series properties of the expectational error (Ut) when observed

P's are

substituted for their expectations. Namely Ut follows a moving average (MA) process of order
N—i, Since u is not orthogonal to the regressands, we must instrument. Rationality also implies

1)

that any variable lagged N periods or more is a potential instrument.
Empirically we use an import price index, Pt', anda marginal cost proxy,
assume are related

(rh

is

toP and C

by:

Pt=oPt' and

Defining

C', which we

=(S/v), D = T

R.

jEPh

the set of firms in industry h), H as the number of industries, and

=(p+

( )),

the

jE41

pass—through equation is:
N

H

fl
lng(P') = log( h=1
[ I

(7)

The constant term

is

— ( 1/E

h

h

]
[mtl)

)+

i=O

*

alog(C) +

u

the parameter we are most interested in. (7) shows the constant term

is inversely related to the Ehrs which are directly related to the mt's. According to the
beachhead model, the mt's should jump up (for industries with low enough F's), forcing the
up, and the constant term down. Thus:
Implication

:

Es

The structural break should take the form of a reduction in the constant term of

equation (7) beginningsometime in the early 1980s.

In the Chamberla.inian framework,additional entry increases the aggregate import price
elasticity (which is simply the weighted sum of the variety—specific elasticities). Also each firm
has a lower constant term but there are more firms, so the aggregate constant (which is the sum
of firns' constants) may increase or decrease, Lastly, the income elasticity shift is ambiguous.

This gives us:
Implication 3: The price elasticity in the aggregate import demand equation should rise (in
absolute value) synchronouswith the structural break in the pass—through equation. The
constant term and income elasticity may rise, fall or remain unchanged.
B. Evaluating the Implications
To test implications 1 and 2, we estimate (7) allowingfor a once—off shift in the constant
term via the inclusion of an intercept dummy (see appendix for data details).7 Table 1 presents
the two stage least squares (2SLS) estimates of (7) using a WPI—based costs proxy and allowing

for a maximum delivery lag of 5 quarters (N=5 was chosen a priori as a reasonable upper

II
bound).8 Since the exact timing of the break is not known, the equation is estimated for a
variety of break points. The results provide strong support for implications 1 and 2. For each
break point, the shift in the intercept term is significart and of the expected sign.
The table I results have several problems. First, as is usually the case with pass—through
equations, the point estimates of the lagged effects are often negative or insignificant — due

of the negative coefficients can we reject the
hypothesis that the true parameter is actually positive; nor can we accept the hypothesis that
most likely to multicollinarity However, for none

their sum

is

zero. Next, the Durbin—Watson statistics are low despite the fourth--order MA

correction. However for all but the 1982:1 breakpoint, the values lie within the upper and lower
boundsof the 5 percent points. We therefore cannot accept or reject the positive first--order
autocorrelation hypothesis.
Although the WPI—based measure is probably a good proxy for marginal costs, it includes
only industrialized countries — leaving open the possibility that the shift stems from the
exclusion of the newly industrializing countries (NICs). Also, between 10 and 20 percent of US

imports are commoditiesso the index can be expected to perform poorly during periods
of large commodity price swings. Additionally WPIs inevitably contain the price of foreign final
non—oil

goods which do not affect production costs. To partially redress these problems, and to check

that our results are robust to the specific cost proxy, we test implications 1 and 2 on two
additional cost proxies: one based on normalized unit labor costs (NULC), and one based on
consumer price indices (CPI),
NULC provides a direct measure of a significant component of firms' marginal costs. It
avoids the problem at including imported final goods prices, but fails to reflect the cost of

imported intermediate goods and commodities(especially fuels). Also

it includes

only

industrialized countries, The third proxy consists of the Federal Reserve Board's foreign costs
proxy, which is based on CPIs from the G—1Q countries and 8 major NICs. CPIs are a poor
proxy for marginal costs (inter alia, they include non—traded and imported final goods prices);
however, they are available for a wider range of countries and for longer periods than are more
direct measures. Details are in the appendix.

12

Table 2 summarizesthe results for various break points and N's (rnulticollinearity hinders
precise identification of the lag length). The CPI results, like the WPI results, strongly support

implications I and 2. The dummies are negative and significant in all cases. The NULC data
provide only weak support for the two implications, In only 2 of the

16 cases

are the dummies

significant at the 90 percent level. However in both cases they are negative. In all but 4 of the
other cases, the dummies are negative but insignificant. The insignificance of the NULC
estimates may he due in part to the shorter sample period, but also to the nature of the NULC.
Since most fuels are priced in dollars, the NULO excludesa cost component which is not directly
affected by the exchange rate. Clearly then the NULC underestimates foreign costs during the

strong dollar period (1980—1987). This argues that the dummies may be insignificant because the
coefficients overestimate the true dummy parameters.

The beachhead model predicts that the parameter shift should have occurred sometime
during the rising dollar. Mann (1986) and Foster and Baldwin (1986) suggest the shift occurred

at the turning point of the dollar cycle. It is not possible to formally identify the break point
from the data; however, it is possible to test these two well—specifiedhypotheses against each
other,9 To this end we estimate equation (7), with 2SLS, including an intercept dummy for the
period from the break point to the peak of the dollar and a second for the post—peak period, If
the beachhead model is correct, both dummies should be negative and significant; if the
alternative

is

correct, only the second dummy should be significant. Table 3 presents the results.

For the WPI data (which is arguably the best proxy) the alternative is clearly rejected.
For all the various break points both dummies are negative, and in all but I case they are
significant. The NULC data tend to reject both hypotheses. In all cases the dummies are
insignificant. In 3 cases both dummies are negative while in one case the first is positive and the
second is negative. Again the low degrees of freedom and biases may account for these results.
The CPI data are ambiguous. In one case both dummies are negative and significant. In

the other cases the first dummy is insignificant and in one case it is actually positive. The
divergence of the CPI and WPI results may be due to the composition of the CPIs. If foreign
currency production costs are constant,

a rising dollar increases the competitiveness and

13

therefore the sales of foreign firms. However the increased sales tend to put upward pressure on
the foreign production costs (e.g., wages). Since CPIs place substantial weight on non—traded
goods (housing and services) which are not directly sublect to the upward pressure, the UP!
underestimates foreign production costs during rising dollar periods. Consequently,the point
estimates on

he first dummy may be insignificant since they underestimate the fr'ie parameter.

Next we turn to implication 3 by testing

parameter shifts

an aggregate import demand equation for

Spe'ifically, workingwith first differences, we regress the log

of

nonil

import volume on the log of real US GNP and the log of current and 6 lags (quarterly data of
relative import prices1' The lag coefficients are constrained to follow a third order polynomial

(data details are

in the appendix).

Table 4 presents two types of evidence. The first line shows the point estimates and
t—ratios for the import demand equation estimated on the entire sample period 1967:1 to 1987:2.

The next 8 lines show how they thange when the same equation is estimated on pre— and
post—break data, For all four break points, the post—break demand is more elastic, providing

some support for implication 3. However only in case 5 are the parameter shifts statistically
significant. The second type of evidence is the results for import demand equations which include
dummies for the constant and price elasticity terms. Slope dummies are allowed for the current

and lagged price terms. Only the sum of the lags and dummies are reported.'2 The intercept and
slope dummies are insignificant in all four cases and are evenly split between positive and
negative point estimates.
Table 4 provides little support for implication 3. This does not necessarily cast doubt on

the basic hysteresis hypothesis because implication 3 is not robust to small changes in the
market structure assumptions. As is well—known, in a symmetric Cournot equilibrium with
homogeneous products, each firm faces the total demand elasticity multiplied by the number of
firms. Additional entry makes each firm face

a more elastic demand curve but does not

shift the

aggregate curve. To make our basic theoretical point most clearly, we utilized the familiar
Chamberlainian setup. If, as in Baldwin (1986), we had worked with homogeneous products, no
volume equation shifts would be expected.

14

Tables I and 2 indicate that the elasticities perceived by individual firms increased; but
table 4 indicates that the aggregate elasticity did not. One interpretation of these results is that
most of the new entrants entered markets marked by homogeneous goods.

IV. QgLion5

This paper shows that in a simple industrial organization model, large exchange rate
shocks can have persistent real effects, while small shocks cannot. In particular it shows that
large exchange rate movements should be correlated with parameter shifts in standard,
estimated trade equations. Moreover we conjecture that the possibility of hysteresis has
theoretical implications for several fundamental issues in international economics. Further
theoretical research is required to explore this conjecture.
Empirical tests find evidence for the predicted structural breaks in the US pass—through
equation in the 1980s, although not for the import volume equation. In particular, we find
evidence

that the structural break in the

phase rather than in 1985 as

is commonly

pass—through equation occurred in the rising dollar

asserted. Nevertheless, the tests have little power

against alternative hypothesesso the breaks may be due to causes totally unrelated to the
beachhead model. Further empirical work is needed to directly evaluate the model. Direct tests
require time series

data on the number of varieties of imported goods and their close substitutes

on an industry—level. Unfortunately, such data (or good proxies) appear to exist only for

a few

industries (e.g., automobiles). A direct test of the model on macro data therefore appears to be
impossible.
Finally, the beachhead model focuses on supply—side factors, yet empirically demand—side
factors may be even more important. In the familiar experience—goods framework,it seems likely

that real exchange rate shocks could cause persistent changes in consumers' information sets,
and thereby have hysteretic effects. Additional research is needed to explore this conjecture.

15

FOOTNOTES
1. Hysteresis is the failure of a property changed by an external agent to return

to its original

value when the cause of the change is removed.
2. If F and G involved foreign currency costs, appreciations would lower entry costs as well as

marginal costs, making ntry more likely.
3. Allowing for the possibility that not all of the sunk asset disappears when the firm exits,
would imply that the re—entry costs are below entry costs.

This consideration would complicate

the analysis without providing any compensating insight.
4, For example, Dornbusch (1976).
5. Baldwin and Krugman (1986), and Dixit (1987a) make alternative assumptions.

6. This assumption reduces the number of cases which must be addressed in determining the
impact of V(E,T on m, but it does not alter the main results.
7. We assume that the 1980s shock was a large V(A,T) of the first type since not all competing
US firms exited,
8. For instruments, we use lagged values of the nominal exchange rate, the nominal foreign cost

proxy and nominal domestic costs.
9. If a test statistic is to have a well—defineddistribution under both the null and alternative

hypotheses, the model must be correct under both. That is, the hypotheses must be nested.
Searchingfor break points violates this condition. Nevertheless, it may be of interest that for the
WPI data the 1982:3 breakpoint had the highest R—equared.
10. A standard assumption used to identify the import demand equation is to assume that

supply is infinitely elaatic,

ON? are trended, so the asymototic distribution of the estimator is not
well—defined.First differencingremoves the time series' explosive component.
11. Imports and

12. As usual the point estimates on lagged price effects are often negative or insignificant due

most likely to multicollinearity.

16

REFERENCES

Baldwin, Richard, 'Hysteresis in Trade' unpublisheddraft, July 1986.

and Krugman, Paul, 'Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate
Shocks,' NEER Working Paper, No. 2017, September 1986.
Bean, Charles,

'Sterling Misalignment and British Trade Performance," Centre for

Labour Economic, LSE, Discussion Paper No. 288, July 1987.

Chamberlain, Edward, The Theory of Monopolistic Competition, Cambridge, MA,
Harvard University Press, 1933.
Dixit, Avinash and Stiglitz, Joseph, "MonopolisticCompetition and Optimum
Product Diversity," American Economic Review, 1977, 67, 297—308.
"Entry and Exit Decisions of Firms Under Fluctuating Real Exchange Rates,"
mimeo, September 1987.

"Hysteresis, Import Penetration, and Exchange Rate Pass—Through," mimeo,
November 1987.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political
Economy, 1976, 6, 231—244.
•

"Exchange Rates and Prices," American Economic Review, March

1987, 77, 93—106.
Feinberg, Robert M., "The Effects of Foreign Exchange Movementson US Domestic

Prices," ITC rnimeo,December 1986.
• "Recent Foreign Exchange Movements, Prices and US Trade Flows," ITO
mimeo, March 1987.

Foster, Harry, "The Relationship Between US Import Prices and the Exchange Rate:
An Empirical Investigation", MIT mimeo, December
•

1986.

and Baldwin, Richard, "Marketing Bottlenecks and the Relationship between

Exchange Rates and Prices," MIT mimeo, October 1986.
Helkie, Bill and Hooper, Peter, "The US External Deficit in the 1980s," December

'7
I96,

in R.C.

Bryant and others, eds., Empirical Macroeconomics for

Interdependent Economies, Washington,DC., Brookings Institution, forthcoming.
Krugman, Paul, "Pricing to Market when the Exchange Rate Changes,' NBER. Working
Paper No. 1926, May

1966.

and Baldwin, Richard, The Persistence of the US Trade Deficit,
Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, 1:1967, 1—43.

Mann, Cathy, Prices, Profits Margins, and Exchange Rates," Federal Reserve
Bulletin, June 1986

... "Prices, Profit Margins and Exchange Rates: After the Fall," DIF Discussion
Paper, Federal Reserve Board, July

1987.

'The Puzzling Behavior of Non—oil Import Prices," mirneo, November

1987.

Orcutt, G, "Measurement of Price Elasticities in International Trade,"
Review of Economicsand Statistics, 1950, 32:117—132.
Spence, Michael A., "Product Selection, Fixed Costs and Monopolistic Competition,"
Review of Economic Studies, 1976, 9, 1, 58—73.

is

APPENDIX
Figure 3 is based the Federal Reserve Board's foreign cost proxy converted to dollars and
divided by the US GNP deflator. The Boards proxy is a trade—weighted index of CPrs from the
C—lU

and Mexico, Brazil, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, South Korea, Philippines and

Malaysia. Table I uses the NIA

non—oil

import price and a dollar—denominated,

import—weighted marginal costs proxy made from IMF

data on manufactured goods WPIs from

Canada, Japan, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and UK Both measures are deflated by the US
manufactured goods WPI. For lack of a better measure, we use the NIA deflator (which is a
variable weight index based on unit value indices). Shifts in import commodity composition
may contribute to the parameter shifts. This cannot be the whole explanation since many
studies show that even industry level pass—through equations (where fixed weight indices are
used) have shifted.
Table 2 NULC data is a dollar—denominated, import—weighted index of the IMF NULC
data from the above mentioned 15 countries and the NIA deflator, both divided by the US
NLTLC.

Table 4 data is the NIA non-oil import value converted to volume by the corresponding
deflator; and the relative price term is the the NIA deflator divided by the US GNP deflator.
These data choices are standard(Helkie and Hooper 1986) but subject to well known
measurement error biases, However there is no reason to suspect that the biases have changed,
so the structuralbreak tests are still valid.

19
Table 1: Estimate Results for Pass-Through Equation on WPI data,
Break
Point
1980:3

1982:1
1982.3

C

DUNMY

3.3
(10.5)

(—3.3)

5.1
(3.8)

(-2,1)

3.9
(10.4)

1983:1

3.3

(13.4)

—.08

-.18

—.11

LNC

LMC1

.23
—.38
(1.1) (—1.3)

-.20
(-.6)

.04
(.2)

—.07

.11

(—4.2) (—.4)

(.6)

-.07
(—4.0)

-.00
(—.0)

.08
(.3)

LNC2 LNC3 LNC4 LMC5
.14
(.8)

.11

-.06

(.4)

(—.2)

.22

O1

(.9)

(.0)

.19

.11

(2.2) (.7)
.31 -.11
(3.0) (—.5)

t—statistics in parentheses.
LMC indicates log of marginal cost proxy.
DUMNY indicates intercept dummy.
C indicates constant term.
SE indicates standard error of regression.
DW indicates Durbin-Watson statistic.
R2 indicates R-squared statistic.
Sample period 1975:1—1987:1, quarterly data.

SE

N5

DW

.25 .03 1.2

R
.90

(1.6)

-.12

-.07 .04 0.9 .80

—.13

—.07 .02 1.7 .96

(-.3) (-.2)
(—.8) (—.5)

.04 -.03 .02 1.3 .95
(.2) (—.2)

20

TABLE 2 —

Intercept Dummies:

Sample period:
Max.

(N=7)

Manuf. WPI
(1975:1-87:1)

Unit Labor Cost
(1975:1—86:3)

na
na

—
-

1980:3

+
+

—
—

1980:3
1982.1

na
+
+
ma

1982.3
1983.1
(N4)

—

1980:3

—

1982.1

—

1982 .3
1983.1

—
-

(N=3)

CPI
(1967:1—87:2)

Break
Point

1982.1
1982.3
1983.1

(N5)

Various Data Sets and Break Points

1980:3

—

1982.1
1982.3
1983.1

—
—
—

**
**

—

—

—

-

—

—

ma

-

- indicates that

intercept dummy is negative, implying that perceived
demand elasticity increases in magnitude after break point.
+ indicates that intercept dummy is positive, implying that perceived
demand elasticity decreases in magnitude after break point.
na indicates the test could not be performed due to non-convergence.
** indicates no change in constant term hypothesis rejected at 95%
level.

*

indicates
level.

no change in constant term hypothesis rejected at 90%

21

Table 3: Tests for Timing of Structural Break in Pass—Through Equation,
N=5

WPI

Rising
$ Dummy

N1JLC

Falling
$ Dummy

Rising
$ Dummy

Falling
$ Dummy

CPI
Rising
Falling
$ Dummy
$ Dummy

Break Point

1980:3
1982:

+

-

1

1982: 3
1983:

—

+
*

1

indicates
indicates
indicates

intercept dummy is negative.
intercept dummy is positve.
dummy is significant at 90 percent level.
indicates dummy is significant at 99 percent level.

+

22

Table

4

:

Vaon,

Structural Break Tests on Import
1st differences

ESTIMATION ON SUB-SAMPLES

Case

Sample
Period

C

Ct—stat) GNP

Ct-stat)

Sum of Price
Terms Ct-stat) SE DW

1

67:1-87:2

.004

(0.7)

2.07

(4.2)

-0.80

(-2.1)

.04 2.6 .34

2

67:1—80:3
80:4-87:2

.003
.000

(0.3)
(0.0)

1.91
2.40

(2.7)
(3.1)

—0.69
-1.08

(-1.1)
(-1.1)

.05 2.6 .32
.03 2.7 .35

67:1-82:1

.003

(0.3)
(-1.3)

1.92
2.93

(3.3)
(2.8)

-0.63
-2.10

(-1.2)
(-1,8)

.05 2.6 .32
.03 3.1 .46

(0.5)
(-1.4)

1.89
3.58

(3.4)
(2.8)

—0.70

(-1.4)

-1.63

(-1.3) .03 2.4

.05 2.6 .32
.50

1.94

(3.4)

—0.67

(-1.4)

.05 2.6 .3

3

82:2-87:2 —.026
4

5

67:1-82:3
82:4-87:2

.003
—.029

67:1-83:1
83:2—87:2

—.021

.003

(0.3)

(-1.7)

2.51

(3.1)

(-2.4) .02 1.6 .73

—2.26

ESTIMATION WITH DUMMIES

Break
Point

Intercept
Dummy

Sum of Price
Dummies

1980:3

—

1982: 1

1982:3
1983:1

+
+

is sum of coefficients on current and
indicates constant term.

Price term
C

R2

None of

+
+
6

lagged terms.

the dummies are significant at the 90 percent level.

Figure 1: Equilibrium range of firms

S

Number of

firms
Sb

24

Figure

2a: Time Paths of e,

m

P for Small Overvaluation

1110

0
I

t0
Fiqure 2b: Time Paths of e,

I

ni,

time

P for Large Overvaluation

e0

1

pO
t=O

T

time

25

Fiqure

+

3: The US Dollar Real Exchanqe Rate

-

1

4.

4n
4

-i

445 57

6 69

I

70 71 72 73

II

I1

7475 75

77

7

iJ 1

23456

C7

