                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MINDING YOUR PS AND QS:
     GOING FROM MICRO TO MACRO IN MEASURING PRICES AND QUANTITIES

                                         Gabriel Ehrlich
                                       John C. Haltiwanger
                                          Ron S. Jarmin
                                         David Johnson
                                       Matthew D. Shapiro

                                       Working Paper 25465
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25465


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019




We acknowledge financial support of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and additional support from
the Michigan Institute for Data Science. The results in this presentation are based on researchers
own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC
and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing
Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn
from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen
is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results
reported herein. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily represent the view of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic
Researich. We thank Jamie Fogel, Diyue Guo, Dyanne Vaught and Laura Zhao for superb
assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Gabriel Ehrlich, John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, David Johnson, and Matthew D.
Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Minding Your Ps and Qs: Going from Micro to Macro in Measuring Prices and Quantities
Gabriel Ehrlich, John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, David Johnson, and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 25465
January 2019
JEL No. D12,E01,E20,E31

                                         ABSTRACT

Key macro indicators such as output, productivity, and inflation are based on a complex system
across multiple statistical agencies using different samples and different levels of aggregation.
The Census Bureau collects nominal sales, the Bureau of Labor Statistics collects prices, and the
Bureau of Economic Analysis constructs nominal and real GDP using these data and other
sources. The price and quantity data are integrated at a high level of aggregation. This paper
explores alternative methods for re-engineering key national output and price indices using item-
level data. Such re-engineering offers the promise of greatly improved key economic indicators
along many dimensions.

Gabriel Ehrlich                                 David Johnson
Department of Economics                         University of Michigan
University of Michigan                          johnsods@umich.edu
611 Tappan St
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                        Matthew D. Shapiro
gehrlich@umich.edu                              Department of Economics
                                                University of Michigan
John C. Haltiwanger                             611 Tappan St
Department of Economics                         Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
University of Maryland                          and NBER
College Park, MD 20742                          shapiro@umich.edu
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu

Ron S. Jarmin
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
ron.s.jarmin@census.gov
        Key national economic statistics produced by the U.S. statistical agencies rely primarily

on surveys of businesses and households. The current methods for measuring GDP were

developed by Simon Kuznets and the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) in the

mid-20th century. Many improvements have been made since then, but the basic concepts and

methodology remains the same. We are at a point where measurement of key economic concepts

like GDP will begin to change in critical ways. There are fundamental changes in the

information available on households and businesses given the digitization of most transactions in

the economy. For key sectors of the U.S. economy, digitized data offer the opportunity to

improve the measurement of key national economic indicators while also drastically reducing the

respondent burden on households and businesses from responding to a variety of surveys

conducted across multiple statistical agencies. In addition, declining response rates and

increasing costs of household and business surveys provide additional incentives to explore new

source data for economic measurement.

        The digitization of economic activity yields a vast and rapidly increasing pool of data,

residing mostly within the private sector that can potentially be used for improving, enhancing,

and in many respects re-inventing the way we measure two key building blocks of our national

economic statistics: output and prices. The core motivation for our approach is that prices and

quantities should be measured in an integrated and consistent manner at the micro and the macro

levels. The current system of economic measurement does not do so and suffers from substantial

limitations as a result.

        The methods used to measure GDP in the U.S. are similar to those in other advanced

economies, though data collection in the U.S. is divided across multiple agencies. To measure

real output, the U.S. Census Bureau (Census) collects the source data for the numerator
(revenue), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) collects the source data for the denominator

(prices), and the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) divides the revenue by price data to

measure real output.

       The constraints built into this system impose limitations on the quality and utility of the

resulting data products. One important limitation is that it is extremely difficult for economic

measurement to keep up with the changes in the structure of the economy. Changes in

information technology have yielded a rapid turnover of goods as well as changes in the way that

persons acquire goods and services. Rapid product turnover is an inherent challenge for price

index measurement, which in turn impacts estimates of GDP and productivity growth. Some

have speculated that mismeasurement underlies the post-2000 decline in measured productivity

growth. While evidence supporting this hypothesis is limited, there is widespread concern that

measures of productivity and real wage growth do not adequately capture improvements in

goods and services.

       Incorporating data from digitized transactions on a widespread basis has the potential to

overcome these and related limitations. First, the approach we advocate implies that macro

indicators can be generated in an internally consistent manner with underlying micro data so that

micro-macro based statistics and research can become the norm. Second, data based on item-

level transactions have the potential to enable the incorporation of rapid product turnover as

goods are tracked at the product code and outlet levels. Item-level data on prices, quantities, and

attributes of goods and services allow for new techniques to measure the value of new goods,

new outlets, and quality change. Third, the dense nature of item-level data provides data with

more granularity (e.g., by industry and geography or time). In addition to providing more detail,

more granular data can provide distributional measures beyond means or totals. Fourth,



                                                 2
processing of digitized source data from firms or aggregators could reduce the already short lags

between reference periods and the preliminary release of official statistics. Fifth, digital data can

provide comprehensive data covering a large fraction of sales and prices almost immediately.

Hence, a new architecture for economic statistics could obviate the need for some of the

substantial revisions of statistics that take place over the long intervals in the current system.

                                        I. Starting with Retail

                               A. Challenges Facing Current Methods

        Measurement of GDP is a complex multi-step process involving many components with

source data from both statistical agencies and private sector sources. 1 We focus on the

expenditure side approach of measuring GDP, and in particular its personal consumption

expenditure (PCE) component. Digitized data could also be used extensively for the other

components of GDP, as well as on the income side, so our approach has wider applicability.

Within the PCE component of GDP, we focus on expenditure on goods through the retail sector,

with the goal of eventually incorporating additional components of PCE that are transacted

digitally.

        To illustrate the current decentralized approach to data collection, processing and

provision, we consider the measurement of real GDP for the retail sector using the expenditure

approach. 2 Census collects revenue (sales) information from businesses at various frequencies

and levels of detail using different surveys. These provide key inputs to measuring nominal

output (nominal GDP). The BLS conducts surveys measuring prices to produce the Consumer

Price Index (CPI). The CPI integrates multiple data collections: the Consumer Expenditure (CE)


  1
     Much of this discussion follows the BEA methodology papers http://www.bea.gov/methodologies/. We also
draw on the BLS Handbook of Methods http://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpi_methods.htm and the Census Bureau
https://www.census.gov/retail/index.html.
   2
     Figure A.1 in the online appendix provides an overview of the data and measures.

                                                    3
Survey for expenditure weights, the Telephone Point-of-Purchase Survey (TPOPS) for location

of expenditure, and then enumeration of prices from a probability sample of goods within

locations. 3 Inflation measures are complex and subject to considerable sampling and non-

sampling measurement errors both in terms of statistical methodology and challenges in

integrating prices from BLS surveys and expenditure/output weights from BLS and Census

surveys. Finally, the BEA measures real output by integrating price indices from BLS with the

nominal output measures from Census and augmenting with additional data sources. 4 A notable

feature of the current architecture is that data collection for spending (Census) and for prices

(BLS) are largely independent.

        An additional challenge is that response rates on the retail trade surveys have declined

substantially over time. The response rate for the monthly retail trade survey has recently fallen

to 52 percent in 2015, from 66 percent in 2009. Jarmin (2019) discusses challenges facing

surveys and the urgency for finding alternative sources of data for economic measurement,

especially for sectors such as retail where survey performance has declined sharply.

                    B. Using Item-level Transactions Data for Economics Measurement:
                                        Nominal Revenue Indexes

        Recent research on the use of digitized data for retail trade focuses on improving price

indices, either from use of scanner data or from web-scraped posted prices. The potential

advantages of digitized data do not stop at improved price indices. Our approach aims to develop

integrated nominal expenditure, price, and real expenditure indices from the same sources rather

than focusing on price indices alone. Our research aims to combine data from multiple sources

including individual retailers and aggregators. In this paper, we present indexes based on


  3
  In 2020, the CE Survey will begin collecting data on the location of expenditure, replacing the TPOPS.
  4
   BEA and the Census Bureau have been actively evaluating the use of commercial data (see Bostic, Jarmin and
Moyer (2016)).

                                                     4
transactions data aggregated to the item-level across time and outlets from Nielsen Scanner data

to produce prices, P, quantity, Q, and total revenue, P*Q.

         The Nielsen Retail Scanner data (made available from the Kilts center) provides weekly

item-level data on sales and units sold for a large panel of grocery stores and other mass

merchandisers. 5 Since items are defined narrowly (i.e., the UPC level), dividing sales by units

sold gives a good measure of price. The ability to infer prices from unit values is central to

measuring P and Q using scanner data. 6 We aggregate to monthly data using the National

Research Federation calendar. For current purposes, we aggregate items to the national level and

further time-aggregate to a quarterly frequency.

         Figure 1. Nominal Sales of Food: Scanner, Census Retail Sales, and BEA PCE




         Figure 1 depicts the quarterly level of nominal food sales from the scanner data compared

to the Monthly Retail Trade Survey (MRTS) estimates for Grocery Stores and to nominal BEA



  5
     We have also analyzed the Nielsen Consumer Panel. Results for the indexes presented in this paper are similar
(see Figures A.4 and A.5 in the online appendix.)
   6
     Price is not exactly measured by unit value if there is within-week variation in prices and other complications in
pricing.

                                                           5
Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) for Off-premises food and non-alcoholic beverages. 7

The figure shows index numbers with calendar year 2010=1. Despite their completely different

source data, the scanner and the MRTS have similar trends. They trend together for most of the

period in the sample, and diverge somewhat early and late in the sample. The PCE and MRTS

have very similar trends, but PCE is based in part on MRTS, so this is the case by construction.

The Nielsen data likely has some coverage changes early in the sample.

          There are important differences in the data sources for the series that highlight the value

of item-level transactions data for measuring nominal volumes. Census monthly and annual

retail sales are measured across all retail establishments within a firm. Census monthly retail

sales are based on a relatively small sample of firms (13,000 for the entire retail trade sector),

while the scanner data covers about 35,000 stores. Census retail sales at grocery stores include

sales of many non-food items, but can exclude sales of food at, for example, general merchandise

stores. In contrast, the scanner data, which we aggregated based on product codes, include only

sales of food regardless of the type of outlet and contain information on more than 650,000 item-

level products per month. The different seasonality of the Census MRTS data on grocery stores

relative to the scanner data (see Figure A.3 in the online appendix) likely reflects the non-food

items at grocery stores.

          The advantages of item-level data that yield detailed product class information at high

frequency are highlighted when one considers estimates of PCE. The high-frequency data

underlying PCE come from the MRTS, which as we have seen, provides estimates by type of

outlet, not by product. Every five years the Economic Census (EC) yields information on sales

at the establishment level by detailed product class. In the intervening time periods, the Annual



  7
      Figure A.2 in the online appendix displays the same information in growth rates.

                                                           6
Retail Trade Survey (ARTS) and the MRTS survey firms for their total sales, classifying firms

into major kind of business (e.g., Food and Beverage or Grocery Stores). The revenue growth

and quantity indices developed by BEA using the integrated data from Census and BLS require

extrapolating the detailed EC information at the product class level with the more current

information by outlet type from the ARTS and MRTS. The EC uses an annual reference period,

so it provides the BEA no information on the within-year composition of products sold by

outlets. Thus, the EC provides no information for the BEA to produce non-seasonally adjusted

PCE at the detailed goods level at high frequencies. Hence, BEA uses within-year composition

information from scanner data in combination with the PCE reported in Figure 1 to produce

statistics on more detailed food products (e.g., poultry).

        This example highlights the extrapolative nature of high-frequency GDP estimation given

the current architecture. Data users might not be too concerned about the fact that GDP statistics

abstract from the shifting seasonal mix of goods sold by grocery stores. But the same issue will

apply at business cycle frequency and for business cycle shocks, with the potential for the current

system to either overstate or understate cyclical fluctuations depending on the product mix across

outlets and their cyclicality sensitivity.

       C. Using Item-level Transactions Data for Economics Measurement: Price Indices

        Both BLS and BEA, along with some international statistical agencies, have already

begun to incorporate item-level transactions scanner data in their price indices. To illustrate the

relationship between the current methods and using scanner data, Figure 2 compares the BLS

CPI for the product groups covered by the Nielsen scanner data to a variety of price indices




                                                  7
computed from the scanner data. 8 The scanner indices in Figure 2 are constructed from quarterly

unit prices and expenditure shares covering more than 100 product groups. Figure 2 reports

four-quarter averages of the quarterly indices of price change (measured using the log

differences of the indices). The number of item-level price quotes monthly in the BLS CPI for

these product groups is about 40,000, compared to the 650,000 item-level prices in the scanner

data.

                 Figure 2. BLS CPI and Nielsen-Scanner Based Price Indices
                 (Annual Averages of Quarterly Changes)

                 Panel A. Food




  8
     We thank the BLS for producing food and nonfood CPI indices using the product groups in the Nielsen data.
The BLS data provided should be interpreted with care because they do not meet BLS’s standard publication
criteria.

                                                        8
              Panel B. Non-Food




       The top panel shows the results for the food product groups and the lower panel the

nonfood product groups. The price indices from the scanner data are computed at the product

group level, and then Divisia expenditure share weights by product groups are used to aggregate

to the food and nonfood indices. Each panel displays three indices calculated from the scanner

data: a Laspeyres index; the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) demand-based price index

with the adjustment for product turnover proposed by Feenstra (1994, hereafter Feenstra); and

the Unified Price Index (UPI) proposed by Redding and Weinstein (2018). The Feenstra and

UPI are modified price indices based upon a CES expenditure function approach that

incorporates (i) product quality changes from product turnover (Feenstra and UPI) and (ii)

product quality/appeal from what Redding and Weinstein denote the “consumer valuation bias”

(UPI only).




                                                9
       Computing the Feenstra and UPI requires elasticities of substitution, which we estimate

for each product group using the Feenstra (1994) method applied to the item-level data following

Redding and Weinstein (2018). To calculate the Laspeyres index using the item-level data, we

use previous-quarter expenditure weights updated for each quarter.

       For food, the average rate of price change using the BLS CPI is very similar to (albeit

slightly lower than) the Laspeyres index from the scanner data, and the two price indices track

each other well (with a correlation about 0.97). The Feenstra shows a notably lower average

price change and a correlation with the CPI of 0.98. The UPI has a much lower average and a

correlation with the CPI of 0.78. The finding that the CPI and the Laspeyres from scanner data

track each other so well is reassuring, but also not surprising given that the quality adjustments

used in the CPI for Food are modest at best. The close relationship between the CPI and

Laspeyres for food provides a benchmark to gauge the impact of the quality adjustments via

Feenstra and UPI, which like the Laspeyres use the scanner data.

       The lower panel shows greater differences across price indices for nonfood. Here the

CPI inflation rate is slightly higher than the scanner Laspeyres, but their correlation is weaker

(0.54). The Feenstra has a substantially lower mean and the UPI a much lower mean. The CPI’s

correlation with the Feenstra is 0.37 and with the UPI is negative (-0.53). The larger gap across

price indices for nonfood than for food is consistent with the hypothesis that quality adjustments

from product turnover and changes in product appeal for continuing goods (i.e., consumer

valuation) are likely to be more important for nonfood. Also consistent with that hypothesis,

there is a more substantial gap between the Feenstra and UPI than there is between the Laspeyres

and Feenstra.




                                                 10
        The results suggest the CPI is missing substantial quality adjustments, especially for

nonfood. Appropriate caution is required in drawing this inference because both the Feenstra

and UPI require specification of a utility function and estimates of the elasticity of substitution

parameters. Although estimating the elasticities at a product group level (e.g., carbonated

beverages for food and electronic products for nonfood) permits allowing for over 100 different

elasticities within the scanner data, this may still be a very high level of aggregation. Within

scanner’s product groups are arguably goods that are very close substitutes, while others are

more differentiated. For product turnover and expenditure share volatility with close substitutes,

the appropriate quality adjustment factors in Feenstra and UPI become very small. The

procedure used in Figure 2 is to assume the same elasticity of substitution for all products within

a product group. 9

        An alternative approach is to use attribute data with transactions data on prices and

quantities to create hedonic price indices. Hedonic methods (e.g. Pakes (2003) and Bajari and

Benkard (2005)) can be used with price, quantity, and attribute data, but the practicality of using

the hedonic approach at scale remains to be seen. 10 The BLS implements hedonics on a limited

basis with careful attention to the measurement of attributes for products. Although the

expenditure function approaches promise to overcome the scale issues, they rely on an

appropriate structure of grouping and nesting products. The problem of finding the correct

grouping or nesting has elements of the “house to house combat” of conventional approaches to

quality adjustment (see Shapiro and Wilcox (1996)), and the solution may rely on similar

measurement of attributes to justify the classification structure of items. Machine learning


  9
      A nested CES approach within product groups has the potential to overcome these aggregation issues, but it
brings its own challenges (see, e.g., Hottman, Redding and Weinstein (2016)).
   10
      The relationship between quality adjusted price indices using the UPI and hedonic approaches is explored in
much more detail in Ehrlich et. al. (2019).

                                                       11
methods could potentially be used with the rich text and image data on products that are

increasingly available in digital format for either estimating hedonic models of specifying the

nests for expenditure functions.

                         II. Re-Engineering Key Economic Indicators

       Given the availability of item-level transaction data and the advantages they present

relative to survey data along multiple dimensions, the time is ripe for re-engineering the data

collection and measurement of key economic indicators such as real output and inflation.

Beyond the conceptual challenges discussed in this paper, there are many practical challenges to

address in finding ways to tap into the item-level data in a manner that is cost effective for both

businesses and the statistical agencies. Getting buy-in from companies to harvest their granular

data is a key challenge. An open question is whether information aggregators (such as Nielsen)

are more desirable means of tapping into this data or alternatively whether “harvesting” apps

could be developed for firms to implement on their individual data platforms.




                                                 12
                                       REFERENCES


Bajari, Patrick. and C. Lanier Benkard. 2005. “Hedonic Price Indexes With Unobserved Product

  Characteristics, and Application to Personal Computers.” Journal of Business and Economic

  Statistics, 23(1), 61-75.

Bostic, William, Ron Jarmin, and Brian Moyer. 2016. “Modernizing Federal Economic

  Statistics.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 106(5).

Ehrlich, Gabriel, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, David Johnson, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2019.

  “Re-engineering Key National Indicators,” working paper.

Feenstra, Robert C. 1994. “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”

  American Economic Review, 84(1), 157-177.

Hottman, Colin, Stephen Redding, and David Weinstein. 2016. “Quantifying the Sources of

  Firm Heterogeneity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(3), 1291-1364.

Jarmin, Ron. 2019. “Evolving Measurement for an Evolving Economy: Thoughts on 21st

  Century US Economic Statistics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.

Pakes, Ariel. 2003. “A Reconsideration of Hedonic Price Indexes with an Application to PCs,”

  American Economic Review. 93(5) 1578-1596.

Redding, Stephen, and David Weinstein. 2018. “Measuring Aggregate Price Indexes with

  Demand Shocks: Theory and Evidence for CES Preferences,” Unpublished paper, Columbia

  University.

Shapiro, Matthew D. and David W. Wilcox. 1996. “Mismeasurement in the Consumer Price

  Index: An Evaluation.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 11, 93-142.




                                              13
                                    APPENDIX

Figure A.1. Measuring Real and Nominal Consumer Spending: Current Architecture




                                        14
Figure A.2. Quarterly Growth Rates of Nominal Sales of Food: Scanner, Census Retail
Sales, and BEA PCE

10%
                               PCE Food and Non-alcoholic Beverages-off premises (SA)
 8%                            Scanner Food (NSA)

                               Census MRTS Grocery Stores (NSA)
 6%


 4%


 2%


 0%


-2%


-4%


-6%
      2006   2007   2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013    2014     2015




                                           15
Figure A.3. Comparisons of BLS CPI and Nielsen-Scanner Based Price Indices, Quarterly
Changes

    A. Food
 0.03

 0.02

 0.01

 0.00

 -0.01

 -0.02

 -0.03

 -0.04

 -0.05

 -0.06




              BLS CPI      Scanner Laspeyre        Scanner Feenstra   Scanner UPI



    B. Non-Food
 0.03

 0.02

 0.01

 0.00

 -0.01

 -0.02

 -0.03

 -0.04

 -0.05

 -0.06

 -0.07




              BLS CPI      Scanner Laspeyre        Scanner Feenstra   Scanner UPI




                                              16
Figure A.4. Comparisons of BLS CPI and Nielsen-Consumer Panel (CP) Based Price
Indices, Annual Averages of Quarterly Changes

    A. Food
 0.04



 0.02



    0
     2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016


 -0.02



 -0.04

            CP Laspeyres       CP Feenstra        CP UPI        BLS CPI



    B. Non-Food
 0.04



 0.02



    0
     2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016


 -0.02



 -0.04

            CP Laspeyres       CP Feenstra        CP UPI        BLS CPI




                                                17
Figure A.5. Comparisons of BLS CPI and Nielsen-Consumer Panel (CP) Based Price
Indices, Quarterly Changes

    A. Food
 0.03

 0.02

 0.01

 0.00

 -0.01

 -0.02

 -0.03

 -0.04

 -0.05




                    BLS CPI     CP Laspeyres        CP Feenstra   CP UPI



    B. Non-Food
 0.03

 0.02

 0.01

 0.00

 -0.01

 -0.02

 -0.03

 -0.04

 -0.05

 -0.06




                    BLS CPI     CP Laspeyre         CP Feenstra   CP UPI




                                               18
