                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           DYNAMISM DIMINISHED:
             THE ROLE OF HOUSING MARKETS AND CREDIT CONDITIONS

                                         Steven J. Davis
                                       John C. Haltiwanger

                                       Working Paper 25466
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25466


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019




We thank Simon Gilchrist, John Robertson and participants in seminars and conferences at the
American Economic Association, Bank of Korea, Cambridge University, Congressional Budget
Office, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Goldman Sachs Global Markets Institute, Hoover
Institution, London School of Economics, National Bureau of Economic Research, National
University of Singapore, Stanford University and the University of Chicago for many helpful
comments. Diyue Guo and Laura Zhao provided superb research assistance. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Goldman Sachs Global Markets Initiative and the Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25466.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Steven J. Davis and John C. Haltiwanger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dynamism Diminished: The Role of Housing Markets and Credit Conditions
Steven J. Davis and John C. Haltiwanger
NBER Working Paper No. 25466
January 2019
JEL No. E2,E3,E5,G2,J2

                                         ABSTRACT

The Great Recession and its aftermath saw the worst relative performance of young firms in at
least 35 years. More broadly, as we show, young-firm activity shares move strongly with local
economic conditions and local house price growth. In this light, we assess the effects of housing
prices and credit supply on young-firm activity. Our panel IV estimation on MSA-level data
yields large effects of local house price changes on local young-firm employment growth and
employment shares and a separate, smaller role for locally exogenous shifts in bank lending
supply. A novel test shows that house price effects work through wealth, liquidity and collateral
effects on the propensity to start new firms and expand young ones. Aggregating local effects to
the national level, housing market ups and downs play a major role – as transmission channel and
driving force – in medium-run fluctuations in young-firm employment shares in recent decades.
The great housing bust after 2006 largely drove the cyclical collapse of young-firm activity
during the Great Recession, reinforced by a contraction in bank loan supply. As we also show,
when the young-firm activity share falls (rises), local employment shifts strongly away from
(towards) younger and less-educated workers.


Steven J. Davis
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu

John C. Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
    I.      Introduction

         Workers at young firms – less than 60 months since first paid employee – fell from 17.9
percent of private sector employees in 1987 to 9.1 percent in 2014 (Figure 1). This pronounced
shift away from young firms is part of a broader secular decline in business formation rates,
business volatility, the pace of job reallocation, and worker mobility rates in the United States.1
Overlaying these long-term developments, the growth rate of the young-firm activity share varies
cyclically, as seen in Figure 2. Each bar shows the average annual log change in the young-firm
employment share during the indicated cycle episode, deviated about the mean annual change
from 1981 to 2014. The young-firm share falls relative to trend in aggregate contractions and
rises or falls more slowly in expansions. Except for the early 2000s, the negative young-firm
fluctuation in contractions intensified over time, and the positive fluctuation in expansions
weakened. Indeed, the Great Recession and its aftermath involve the worst relative performance
for young firms in at least 35 years.
         In light of these observations, we investigate three related questions: First, what is the
role of housing market developments, especially the massive boom and bust since the late 1990s,
in the fortunes of younger firms? Second, what is the role of credit market conditions? Third,
how do young-firm fortunes translate to labor market outcomes? To address these questions, we
exploit the abundant spatial and time-series variation in local housing market and credit
conditions in the United States. Our main goal is to better understand the cyclical and medium-
run fluctuations in the performance and activity shares of young firms.2 We seek to estimate the
causal effect of local house price changes on local young-firm activity and to develop evidence
on the channels through which housing prices affect young-firm activity. We also quantify the
role of house price changes and bank loan supply shocks in national and local fluctuations of
young-firm activity shares. Finally, we quantify the implications of young-firm activity shares
for employment outcomes by worker age, education and gender.
         Section II describes our data sources for local young-firm activity measures, housing
prices, housing supply elasticities, credit supply shifts and cyclical conditions at the aggregate

1
  These secular developments are well documented in recent work and the subject of active
study. See Davis et al. (2007), Davis et al. (2010), Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2012),
Fujita (2012), Lazear and Spletzer (2012), Hyatt and Spletzer (2013), Davis and Haltiwanger
(2014), Decker et al. (2014ab), Haltiwanger, Hathaway and Miranda (2014), Hathaway and Litan
(2014ab), Karahan et al. (2015), Molloy et al. (2016) and Pugsley and Şahin (2018).
2
  In contrast, recent work by Davis and Haltiwanger (2014) and Karahan et al. (2015), for
example, consider forces behind the long-term shift away from younger firms.
                                                                                                      1
and local levels. Section III first expands on our characterization of trend and cycle movements
in young-firm activity shares. At the national level, the Great Recession involved an historic
deterioration in young-firm performance (relative to a declining trend) on multiple margins,
including the firm startup rate and the growth rate of young relative to older firms. At the state
level, changes in young-firm employment shares covary strongly and positively with local cycle
conditions and with the growth rate of local house prices.
       Section IV implements two IV estimation approaches to identify the causal effect of local
house price changes on local young-firm activity shares.3 Our first approach exploits national
housing boom and bust episodes that differentially affect MSA-level house prices due to
differences in local housing supply elasticities. To obtain instruments that isolate arguably
exogenous variation in local house price movements, we interact period effects (boom and bust)
with the Saiz (2010) housing supply elasticity measure. The identification idea is that a common
shock to local housing demand generates cross-MSA differences in local house price movements
due to exogenous spatial differences in housing supply elasticities. This approach follows the
same identification strategy as the highly influential work of Mian and Sufi (2009, 2011, 2014),
but we focus on a different outcome variable (young-firm activity shares) and consider additional
controls to address various threats to identification. In our second IV approach, we instrument
local house price changes using the interaction between local housing supply elasticity and local
cyclical indicators.
       Our two IV approaches exploit different sources of data variation, but they yield similar
estimates for the effect of local house price changes on young-firm activity shares. Both
approaches address (serious) concerns about measurement error in local house price data.
Beyond that, each approach offers certain advantages and disadvantages. In its focus on national
boom and bust episodes, the first IV approach facilitates comparisons to previous research. By
encompassing a much longer time period and eleven times as many observations, the second
approach readily accommodates the inclusion of local loan supply shocks.
       We supplement our second IV approach by building on Greenstone, Mas and Ngyugen
(2015) to isolate exogenous MSA-level shifts in the supply of bank lending to small (and young)

3
 Our focus on activity shares differs from previous work on how local house prices affect the
demand for local non-traded goods and services (e.g., Mian and Sufi, 2011), local self-
employment and small-firm employment (e.g., Adelino et al., 2015), and the local pace of job
creation and destruction at young firms (e.g., Mehrotra and Sergeyev, 2016). In particular,
shocks that affect the level of local economic activity – but not its distribution between young
and mature firms – have no effect on our main outcome measures.
                                                                                                     2
firms.4 The idea here is that large banks differ in their financial fortunes, geographic footprints and
propensities to lend to smaller and younger firms. When a national bank pulls back from lending
to smaller and younger firms in a given MSA for reasons other than local economic conditions, it
produces an exogenous drop in loan supply to young firms in the MSA. Consistent with this view,
we find that “small” business bank loan supply shocks have statistically significant effects on
young-firm activity shares, and that these shocks have noteworthy effects on young-firm activity
shares in certain episodes, particularly the Great Recession.
        We also show that “small” business loan supply shocks have weaker effects on small firms
than young ones. Siemer (2018) reaches the same conclusion using different data and an empirical
design that exploits industry differences in the role of external financing. In addition, we find
weaker effects of housing prices on small firms than young ones. These findings reflect the
heterogeneous character of the small-firm population. The bulk of small-firm employment resides
in firms that are mature, relatively stable, and have little need or desire for credit-fueled expansion.
In contrast, young firms are much more volatile and highly prone to up-or-out growth dynamics.5
Most young firms are also small. Thus, shocks to the supply of “small” business bank lending have
much stronger effects on activity in young firms than in the average small firm.
        As we discuss in Section V, housing market conditions can affect young firms and the
local economy through a variety of wealth, liquidity, collateral, credit supply and consumption
demand channels. That discussion leads us to data and empirical designs that help disentangle
these channels. Since many studies find large effects of housing price changes on consumption
expenditures, we test whether they affect local economies only through consumption demand.
Our test of this view is new and conceptually simple: If house price changes work entirely
through consumption demand channels, the local industry growth rate response should be
invariant to the age structure of firms in the local industry. A natural alternative to this age-
invariance hypothesis says that the local industry response rises with its young-firm activity
share due to wealth, collateral, and liquidity effects of house prices on the propensity to start a
new business or expand a young one. We find overwhelming statistical evidence against the age-


4
  Other related work with a focus on the Great Recession period includes Chodorow-Reich
(2014), Burcu et al. (2015), Huang and Stephens (2015) and Siemer (2018). Our empirical
approach to identifying bank loan supply shocks is closest to that of Greenstone et al. (2015).
5
  For evidence that young age is much more indicative of high growth propensity, while small
size is not (conditional on age), see Section 4.2 in Davis and Haltiwanger (1999) and
Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2013). For evidence on the prevalence of up or out behavior
among younger businesses, see Davis et al. (2009) and Haltiwanger et al. (2016).
                                                                                                      3
invariance hypothesis. The departures from age invariance fit the alternative view and involve
large effects on the distribution of employment growth across MSA-industry cells in periods
with large housing price movements. In a dynamic extension, we also find that the positive
effect of local house prices changes on local industry growth rates is both larger and more
persistent in MSA-industry cells with a larger share of young-firm activity.
         To quantify the role of housing market developments, Section VI combines local house
price changes with IV estimates of their causal effect to obtain implied paths for local young-firm
activity shares. We then aggregate to the national level and ask how well the results account for
the episode-by-episode cycle movements in Figure 2 and analogous year-by-year changes. By
design, our quantification exercise captures the effects of exogenous house price changes and the
role of house prices in transmitting shocks that originate elsewhere. The exercise also incorporates
a separate role for exogenous bank loan supply shifts. The quantification results imply that housing
market ups and downs are a major driver of medium-run fluctuations in young-firm activity shares,
especially since the late 1990s. The great housing bust after 2006 largely drove the collapse of
young-firm activity shares (relative to a declining trend) during the Great Recession, reinforced by
the effects of a contraction in bank loan supply. Shifts in the supply of bank lending also played a
material role in certain other episodes – contributing, for example, to the mild cyclical contraction
in young-firm activity in the early 2000s (Figure 2). A rebound in bank lending from 2010 to 2014
prevented an even larger decline in the young-firm employment share.
         Section VII investigates how the fortunes of young firms play out in the labor market. We
show that changes in local young-firm activity disproportionately load onto the employment of
younger and less-educated workers for both men and women. The dramatic drop in young-firm
activity shares during the Great Recession helps explain why younger and less-educated workers
fared even more poorly in the labor market than other demographic groups.


   II.      Data Sources
            a. Young-Firm Activity Measures
         Fort et al. (2013) and Davis and Haltiwanger (2014) show that spatial and industry
variation in job flows, worker flows, and growth rate differentials by firm size and age provide
much scope for analysis and identification. We also exploit data sets that offer variation by firm
age, firm size, industry and local area (State or MSA). Our outcome measures derive from
administrative records that cover all firms with paid employees. A key advantage of the resulting


                                                                                                     4
activity measures is that they are not subject to missing observations or sampling variability,
even within narrow geographic and industry cells.
      Our analysis of young-firm activity relies heavily on two Census Bureau statistical products:
Business Dynamic Statistics (BDS) and Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI). The BDS
includes employment statistics by firm size, firm age, state, MSA and industry tabulated from
micro data in the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).6 The LBD covers the universe of firms
and establishments in the nonfarm business sector with at least one paid employee. Employee
counts pertain to the payroll period covering the 12th of March in each year from 1976 to 2014.
The LBD includes the location of each establishment and, hence, the distribution of each firm’s
employment across states and MSAs. While firm characteristics reflect the national firm, the
BDS state (MSA) activity measures cover all establishments operating in the state (MSA) for the
industry, firm size or firm age group.
         For our purposes, it is essential to have a suitable measure of firm age and to consistently
track young-firm activity over time. Firm age in the BDS reflects the age of its oldest
establishment when the firm first became a legal entity. In turn, establishment age equals the
number of years since operations began (as indicated by one or more paid employees) in the
establishment’s current narrowly defined industry. For a startup business comprised of all new
establishments, firm age is initially set to zero. For firms newly created from one or more
existing establishments through a merger, spinoff or corporate reorganization, firm age is
initially set to the age of its oldest establishment. From that point forward, the firm ages naturally
as long as it exists. Simple ownership changes do not trigger a change in firm age, and the BDS
concept of business startups reflects new firms with only age-zero establishments. These
features of the BDS are a major strength, as they ensure that our young-firm activity measures
and their evolution are not distorted by firm restructurings and ownership changes.
          For simplicity and brevity, our analysis focuses on two age groups: “young” firms less
than five years old (fewer than 60 months), and “mature” firms that are at least five years old.
Using these definitions, the BDS enables us to track young- and mature-firm activity measures at
the national and state levels in a consistent manner from 1981 to 2014 and from 1992 to 2014 at
the MSA level. The BDS reports employment and firm counts as of March in the indicated year
and March-to-March changes and growth rates. Appendix A provides more information about
the level, change and growth rate statistics in the BDS and how we exploit the data.


6
    The BDS is a public use database at www.census.gov/ces/dataproducts/bds/index.html.
                                                                                                    5
       The BDS does not simultaneously classify young-firm activity measures by state (or
MSA) and industry. To overcome this limitation, we turn to the QWI in Section V when we
investigate the channels through which house price changes affect young-firm and industry
activity shares. We use the QWI to track young-firm employment at the MSA-industry-age level
for more than 30 states from 1999 to 2015. The firm age concept in the QWI follows the BDS
exactly. We also exploit the QWI to investigate how young-firm activity shares vary with
employment outcomes by gender, age and education in MSA and MSA-industry level data.
           b. Local Housing Price and Supply Elasticity Measures
       We measure house price changes using data at the state and MSA levels from the Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). These data are available for the entire 1981-2014 period
considered in our analysis. As explained below, we seek to isolate local house price movements
that are exogenous with respect to local young-firm activity shares by interacting other variables
with the Saiz (2010) measure of the local housing supply elasticity. His measure, available at the
MSA level, reflects a careful effort to quantify supply elasticities based on detailed studies of
local zoning, regulatory and natural topographic and geophysical barriers to residential housing
construction. Saiz produces housing supply elasticities for 248 MSAs. For 15 of these MSAs, we
cannot produce all regressors in our empirical specifications on a balanced-panel basis. Thus, we
typically report results for samples that contain 233 MSAs, roughly three times as many as in
Mian and Sufi (2011).
           c. Bank Lending Measures
       We follow Greenstone, Mas and Ngyugen (2015) (hereafter GMN) in using data on small
business loan activity that banks file in compliance with the Community Re-Investment Act of
1996 (CRA). The CRA requires banks with assets greater than 1 billion to report annually on
small business loans at the county level. We aggregate these CRA data to the MSA level. Like
GMN, we consider the volume of loans to businesses with less than $1 million in gross revenue.
We build on the GMN approach to construct local “small” business loan supply shocks using a
modified Bartik-like approach, as detailed in Section V below. Although the CRA data explicitly
specify loans to small business, we think there is considerable overlap between credit supply
shifts for small business lending and credit supply shifts for young business lending. Our
empirical results strongly support that view.
       When integrating data across sources, we pay careful attention to the timing of the
observations. BDS employment data reflect the payroll period covering the 12th day of March in
each calendar year. We measure employment changes and changes in all other variables over the
                                                                                                    6
same March-to-March intervals. It is straightforward to align the timing for most of our
variables, because they are available on a monthly or quarterly basis. The annual CRA data are
an exception. Appendix C details how we construct our CRA-based measures.
             d. Local and National Cycle Indicators and Other Variables
          We supplement our young-firm activity measures with local and national business cycle
indicators. At the state and MSA level, we use unemployment rates from the BLS Local Area
Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) program, which draws on data from the Current Population
Survey, Current Employment Statistics, claims for unemployment insurance benefits and other
sources. We have consistent measures of unemployment rates at the state level from 1980 to
2014 and at the MSA level from 1990 to 2014. We use real GDP growth rates as a national
business cycle indicator. We obtain annual county-level population data from the Census Bureau,
which we map to MSA as explained in Appendix A. Finally, we rely on the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages (QCEW) at the national and MSA-industry level (2-digit NAICS) to
construct additional controls and instruments for local demand shifts.


   III.      Secular, Cyclical and Spatial Patterns in Young-Firm Activity
             a. Aggregate Measures of Young-Firm Activity
   The patterns depicted in Figures 1 and 2 reflect changes along several margins at young and
mature firms. To see this point, write the change from t-1 to t in young-firm employment as

            !"#$% − !"'(
                     #$%
                         = [!"+ + ∑/#0((!"# − !"'(
                                               #'( ]    /
                                                   ) − !"'( ≡ 4!5"#$% − !"'(
                                                                         /
                                                                                           (1)

where !"#$% is employment in young firms (age<5) in year t, !"+ is employment in startup firms
(age=0) in t, and !"# is employment in firms of age a in t. This accounting identity says that the
young-firm employment change equals the net change among firms that remain young, inclusive
of new employment at startup firms, minus employment at firms that age out of the young group.
Similarly, the employment change from t-1 to t among mature firms is the net change among the
already mature as of t-1 plus employment at firms that age into the mature group in t. A parallel
set of accounting relationships holds for the numbers of young and mature firms.
          We express young-firm employment as a share of total private-sector employment. Thus,
Figure 1 plots the evolution of !"#$% /!" , where !" is the count of all paid employees in the
nonfarm private sector in March of year t. Figure 2 plots the average annual value of
78(!"#$% /!" ) − 78(!"'(
                     #$%
                         /!"'( ) for each cycle episode, deviated about its mean value from 1981


                                                                                                    7
to 2014. Appendix B presents additional evidence on the secular and cyclical behavior of young-
firm activity measures, which we summarize here. Appendix Figure B1 shows a strong secular
decline in the firm startup rate since the mid 1980s, a further large drop in the Great Recession,
and little recovery afterwards. The firm exit rate moves counter cyclically with little or no trend.7
The net entry rate of firms actually turned negative in the Great Recession for the first time since
at least 1981, and it remains near zero more recently. These developments translate into a
pronounced drop in the share of firms with paid employees that are less than five years old –
from nearly 45 percent in 1981 to 28 percent in 2014 (Figure B2).
       Figure B3 reports net growth rates for young-firm and mature-firm employment,
inclusive of entry and exit for each age group.8 For changes from t-1 to t, the BDS classifies
establishments into firm age groups based on age of parent firm at t. Young firms exhibit much
higher net growth rates than mature firms. This pattern underscores the importance of young
firms in the job creation process, as highlighted in Haltiwanger et al. (2013). However, young
firms exhibit larger growth rate declines in downturns, especially so in the Great Recession. In
fact, the net employment growth rate of young firms plummeted from 24 percent in 2006 to 8
percent in 2009, a dramatic negative swing of 16 percentage points. By way of comparison, the
net employment growth rate of mature firms fell from zero in 2006 to minus 6 percent in 2009.
       Appendix B also presents analogs to Figure 2 for other young-firm activity measures.
Figure B4 shows that the early 1980s and the Great Recession saw especially large declines
relative to trend in the young-firm share of firms with paid employees. Figure B5 shows that the
net employment growth rate of young firms saw especially large declines relative to mature firms
in the 1990-91 downturn and in the Great Recession. It’s worth stressing that the Great
Recession involved an historic deterioration in young-firm performance for all of the activity
measures we consider. In what follows, we focus on the young-firm employment share, but
Figures B1-B5 make clear that secular declines and procyclical movements in young-firm
performance are present on several margins.



7
  The BDS measure of firm exit rates reflect legal entities that shut down all establishments.
Like the startup rate, the BDS exit rate concept is designed to abstract from firm ownership
changes and M&A activity.
8
  The BDS follows Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996) in calculating group-level growth rates
as the employment weighted average of establishment-level growth rates in the group, where
each establishment’s growth rate is measured as its change from t-1 to t divided by the simple
average of its employment in t-1 and t.
                                                                                                     8
           b. State-Level Fluctuations in Young-Firm Employment Shares
       Our empirical study exploits spatial and time variation to investigate the influence of
credit conditions and housing markets on young-firm activity. To help motivate this approach,
Figure 3A presents a scatter plot of log differences in young-firm employment shares (vertical
axis) against changes in the unemployment rate (horizontal axis) at the state-year level for the
period from 1981 to 2014. There is much state-level time series variation in these measures,
which we will use in our econometric investigation. An increase in the state-level unemployment
rate of one percentage point is associated with a 1.77 log point drop in the state’s young-firm
employment share. Figure 3B shows the contemporaneous relationship between log differences
in the young-firm employment share (vertical axis) and log differences in real housing prices at
the state-year level from 1981 to 2014. Greater house price appreciation in a state tends to
coincide with a larger rise (or smaller fall) in its young-firm employment share. A real house
price gain of 10 log points in a state is associated with an increase in its young-firm employment
share of 3 log points. The t-statistic for this relationship is about 15.9 Appendix Figures B6 and
B7 show that greater house price appreciation in a state also coincides with a larger rise (or
smaller fall) in the young-firm share of all firms with paid employees and in the firm startup rate.
       Figure 3B and the related results in Figures B6 and B7 might appear at odds with results
in Hurst and Lusardi (2004). Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and
regional house price variation from 1985 to 1988, they test whether households in Census
regions with strong house price gains were as unlikely to start a business as households in other
regions. They do not reject this hypothesis. Restricting our state-level panel data to the 1985-
1988 period in Hurst and Lusardi, and rerunning our Figure 3B regression, yields an estimated
coefficient of 0.29 (0.06). So different sample periods do not explain our different results.
Instead, we think the different results reflect important conceptual and measurement differences
between our study and theirs. First, business starts in the PSID include those with no employees,
while our measures consider only firms with paid employees. Davis et. al. (2009) show that non-
employer businesses are much more numerous than employer businesses, but most non-employer
businesses are very small, contribute little to aggregate economic activity, and are unlikely to



9
  Figure 3b reveals a few large outliers in the log changes of young-firm shares. The estimated
relationship is robust to winsorizing the log differences at the 99.75 and the 0.25 percentiles (one
quarter of one percent). The estimated slope coefficient is 0.29 (0.02) with the winsorized data
compared to 0.30 (0.02) in Figure 3b.
                                                                                                     9
ever hire a worker. Second, our use of administrative data sources yields much more precise
estimates of young-firm activity in narrower geographic areas.
         Figures 3A and 3B also indicate that the empirical relationships among changes in
unemployment rates, house prices and young-firm employment shares are approximately (log)
linear in our data. We stick to linear specifications in the econometric results reported below. In
unreported results, we find little evidence of departures from linearity.
         In summary, Figures 3A and 3B tell us that stronger state-level economic conditions and
rising house prices involve an increase in the state’s share of economic activity accounted for by
young firms. Of course, these empirical relationships do not tell us why young-firm activity
shares covary strongly with local conditions, but they suggest the possibility that housing market
developments have important causal effects on young-firm activity shares. Hurst and Stafford
(2004), Mian and Sufi (2011), Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2015) and Agarwal et al. (2015), among
others, find evidence that house price appreciation stimulates household spending and local
economic activity more generally. As noted, our focus is on the effects of house price movements
on young-firm activity shares in the local economy.


   IV.      Local Effects of Housing Prices and Loan Supply on Young-Firm Activity
            a. Overview of Estimation and Identification
         We implement two instrumental variables (IV) estimation strategies to identify the causal
effects of local house price changes on local young-firm activity shares. Specifically, we
construct instruments for housing price changes by interacting local housing supply elasticities
from Saiz (2010) with time-period effects (first approach) or with time-varying local economic
conditions (second approach). Our first approach uses the same identification strategy as Mian
and Sufi (2011) but differs in its focus on young-firm activity shares and in our use of panel data
to control for unobserved factors that affect local MSA trends. Our second approach covers a
much longer period and facilitates the inclusion of loan supply shocks.
            b. Boom-Bust Panel Regressions – IV Approach 1
   Our first IV approach uses 466 observations on annual average log changes in MSA-level
data – 233 boom changes from 2002 to 2006 and 233 bust changes from 2007 to 2010. We use
these data to estimate the following statistical model:

   :;< = ∑< =< >< + ∑; =; >; + ?@A;< + B;<                     (2) (Second stage)
                                       E
   @A;< = ∑; C; >; + ∑< C< >< + ∑< >< D; F< + G;<              (3) (First stage)

                                                                                                   10
where :;< is the log change in the young-firm employment share for MSA m and period s, @A;<
is the contemporaneous log change in the MSA’s house price index, >< is a dummy for period s,
>; is dummy for MSA m, D; is a cubic polynomial in the Saiz housing supply elasticity, and =H
and CH are coefficients on dummy variables. The chief parameter of interest is ?, the response of
the change in the local young-firm employment share to the local house price change.
                                                                   E
        To identify ? we rely on the exclusion restrictions, E(>< D; , B;< ) = 0, which says that
    E
>< D; influences young-firm employment shares only through house price growth, conditional on
period and MSA effects. Stacking boom and bust episodes lets us control for MSA-specific
trends in the 2000s, addressing concerns that these trends reflect other factors that happen to
correlate with local housing supply elasticities, as argued by Davidoff (2016). We consider other
threats to identification shortly.
        Figure 4 shows the MSA-level changes in young-firm employment shares and house
prices that we use to estimate (2) and (3). Housing prices rose across MSAs during the boom
from 2002 to 2006, and they fell in the vast majority of MSAs during the bust from 2007 to
2010. Both periods exhibit enormous local variation and a strong positive relationship across
MSAs between changes in housing prices and young-firm employment shares. Other periods
show smaller movements, which makes them less useful under IV approach 1.
        Table 1 reports regression results for specification (2) fit to the MSA-level data. We find
a positive, statistically significant effect of local housing price growth on local young-firm
activity shares. According to the IV estimates in Column (4), which control for common period
effects and MSA-specific trends during the 2000s, an increase in local real housing prices of 10
log points per year yields a gain of 1.94 log points per year in the local young-firm employment
share. IV estimates for ? are somewhat larger than the corresponding OLS estimates, in line
with the view that measurement error in the local housing price indices produces some
attenuation under OLS. F-tests show a very strong first stage, with test statistics well above 10.
As seen in Figure 5, the IV-estimated relationship in Table 1 is very similar in the boom and bust
periods, and it is not driven by a few outliers.
        We think the IV estimation strategy and Column (4) specification in Table 1 yields a
plausible estimate for the causal effect of local house price changes on the local young-firm
employment share. The specification controls for unobserved factors that drive MSA-specific
trends in young-firm activity shares during the 2000 and that also correlate with the Saiz housing
supply elasticity across MSAs. The specification also controls for common period effects, and it

                                                                                                    11
deals with measurement error in the housing price indices. We don’t think reverse causality is a
concern, given our choice of dependent variable in (2). That is, we do not think exogenous shifts
in the local young-firm share of activity drive changes in local house price growth.
        A more serious concern is that (2) and (3) may not adequately control for local shocks
that affect local house price growth and our second-stage outcome measure, :;< . Omitted
variables with these properties can produce a failure of our key identifying assumption,
       E
! (>< D; , B;< ) = 0. To see this point, suppose the true specification is:

                                             E
        :;< = ∑< =< >< + ∑; =; >; + ?@A;< + O;< P+B;<                         (2') (Second stage)
                                           E       E
       @A;< = ∑; C; >; + ∑< C< >< + ∑< >< D; γ< + O;< R + G;<                 (3') (First stage)

where O;< is a vector of local shocks that affects young-firm activity shares and local house
                                    E
prices. Suppose further that ! (>< D; , O;< ) ≠ 0, i.e., the local shocks O;< are also correlated with
                                                                              E
our instrument. These circumstances violate our exclusion restriction, ! (>< D; , B;< ) = 0, in the
estimated system (2) and (3), yielding a bias of unknown direction in the estimate of ?. 10 A
solution is to instead estimate the system (2') and (3') with controls for O;< .
        Motivated by this type of identification threat, we now consider three additional controls.
First, we include a local cycle control: the average annualized change in the MSA-level
unemployment rate during the period. Second, we control for a local demand shifter that varies
by MSA and period, which we construct as (the lagged MSA-level industry employment share)
X (the current-period national industry employment growth) summed over all 2-digit NAICS
industries.11 Finally, we control for the average annualized growth rate in the MSA-level
population during the period, using data from the Bureau of the Census.
        Table 2 reports regression results for (2'). We again find a strong positive impact of
local housing price growth on young firm activity shares for the IV results. Conditioning on all
three additional controls in Column (4), an increase in local real housing prices of 10 log points
per year raises the local young-firm employment share by 1.61 log points per year.12 This effect


10
   As one example of an omitted variable that causes a downward bias in the estimate of ?,
suppose that local housing prices rise with the entry (exit) of local establishments operated by
mature national firms. This type of entry (exit) by mature firms also causes a mechanical
decrease (increase) in the young-firm employment share.
11
   We use annual QCEW data to construct this Bartik-type measure, averaging over years for
each MSA within the boom and bust periods, respectively. Results are similar using 4-digit
industry data, but there is much cell-level data suppression at that level of disaggregation.
12
   Because of the dotcom bust, San Francisco stands out as an MSA with a large drop in the
                                                                                                    12
is statistically significant at the 5 percent level, and an F-test again provides strong evidence
against the hypothesis of weak instruments.
           c. Annual Panel Regressions – IV Approach 2
       Our second IV approach uses annual data and a different source of variation to construct
instruments for MSA-level house-price changes. Specifically, we estimate the following model:

                                              E
:;" = ∑" =" >" + ∑; =; >; + ?@A;" + VW:W;" + O;" P+B;"                        (4) (Second stage)
                                    E               E
@A;" = ∑; C; >; + ∑< C" >" + W:W;" D; F + XW:W;" + O;" R + G;"                (5) (First stage)

where :;" is the log change from year t-1 to t in the young-firm share for MSA m, W:W;" is the
contemporaneous change in the MSA-level unemployment rate, and O;" is an additional set of
controls that vary at the MSA-year level. As before, we consider MSA fixed effects and
common period effects as controls. We again use the local housing supply elasticity to construct
instruments, but we now interact it with a local cycle measure rather a common period effect.
Hence, IV approach 2 relies on a different source of variation than IV approach 1. Approach 2
also exploits data for a much longer time span, yielding eleven times as many observations.
                                                 E
       The exclusion restriction is now !(W:W;" D; , B;" ) = 0; i.e., the interaction between the
local cycle and local supply elasticity affects :;" only through its effect on local house price
growth, @A;" , conditional on controls. The motivation for IV 2 applied to the system (4) and (5)
is similar to that of IV 1 applied to the earlier system. Specifically, the IV approach addresses
concerns about measurement error, and it allows us to isolate aspects of local house price
changes that are plausibly exogenous with respect to changes in local young-firm activity shares.
For the same reasons as before, we do not think reverse causality is a serious concern. And as
before, we address concerns related to omitted variables by including multiple controls.
       Table 3 reports estimates for ?, the chief parameter of interest in (4). The sample contains
the same 233 MSAs as before but now covers the period from 1992 to 2014. Qualitatively, the
Table 3 results are the same as those in Tables 1 and 2, but the IV estimates of ? are 50-100
percent larger in Table 3. (However, the precision of the estimates makes it hard to draw strong
conclusions in this regard.) According to Column (4), which entails the fullest set of controls, an
annual increase in local real housing prices of 10 log points raises the local young-firm



young-firm employment share from 2002 to 2006, even as local housing prices appreciated. In
unreported results that exclude data for San Francisco, the estimate of ? corresponding to
Column (4) in Table 2 is 2.03, notably larger than the full-sample estimate.
                                                                                                    13
employment share by 3.0 log points. The gaps between OLS and IV estimates of ? are much
greater in Table 3 than in Tables 1 and 2, which makes good sense given concerns about
measurement error in the local housing price indices. In particular, local house price changes are
greater during the boom and bust than in other periods. Thus, the signal-to-noise ratio in the
housing price indices is larger in the boom-bust sample than in the full 1992-2014 sample. As a
consequence, attenuation bias under OLS is greater in Table 3 than in Tables 1 and 2.
             d. Adding Small Business Lending Shocks under IV Approach 2
         We now extend (4) and (5) to incorporate a role for “small” business loan supply shocks
as potential drivers of young-firm activity shares. As discussed in Section V, multiple sources of
credit supply shifts can affect young-firm activity. For the moment, we aim to estimate the role
of shifts in bank loan supply to small and young firms due to forces that are exogenous to local
economic activity. We follow the approach of GMN (2015), who exploit the fact that national
and regional banks differ in their financial fortunes and their geographic footprints. To see the
basic idea, suppose bank B with a large local footprint reduces its lending to small and young
firms nationally for reasons unrelated to local conditions. Bank B’s pullback in local lending to
young firms reduces their credit access, assuming credit supply is less than perfectly elastic.
         To operationalize this idea and construct local loan supply shocks, we use CRA data on
the volume of individual bank lending to small businesses in each MSA.13 For every pair of
consecutive years, we first fit the following regression by weighted least squares:

                     Y;Z" = [\];" + ^_8`Z" + BHZ"                             (6)

where Y;Z" is the growth rate in the volume of real small business loans by bank holding
company j in MSA m from t-1 to t, and we weight by the bank’s volume of small business loans
in MSA m in t-1. The MSA effects control for local conditions, and the Bank effects capture the
national growth of small business lending by the bank holding company (hereafter, “bank”).
         Next, to estimate the locally exogenous component of the growth rate in small business
bank lending to MSA m, we construct a Bartik-like measure given by:

                                            c Z"
                          \^a;" = ∑Z b;Z"'( ^_8`                        (7)

where b;Z,"'( is bank j’s share of small business lending in MSA m at t-1. SBL captures cross-
MSA variation in small business lending by the national banks that differ in their fortunes and in

13
     See Appendix C for more information about the CRA data and how we use them.
                                                                                                    14
the geographic footprints of their small business lending activity. We treat this measure as
exogenous to local young-firm employment shares.
       Incorporating small business loan supply shocks, our statistical model becomes

                                                       E
:;" = ∑" =" >" + ∑; =; >; + ?@A;" + VW:W;" + d\^a;" + O;" P+B;"                       (8)
                                    E                        E
@A;" = ∑; C; >; + ∑< C" >" + W:W;" D; F + XW:W;" + e\^a;" + O;" R + G;" (9)

Because our SBL data run only from 1999 to 2014, we lose the ability to control for year effects
in an unrestricted manner while retaining enough power to recover precise estimates for the key
parameters. Thus, we drop the year effects and instead introduce a quadratic polynomial in
national GDP growth rates in the X vector.
       Table 4 reports OLS and IV estimates of the key parameters in (8). We find positive,
statistically significant effects of local bank loan supply shocks on local young-firm activity
shares. An increase in the loan supply shock of 10 log points raises the local young-firm
employment share by 0.2 to 0.24 log points in the IV specifications. The estimated effects of
local housing price changes in Table 4 are very similar to results in Table 3, despite the shorter
sample period and inclusion of loan supply shocks. The evidence that bank loan supply shocks
matter for young-firm activity shares is weaker than the evidence that housing price growth
matters. As we will see below, the bank loan supply shocks also play a much smaller role in
accounting for the medium- and short-run fluctuations in young-firm activity shares.
           e. Results for the Employment Growth Rate as Dependent Variable
       By treating the young-firm employment share as the dependent variable, the
specifications in Tables 1-4 control for omitted variables that have equiproportional effects on
the activity levels of young and mature firms. This specification feature is attractive from an
identification standpoint, but we are also interested in effects on employment growth. To that
end, Table 5 reconsiders the statistical model (8) and (9) but treats MSA-level growth rates in the
employment of young and mature firms as dependent variables. According to the IV results in
Panel A, an increase in local housing prices of 10 log points raises local young-firm employment
by 3.1 to 3.3 log points. Panel B, in contrast, shows a much smaller effect on mature-firm
employment that is statistically insignificant when including our full battery of controls. Loan
supply shocks also have much larger effects on young-firm than mature-firm employment. In
short, Table 5 says that house-price changes and loan supply shocks generate much large
percentage changes in the activity levels of young firms as compared to mature ones.


                                                                                                     15
           f. Small vs. Young-Firm Effects
   Thus far, we have focused on how housing market conditions and bank loan supply affect
young-firm activity. Young firms are also small (Davis et al., 2007 and Haltiwanger, Jarmin and
Miranda, 2013). Moreover, as discussed in Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) and Fort et al. (2013),
firm size often serves as a proxy for access to credit markets. A natural question then is whether
our main findings hold for small firms as well as young ones. The short answer is no: Our main
findings do not hold up if we consider small-firm activity shares as the outcome of interest,
although some aspects of our results hold in weaker form. Appendix B provides detailed backing
for this claim. Here, we summarize a few key points and explain why young-firm activity shares
are more responsive than small-firm shares.
   For present purposes, we define small firms as those with fewer than 50 paid employees.
Using this threshold, the small-firm share of private-sector employees fell from 32 percent in
1981 to 27 percent in 2014. This aspect of small-firm behavior mirrors, in muted form, the
secular fall in young-firm shares. However, unlike the pattern documented in Figure 2, the small-
firm employment share moves counter cyclically (Appendix Figure B.8). An important reason
for this dynamic pattern is that many firms slip below the small-large threshold in contractions
and rise above it during expansions (Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh, 1996).
   In Table B.1, we compare the results of estimating (8) with the small-firm share as the
dependent variable to the results for the young-firm share. Whether we run OLS or IV 2, the
estimated effects of local housing price growth are about three-to-four times greater on young-
firm shares than on small-firm shares. The same pattern holds for the estimated effects of small
business bank loan supply shocks. That is, “small” business bank loan supply shocks have larger
estimated effects on young-firm shares than on small-firm shares.
   Given the threshold-crossing issue, we also conduct the small-versus-young comparison
using a different dependent variable. Accordingly, Table B.2 reports the results of estimating (8)
for the growth rate differential between small firms and large ones, where we classify each firm
into a given size bin for t-1 and t based on its size in t. This approach follows Davis and
Haltiwanger (1999) and Fort et al. (2013). Table B.2 also reports results of estimating (8) for the
growth rate differential between young and mature firms. Local house price changes have similar
effects on the local young-mature and small-large employment growth differentials. We also find
strong statistical evidence that local small business loan supply shocks affect young-firm shares
but no statistically discernable effect on local small-firm shares.


                                                                                                   16
   We interpret these results as evidence that young firms in particular, rather than small firms,
are especially sensitive to credit availability. As discussed in Gertler and Gilchrist (1994), the
informational frictions that raise external financing costs pertain to young firms more than small
ones. Young firms are also more dynamic, and more likely to bump up against credit restrictions
that constrain their growth. Most mature small firms, in contrast, have little prospect for rapid
growth regardless of credit availability.


   V.      Transmission Channels
           a. From House Prices and Credit Supply to Young-Firm Activity
        Local housing market conditions can affect young-firm activity and the local economy
through a variety of wealth, liquidity, collateral, credit supply, and consumption demand
channels. Independent of local housing market conditions, other local and national
developments can shift the supply of credit that young firms tap to finance their activities.
Empirically, Robb and Robinson (2012) show that young firms finance their activities using
home equity loans, personal loans, bank loans, and personal wealth.
        Much previous research finds a positive empirical relationship between personal wealth
and the propensity to start or own a business. Examples include Evans and Jovanovic (1989),
Holtz-Eakin et al. (1994), Gentry and Hubbard (2004) and Hurst and Lusardi (2004). Empirical
studies that specifically consider the impact of changes in home equity values on the propensity
to become self-employed or otherwise start a business include Black et al. (1996), Fan and White
(2003), Fairlie and Krashinsky (2012), Adelino et al. (2015), Schmalz, Sraer and Thesmar
(2015), Kerr, Kerr and Nanda (2015) and Harding and Rosenthal (2017). Jensen et al. (2014)
exploit high-quality Danish micro data and a legal change in 1992 that, for the first time, allowed
home equity to serve as collateral in bank loans to finance consumption expenditures or business
investment. This exogenous relaxation of collateral constraints led to an increase in new
business formation, more so for households that experienced larger increases in usable collateral.
        We turn now to a discussion of several channels through which house price changes and
credit supply shifts can affect business startup rates and young-firm activity shares.
Wealth Effects on Business Formation and Expansion
        A classic paper by Khilstrom and Laffont (1979) models the choice between operating a
risky firm and working for a riskless wage in general equilibrium. Individuals in their model
differ in absolute risk aversion levels. The least risk-averse individuals become entrepreneurs,
and the rest choose to be workers. Under certain regularity conditions, greater risk tolerances in
                                                                                                     17
the population lead to a greater number of entrepreneurs in equilibrium and higher wages. While
Khilstrom and Laffont do not model the determinants of risk aversion, a time-honored view
holds that absolute risk tolerance rises with wealth. Guiso and Paiella (2008) provide evidence.
Thus, by raising wealth levels, a local house-price boom increases risk tolerances among local
homeowners and thereby stimulates new firm formation.
       If existing young-firm owners face a similar tradeoff between less risky (stay small) and
more risky (become larger) undertakings, wealth gains among existing young-firm owners lead
to increases in their business activity levels. Kihlstrom and Laffont describe conditions that
ensure more risk-tolerant entrepreneurs run larger firms. Thus, insofar as many young-firm
owners also own homes, a housing price boom (bust) will lead to an expansion (contraction) in
young-firm activity levels. Of course, this mechanism also applies to homeowners who own
mature firms. We think local young-firm activity levels are likely to exhibit a larger proportional
response to local house price growth for two reasons: young-firm owners are more likely to own
a home in the same area as their businesses, and home equity is likely to form a larger share of
overall wealth for young-firm owners as compared to mature-firm owners.
       In short, the entrepreneurial choice model of Khilstrom and Laffont, plus standard views
about wealth and risk tolerance, imply that local house price booms (busts) cause an upturn
(downturn) in the local firm startup rate and in the local young-firm activity share. The latter
implication also rests on an auxiliary assumption of greater proportional responses to local house
price changes among young-firm owners.
       Wealth effects on young-firm activity shares can also arise for other reasons. Hurst and
Pugsley (2017) focus on the non-pecuniary benefits of business ownership such as “wanting to
be my own boss” and “wanting to pursue my passion.” They model the non-pecuniary benefits of
business ownership as separable from the utility of other consumption goods. Thus, as wealth
rises and the marginal utility of other consumption falls, households become more inclined to
indulge their tastes for business ownership. Effectively, owning a business is a normal good, the
demand for which rises with wealth. If local house price gains (losses) lead to higher (lower)
expenditures on other consumption goods, then housing booms (busts) nudge additional
households into (out of) business ownership.
       The Hurst-Pugsley mechanism provides a clear transmission channel from greater
housing wealth to greater self-employment. The implications for startups with paid employees
and young-firm employment shares are less clear. “Wanting to be my own boss” is a motive for
self-employment but does not require a business with paid employees. However, owning a
                                                                                                   18
business with paid employees indulges a taste for bossing others. So, depending on their precise
nature, non-pecuniary benefits of owning a business may or may not translate into a wealth effect
on the formation of new businesses with paid employees or on young-firm employment shares.
Liquidity and Collateral Effects
        Evans and Jovanovic (1989) focus on differences in entrepreneurial ability and liquidity
constraints as the key factors determining which individuals start a business. A large follow-on
literature concludes that relaxing credit constraints at the household level leads to greater self-
employment and more business startups. Examples include most of the studies cited above on
the impact of changes in home equity values on the propensity to become self-employed or start
a business. The common theme in these studies is that households can tap home equity gains to
relax liquidity constraints, increasing their ability to finance new and young businesses.
Moreover, banks that make loans to these households (or their businesses) collateralized by
home equity become more willing to extend credit as house price gains yield greater home
values. Of course, home equity collateral can facilitate the expansion of mature firms as well. As
in our discussion of wealth effects, there are good reasons to anticipate proportionally greater
effects of local house price gains on local young-firm activity relative to mature-firm activity.
Credit Supply Shifts
        New and young firms often rely on the owner’s personal wealth to finance business
activities, but their very newness implies little accumulation of business equity. And few young
firms are well positioned to raise equity or debt capital from external investors. For these
reasons, new and young businesses are likely to be especially sensitive to credit supply shifts that
involve bank loans to businesses and business owners (perhaps secured by housing collateral),
personal credit cards, and other sources of credit that young-firm owners and young firms,
especially, tap to finance their business activities.
        It is helpful to distinguish among various reasons for local credit supply shifts. First, local
economic fortunes affect the lending capacity of local banks. Insofar as new and younger firms
are relatively dependent on credit from local banks, shocks to the lending capacity of local banks
have a greater effect on young firms. The same point holds for local housing developments that
affect the lending capacity of local banks. When local banks suffer losses due to a bust in the
local housing market, their lending capacities diminish and the credit supply effects are likely to
weigh more heavily on younger firms. In other words, the effect of house price movements on
young-firm activity shares works partly through the capacity of local lenders to extend credit to
young firms and their owners. Other things equal, this impact of local housing market
                                                                                                      19
developments on local young-firm activity shares – working through the credit supply channel –
is smaller when local banks are less important as a source of credit to the local economy.
       Second, both local and national banks are likely to see local housing prices as indicators
of (future) local business conditions, affecting their willingness to lend. To be sure, this link
between house prices and bank lending reflects a perceived shift in business fundamentals rather
than a locally exogenous shift in credit supply. Nevertheless, the impact of such a shift in bank
willingness to lend to local businesses or their owners falls more heavily on young firms for
reasons we have discussed.
       Empirically, local house price changes covary positively with changes in the volume of
bank loans to local small (and presumably younger) businesses, as shown in Figure 6. To
construct the figure, we first regress annual log changes in real housing prices and the real
volume of bank loans to small businesses at the state-year level on state and year fixed effects
and annual changes in the state-level unemployment rate. We then plot the loan volume change
residuals against the house price change residuals. Even after sweeping out state, year and local
cycle effects, there is a strong relationship between house prices and bank loan volume to small
businesses. The empirical elasticity of local small business loan volume growth with respect to
local house price growth is 0.58 with a t-statistic of about 7.
       Third, local credit supply can shift due to factors that are exogenous to local economic
conditions and to local businesses. For example, when a national bank pulls back from lending to
smaller and younger firms in a given MSA for reasons other than local economic conditions, it
produces a locally exogenous drop in loan supply to young firms in the MSA. Our empirical
investigation in Section IV exploits this type of exogenous variation in bank loan supply to
estimate the causal effects of local credit supply shifts on local young-firm activity shares.
Consumption Demand Channel
       Recall from Section III that changes in young-firm activity shares covary strongly with
business cycle conditions in national and state-level data. These patterns suggest that demands
for the goods and services supplied by young firms are more income elastic than the demands for
mature-firm products. If so, then local young-firm demands are also likely to be more elastic
with respect to wealth shifts induced by local housing market ups and downs. In principle, this
type of non-uniform consumption demand shift could fully explain the response of young-firm
activity shares to local house price movements that we find in Section IV. We turn next to a
novel test of the proposition that local house-price changes affect the local economy – including
local young-firm activity shares – only through consumption demand channels.
                                                                                                    20
            b. Local Industry Responses to Local House Price Changes: A Test
        We now investigate whether and how the local industry growth response to local house
price changes depends on the local industry’s firm-age structure of employment. If house prices
work entirely through consumption demand channels, the local industry response will not depend
on its firm-age structure. This invariance proposition is our null hypothesis in the test below. In
contrast, if the wealth, liquidity, collateral and credit supply effects described above are at work,
the local industry growth response to local house price changes will rise with the local industry’s
young-firm activity share. This proposition is our alternative hypothesis in the test below.
        We implement this test using annual QWI data on employment and the firm-age structure
of employment at the industry-by-MSA level from 1999 to 2015. QWI data have three great
advantages for this purpose. First, the four-way sorting of employment into firm
age/industry/MSA/year cells affords a powerful test and a precise characterization of any
departures from age invariance. Second, the QWI derives from mandatory tax filings for
businesses with paid employees. As a result, we are not confronted by the small samples,
reporting errors and non-responses that present difficult challenges in survey data. Third, the
QWI data cover a time period with huge local house prices changes, which lets us precisely
estimate the effects of interest.
        We use the following 14 industry groups for each MSA: Construction (NAICS 23),
Manufacturing (31-33), Wholesale Trade (42), Retail Trade (44-45), Transportation and
Warehousing (48-49), Information (51), Finance and Insurance (52), Real Estate and Rental and
Leasing (53), Professional, Scientific and Technical Services (54), Management of Companies
and Enterprises (55), Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation
Services (56), Health Care and Social Assistance (62), Arts, Entertainment and Recreation (71)
and Accommodation and Food Services (72). We omit Agricultural Services (11), Mining (21)
and Utilities (22), because they have positive employment in few MSAs. We omit Educational
Services (61) and Other Services (81) because of QWI coverage limitations.14
        Now consider the regression specification,

                      fgZ;" = _ + h( W:W;" + hi @A;" + hj :kl8Y\ℎZ;,"'(
                              + n ∙ @A;" × :kl8Y\ℎZ;,"'( + q" + q; + qZ + BZ;"                 (10)


14
  The QWI mostly covers non-profits and religious organizations in NAICS 61 and 81. QWI
local employment growth in these two industries has a weak relationship to local cyclical
variables, including house price changes.
                                                                                                   21
where fgZ;" is the log employment change from year t-1 to t for industry j in MSA m, W:W;" is
a control for local economic conditions in MSA m in year t, @A;" is the log house price change
from year t-1 to t in MSA m, and :kl8Y\ℎZ;,"'( is the lagged young-firm employment share in
industry j and MSA m. The f terms denote fixed effects, and BZ;" is an error term. As before, we
use the change in the local unemployment rate from year t-1 to t as our W:W;" control. The chief
coefficient of interest is c, which tells us how the local industry-level response to local house
price changes varies with the (lagged) young-firm share of employment in the local industry.
Formally, the null hypothesis is n = 0, and the alternative is n > 0.
        Table 6, Panel A reports results for (10) fit to QWI data by OLS and IV. The data
resoundingly reject the age-invariance proposition: n̂ = 0.81 in Column (1), and a one-sided test
of the null hypothesis yields a t-statistic of nearly 14. In words, the local industry response to
higher local house prices rises with the local industry’s young-firm employment share. This
result supports the view that local house prices affect the local economy at least partly through
wealth, liquidity, collateral and credit supply effects on the propensity to start a new business or
expand a young one. Put differently, consumption demand effects do not fully explain the impact
of local house prices on local employment.
        The regression controls in column (1) guard against a spurious rejection of the age-
invariance proposition due to certain unmeasured factors. For example, easier credit conditions at
the national level may drive a more rapid appreciation of home prices and a credit-fueled
increase in young-firm employment shares at the same time. Conversely, tighter credit conditions
may slow or reverse home price appreciation and constrict young-firm employment shares. The
year effects control for this source of covariation between local house price changes and young-
firm activity shares. Similarly, the inclusion of MSA effects control for the tendency of cities
with higher population growth to experience greater home price appreciation and stronger gains
in young-firm employment shares.
        Column (2) of Panel A in Table 6 includes a full set of MSA-year effects as controls,
with little effect on the coefficient of interest. This result tells us that unmeasured sources of city-
level growth rate fluctuations (which might cause systematic co-movements between local
changes in home prices and young-firm shares) cannot account for our rejection of the age-
invariance proposition. Column (3) adds industry-year effects, and again we reject the age-
invariance proposition. Finally, column (4) uses our IV2 strategy and, once again, the data



                                                                                                     22
resoundingly reject the null in favor of the alternative. In short, the statistical evidence against
the age-invariance proposition is overwhelming and unlikely to be caused by omitted factors.
       How large are the departures from age invariance? To address this question, we compute
the regression-implied response differential between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the young-
firm employment shares across MSA-industry cells. We evaluate this response differential at
various points in the distribution of local house price changes. To be precise, we calculate

                           guvwk8vu_yzqq = n̂ {:kl8Y\ℎ|+'(+ }@A(w),             (11)

where n̂ is the estimated coefficient on the interaction term in regression (10), :kl8Y\ℎ|+'(+ is
the 90-10 differential in young-firm employment shares across local industries, and @A(w) is the
pth percentile of annual log changes in MSA-level home prices.
       Table 7 quantifies the departures from age invariance. Panels A and B report inputs to
(11), and panel C implements the calculation using n̂ = 0.813 from Column (1) in Table 6, Panel
A. Evaluating at the 90th percentile of the MSA-level house price change in the Boom, the
employment growth response differential is 2.2 log points per year between local industries at
the 90th and 10th percentiles of the young-firm employment share distribution. The cumulative
response differential is 9.4 log points over the Boom Period as a whole from 2002 to 2006.
Evaluating at the 10th percentile of the MSA-level house price distribution in the Bust, the
response differential is -2.3 log points per year. These are large departures from age invariance.
Of course, when MSA-level house price changes are small, the induced response differential
between industries with high and low young-firm employment shares is small as well.
           c. Hysteresis Effects and the Firm-Age Structure of Employment
       Lastly, we extend specification (10) to include the lagged main effect for local housing
price changes and its interaction with the lagged young-firm employment share in the local
industry. For brevity, Panel B in Table 6 reports only the coefficients on the interaction effects in
this dynamic extension to (10); the other coefficients are similar to the ones in Panel A.
       This dynamic extension yields two additional results: First, the local industry response to
an increase in local house prices now rises even more steeply with the local industry’s young-
firm share. For example, the immediate interaction effect is 1.295 in column (1) of Panel B, as
compared to 0.813 for the static specification reported in Panel A. Second, the dynamic
extension implies an amplification of the immediate interaction effect in the following year. To
see this point, note first that local housing price changes are highly persistent, with an AR1


                                                                                                       23
coefficient of 0.73 (s.e. of 0.012) when controlling for MSA fixed effects. Combining this AR
coefficient with the results in Column (1) of Panel B, the average net interaction effect one year
after a local housing price increase is (1.295 ∗ 0.73) − 0.696 = 0.249. Thus, the effect of a
local housing price increase on local industry employment growth rises in period t with the local
industry’s young-firm share, and it rises even further in period t+1. In terms of local industry
employment levels, these results imply powerful hysteresis effects of local housing price changes
that vary with the firm-age structure of employment in the local industry.


     VI.    Assessing Effects on Aggregate Young-Firm Activity Shares

     We now quantify the contribution of house price movements and exogenous loan supply
shifts to aggregate fluctuations in young-firm activity shares. We first apply our estimation
results to obtain implied paths for changes in local young-firm employment shares. Then we
aggregate to the national level using local-area employment shares.
     When we quantify the effects of house price changes on local young-firm activity shares, we
multiply the IV estimate for ? by the actual changes in local housing prices. This approach
captures the full effect of housing prices on local young-firm activity shares, including their role
as a transmission channel through which other shocks drive housing price changes. We think this
full effect is the most interesting quantity. Isolating the role of local house-price changes as an
exogenous driver of young-firm activity shares would require additional assumptions to
disentangle the exogenous and endogenous components of house-price movements.15
     There are three other important points to keep in mind about our aggregate quantification
exercise. First, and most obviously, the exercise proceeds under an assumption of correctly
identified casual effects at the local level.
     Second, local causal effects need not aggregate as simply as we presume. For example, a
drop in young-firm activity in one area could raise young-firm activity in other areas through a
spatial substitution response in product and factor markets. Conversely, young-firm activity in
one area could have positive spillover effects on young-firm activity in other areas. As a separate
point that cuts in the same direction, entrepreneurs can own houses outside the area where they
operate young firms. This fact raises the possibility that local house price changes in one area


15
  The first stage in the IV estimation identifies exogenous house-price movements, but there’s
no reason to think it captures all, or even most, of the movements in housing prices that are
exogenous with respect to local young-firm employment shares.
                                                                                                      24
directly affect young-firm activity shares in other areas, a possibility neglected by our statistical
models. The net effect of these spatial forces is unclear to us, even as to direction, but we see no
reason to think they are large relative to the effects captured by our models. Still, we recognize
that our neglect of spatial spillover and spatial equilibrium considerations may bias our
assessment of aggregate implications.
     Third, recall that our econometric specifications include period fixed effects as controls.
These controls condition out the common response across local areas to economy-wide
developments. For example, if a national housing bust leads to a broad constriction in credit
supply – and that constriction has disproportionately large effects on the employment growth of
new and young firms – then the housing bust lowers the national young-firm employment share
in a manner not reflected in our aggregate quantification exercise. The same point holds in
reverse for a national housing boom. The upshot is that our quantification exercise may
understate the full effect of the national housing boom and bust on fluctuations in young-firm
employment shares, because it neglects the general equilibrium effects of national housing
booms and busts that affect credit availability in a similar way across local areas.
     Figure 7 implements our quantification exercise using the IV2 estimates for ? from the
rightmost column in Table 3. The solid bars in Panel A reproduce Figure 2. The striped bars
show the model-implied paths for aggregate changes in young-firm employment shares by cycle
episode. We treat states as local areas for this purpose, so we can push the quantification exercise
back to the early 1980s. State-level data also let us cover the entire United States, including rural
areas.16 As in Figure 2, we express both actual and model-implied paths as deviations from the
sample trend.17 Panel B implements the quantification exercise on a year-by-year basis.
     The results in Figure 7 show that housing market ups and downs are a major force behind
cyclical and medium-run fluctuations in young-firm activity shares. According to Panel A, 61
percent of the sharp decline in the young-firm employment share during the Great Recession
reflects the effects of housing price declines. Housing price movements also play an important
role in several other cycle episodes. As seen in Panel B, the cumulative effect of housing price



16
   Re-estimating our statistical model on state-level instead of MSA-level data yields estimates
for ? similar to the ones reported in Table 3, but the point estimates are less precise.
17
   The growth in our national housing price index is nearly identical to the employment-weighted
growth of our state-level housing price indices. Thus, given the linearity of our statistical model,
multiplying the log change in the national housing price index by the estimated value for ?
yields nearly identical results to the ones displayed in Figure 8.
                                                                                                     25
gains from 1997 to 2006 raised the national young-firm employment share by 11 log points. That
stimulus to young-firm activity offset one-half of the trend decline in young-firm employment
during this period. However, this boost to the young-firm employment share during the national
housing boom was mostly undone from 2008 to 2014 as a result of the national housing bust.
       Figure 8 repeats the quantification exercise using our extended statistical model with
bank loan supply shocks. The role of housing price movements implied by the extended model is
very similar to before. However, the extended model also implies a distinct role for small
business bank loan supply shocks as driver of fluctuations in young-firm shares. Panel A in
Figure 8 shows that a contraction in small business lending during the Great Recession further
depressed the aggregate young-firm employment share. The joint contribution of the housing
bust and the pullback in small business bank lending accounts for 85 percent of the huge drop in
the young-firm employment share (relative to trend) during the 2008-2010 period. 65 percent of
the 85 percent is due to housing prices and 20 percent due to small business lending shocks.
       Shocks to the supply of small business lending also have material effects on the young-
firm share in a few other cycle episodes. During the 2001-03 period, both housing price changes
and small business lending shocks worked to offset other forces that reduced the young-firm
employment share. These other forces probably include the fallout from the dotcom bust and the
recession in the early 2000s. During the recovery after the Great Recession period, housing
prices and small business lending worked in opposite directions. Housing price developments
continued to act as a drag on young-firm employment shares, while small business lending
provided a modest boost.
       Panel B in Figure 8 shows the net contribution of housing prices and small business bank
lending shocks to year-by-year fluctuations in the young-firm employment shares from 1999 to
2014. This figure shows that our extended statistical model explains a good deal of the aggregate
fluctuations in young-firm shares since the late 1990s. But there are also notable fluctuations in
young-firm shares not explained by our model. In particular, the model says little about the
sizable moves in the late 1990s and early 2000s, which may reflect the dotcom boom and bust.


   VII.    Implications for the Labor Market

   Prior research offers ample grounds for hypothesizing that the fortunes of young firms have
important and uneven effects in the labor market. Young firms account for a disproportionate
share of newly created job positions (Davis and Haltiwanger, 1992 and 1999), which makes them
highly active in the search, matching and hiring process. Ouimet and Zarutskie (2014) show that
                                                                                                 26
young firms disproportionately employ young workers. They point to several reasons: skill-
demand differences between young and mature firms, positive assortative matching, and a higher
propensity for young firms and young workers to engage in search and matching. Haltiwanger et
al. (2018) and Haltiwanger, Hyatt, and McEntarfer (2018) show that young firms facilitate
movements up the job ladder by younger and less-educated workers. Young firms are important
for these workers as initial labor market entry ports and as re-entry ports when they get knocked
off the job ladder in contractions.
   These findings prompt us to investigate the relationship between young-firm activity and the
distribution of employment by worker age, education and gender. Table 8 first confirms that
young firms disproportionately employ young workers. It also shows they disproportionately
employ less educated workers. This employment pattern leaves younger and less-educated
workers more exposed to the cyclical fortunes of young firms. We directly confirm this inference
in Figure B.11, which shows changes in the aggregate share of employment at young firms by
demographic group and cycle episode.
   To delve more deeply into the empirical relationship between young-firm activity and the
demographic structure of employment, we fit regressions of the form
                                 á     á               á
                ∆\;á" = [\]; + X ∆à;" + O" P + B;á"                                (12)
to annual MSA-level observations for each demographic group, where ∆\;á" is the change from
t-1 to t in group g’s share of employment in MSA m, ∆à;" is the contemporaneous change in the
                                                   á
MSA’s share of employment at young firms, [\]; is a set of MSA fixed effects, and O" is a
quadratic polynomial in the national GDP growth rate. The chief parameters of interest in this
                       á
specification are the X coefficients, one for each demographic group.
   Recall that we use QWI statistics to compute ∆à;" . While these statistics derive from the
universe of administrative records for tax-paying firms, they are subject to noise infusion to
protect the confidentiality of employers (Abowd et al., 2009). The noise infusion process yields
random measurement errors in our ∆à;" observations, generating an attenuation bias in the OLS
                  á                                                                   á
estimator of the X coefficients. To address this issue, our preferred estimator for X relies on a
two-stage approach. The first stage instruments for ∆à;" using contemporaneous values of the
MSA-level change in the unemployment rate, log change in the real MSA-level housing price
index, and MSA-level small business loan supply shocks. This two-stage approach resolves the




                                                                                                 27
attenuation bias.18 It also serves to isolate local economic forces that involve systematic co-
movements in local young-firm activity, as shown by our results in Sections III and IV.
                                    á
     Table 9 reports estimates for X in Columns (1) to (4). In line with our remarks about the
noise-infused nature of QWI data, the two-stage estimates are much larger in magnitude than the
corresponding OLS estimates. The two-stage estimates provide powerful evidence that changes
in the fortunes of young firms involve large shifts in the demographic structure of employment.
For men, a one percentage-point gain in the young-firm share of MSA employment involves a
0.36 percentage point gain in the local share of workers who are 25-44 and a 0.54 drop in the
share who are 45-54. For women, a gain in the local young-firm employment share involves an
even larger shift from older to younger workers. The table also reveals large shifts in the
educational mix of local employment with changes in the MSA’s young-firm share. For both
men and women, a gain in the young-firm share of local employment involves a shift in local
employment from more- to less-educated workers.
     Columns (5) and (6) report two-stage estimation results for regressions at the MSA-industry
level. In addition to the controls in the MSA-level regressions, the regressions at the MSA-
industry level also include controls for industry effects and their interaction with the national
GDP growth rate. Since we estimate separately by demographic group, we are sweeping out
group-specific trends at the MSA and industry levels and controlling for group-specific
sensitivities to the national business cycle that differ by industry. The results in Columns (5) and
(6) are very similar to the MSA-level results reported in Columns (2) and (4).
     In summary, Table 9 provides powerful evidence that changes in the fortunes of young firms
involve sizable shifts in the demographic structure of employment. When the young-firm share
of local employment rises, local employment shifts from older to younger workers and from
more- to less-educated workers. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to uncover this
relationship. In light of the evidence that housing market ups and downs are a major force behind
cyclical and medium-run fluctuations in young-firm activity, Table 9 also suggests new insights
into how housing market conditions affect the labor market. Previous work by Mian and Sufi
(2014), for example, shows that local housing market busts depress the demand for locally
produced non-tradable goods and services and the derived demand for local labor and other

18
   The lagged young-firm employment share measure in (10) is also subject to noise infusion.
However, (12) uses QWI data at a more granular level with 32 demographic groups, which
intensifies concerns related to noise infusion. Also, Table 6 exploits about 13 times as many
observations as the MSA-level regressions in Table 9, which are based on (12).
                                                                                                    28
factor inputs. Our results suggest that housing market conditions also have notable effects on the
demographic and skill mix of local employment through a distinct channel that involves the
causal effect of housing prices on the distribution of business activity by firm age.


     VIII. Concluding Remarks

       The share of American workers at young firms displays a clear pattern of procyclical
movements about a declining trend in recent decades. Cyclical drops in the young-firm
employment share have intensified over time, and cyclical recoveries have weakened. Indeed,
the Great Recession and its aftermath involve the worst relative performance of young firms
since at least the early 1980s. At the local level, changes in young-firm employment shares
covary in a strongly positive manner with local cycle conditions and local housing price growth.
       These patterns motivate our efforts to estimate the causal effects of housing market
developments on young-firm employment shares. Deploying two IV strategies, we find large
positive effects of local house price changes on changes in local young-firm activity shares. We
also identify a distinct and smaller role for locally exogenous shifts in bank loan supply.
Aggregating local effects to the national level, housing market ups and downs play a major role –
as transmission channel and driving force – in medium-run fluctuations in young-firm
employment shares in recent decades.
       The housing boom from 1998 to 2006 drove a cumulative 11 log-point gain in the
national young-firm employment share, according to our quantification analysis, offsetting half
the ongoing trend decline in the young-firm share during this period. The ensuing bust in housing
prices largely reversed the preceding positive effects on young-firm employment shares. Thus,
three sets of forces came together after the mid-2000s to bring about a historic drop in the
employment share of young firms. First, the collapse in housing prices from 2007 reduced the
young-firm share through wealth, liquidity, collateral, credit supply and consumption demand
channels. Second, secular forces continued to reduce the young-firm share.19 Third, a contraction
in bank loan supply further reinforced the drop in young-firm employment shares during the
Great Recession.
       We also implement a novel test that throws light on how housing prices affect the local
economy. The test turns on the following observation: if house price effects work entirely


19
  Inquiries into the secular forces in play include Davis and Haltiwanger (2014), Decker et al.
(2014b), Karahan et al. (2015), Molloy et al. (2016) and Pugsley and Şahin (2018).
                                                                                                  29
through consumption demand channels, then local industry growth responses to house price
changes do not vary with the firm-age structure of employment. We find overwhelming evidence
against this age-invariance hypothesis. The direction of departures supports the view that house
prices affect local economies at least partly through wealth, liquidity, collateral and credit supply
effects on the propensity to start a new business or expand a young one. We also show that the
firm-age structure of employment underpins large, persistent differentials in local industry
growth rate responses to local house price changes. That is, the local industry growth rate
response to local house price changes is both larger and more persistent when young firms
account for a larger share of local industry employment.
       Finally, we show that the fortunes of young firms have sizable effects on the skill mix
and demographic structure of employment in local economies. When the young-firm share of
local employment rises, employment shifts from older to younger workers and from more- to
less-educated ones. Together with our other results, this finding says that housing busts and
credit crunches hurt younger and less-educated workers through their particular effects on the
fortunes of younger firms in addition to their broader effects on local economies.
       Our results also support the empirical relevance of theoretical propagation mechanisms
that rest on firm entry dynamics and young-firm activity levels. Clementi and Palazzo (2016), for
example, show how firm entry and exit behavior amplifies the effects of common shocks and
propagates their effects forward in time.20 Seen in this light, our results suggest that the housing
market bust and the credit supply contraction during the 2007-2010 period slowed the recovery
from the recession through their negative effects on business formation and young firms.




20
   Recent related work includes Gourio et al. (2016), Moreira (2016) and Luttmer (2018).
Clementi and Palazzo (2016) provide references to earlier work on the role of firm entry and exit
in shock amplification and propagation.
                                                                                                   30
                                         References

Abowd, John M., Bryce Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin L. McKinney, Marc
   Roemer, and Simon Woodcock, 2009. “The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the Creation of the
   Quarterly Workforce Indicators” in T. Dunne, J.B. Jensen and M.J. Roberts, editors, Producer
   Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar and Felipe Severino, 2015. “House Prices, Collateral, and
   Self-Employment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 117, no. 2 (August), 288-306.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Souphala Chomsiseng, Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru and
   Vincent Yao, 2017. “Mortgage Refinancing, Consumer Spending, and Competition: Evidence
   from the Home Affordable Refinancing Program,” NBER Working Paper No. 21512.
Black, Jane, David de Meza and David Jeffreys, 1996. “House Price, the Supply of Collateral
   and the Enterprise Economy,” Economic Journal, 106, 60-75.
Burcu, Duygang-Bump, Alexey Levkov and Judit Montoriol-Garriga, 2015. “Financing
   Constraints and Unemployment: Evidence from the Great Recession,” Journal of Monetary
   Economics, 75 (October), 89-105.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2014. “The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-
   Level Evidence from the 2008-09 Financial Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, no.
   1, 1-59.
Clementi, Gian Luca and Beradino Palazzo, 2016. “Entry, Exit, Firm Dynamics, and Aggregate
   Fluctuations,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8, no. 3, 1-41.
Corradin, Stefano and Alexander Popov, 2015. “House Prices, Home Equity, and
   Entrepreneurship,” Review of Financial Studies, 28, no. 8, 2399-2348.
Davidoff, Thomas, 2016. “Supply Constraints Are Not Valid Instrumental Variables for Home
   Prices Because They Are Correlated with many Demand Factors,” Critical Finance Review, 5,
   177-206.
Davis, Steven J., Jason Faberman and John Haltiwanger, 2012. “Labor Market Flows in the
   Cross Section and over Time,” Journal of Monetary Economics, January.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, 2010.
   “Business Volatility, Job Destruction, and Unemployment.” American Economic Journal:
   Macroeconomics, 2, no. 1 (April), 259-287.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 1992. “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
   Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, no 3., 819-863.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 1999. “Gross Job Flows,” in Handbook of Labor
   Economics, Volume 3, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Elsevier Science.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 2014. “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic
   Performance,” in Re-Evaluating Labor Market Dynamics, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
   City. Also available at NBER Working Paper No. 20479.
Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, C.J. Krizan, Javier Miranda, Al Nucci, and Kristin
   Sandusky, 2009. "Measuring the Dynamics of Young and Small Businesses: Integrating the
   Employer and Non-Employer Businesses," in Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from
   Micro Data, (Dunne, Jensen and Roberts, eds.) NBER/University of Chicago Press, 329-366.
Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, 2007. “Volatility and
   Dispersion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms.” NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual, 2006.
Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger and Scott Schuh, 1996. Job Creation and Destruction,
   Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.



                                                                                            31
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda, 2014a. “The Role of
   Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 28 no. 3 (Summer), 3-24.
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda, 2014b. “The Secular
   Decline of Business Dynamism in the United States,” working paper, University of Maryland.
Evans, David S. and Boyan Jovanovic, 1989. “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice
   under Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy, 97, no. 4, 808-827.
Fairlie, Robert W. and Harry A. Krashinsky, 2012. “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and
   Entrepreneurship Revisited,” Review of Income and Wealth, 58, no. 2 (June).
Fan, Fei and Michelle J. White, 2003. “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial
   Activity,” Journal of Law and Economics, 46, 2 (October), 545-567.
Fort, Teresa C., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda, 2013. “How Firms
   Respond to Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size,” IMF Economic Review,
   520-559.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan, 2006. “Market Selection, Reallocation and
   Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s,” Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 88, no. 4 (November), 748-758.icha0, 287-311.
Fujita, Shigeru, 2012. “Labor Market Anxiety and the Downward Trend in the Separation Rate,”
   Business Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Gentry, William M. and R. Glenn Hubbard, 2004. “Entrepreneurship and Household Saving,”
   B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 4, no. 1 (August),
Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist, 1994. “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behavior
   of Small Manufacturing Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, no. 2 (May), 309-340.
Gourio, Francois, Todd Messer and Michael Siemer, 2016. “Firm Entry and Macroeconomic
   Dynamics: A State-Level Analysis,” American Economic Review, 196, no. 5 (May), 214-18.
Greenstone, Michael, Alexandre Mas and Hoai-Luu Nguyen, 2015. “Do Credit Market Shocks
   Affect the Real Economy? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Great Recession and
   ‘Normal’ Times,” working paper, September.
Guiso, Luigi and Monica Paiella, 2008. “Risk Aversion, Wealth, and Background Risk.” Journal
   of the European Economic Association, 6, no. 6 (December), 1109-1150.
Haltiwanger, John, Ian Hathaway, and Javier Miranda, 2014. “Declining Dynamism in the U.S.
   High-Technology Sector,” Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation (February).
Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda, 2013. “Who Creates Jobs? Small versus
   Large versus Young,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, no. 2 (May), 347-361.
Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, Robert Kulick and Javier Miranda, 2016. “High Growth
   Young Firms: Contributions to Job, Output and Productivity Growth,” working paper.
Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Lisa Kahn and Erika McEntarfer, 2018. “Cyclical Job Ladders
   by Firm Size and Firm Wage,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10, no. 2, 52–
   85.
Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, and Erika McEntarfer, 2018. “Who Moves Up the Job Ladder?”
   Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1), 301-336.
Harding, John and Stuart S. Rosenthal, 2017. “Homeownership, Housing Capital Gains and Self-
   Employment,” Journal of Urban Economics, 99, 120-135.
Hathaway, Ian and Robert Litan, 2014a. “Declining Business Dynamism in the United States: A
   Look at States and Metros,” Economic Studies at Brookings, May.
Hathaway, Ian and Robert Litan, 2014b. “The Other Aging of America: The Increasing
   Dominance of Older Firms,” Economic Studies at Brookings, July.
Herkenhoff, Kyle, Gordon Phillips and Ethan Cohen-Cole, 2016. “The Impact of Consumer
   Credit Access on Employment, Earnings and Entrepreneurship,” NBER W.P. 22846.
                                                                                            32
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994. “Sticking It Out –
   Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints.” Journal of Political Economy, 102, no.
   1, 53-75.
Huang, Haifang and Eric Stephens, 2015. “From Housing Bust to Credit Crunch: Evidence from
   Small Business Loans,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 48, no. 3, 853-880.
Hurst, Erik G. and Annamaria Lusardi, 2004. “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth and
   Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Political Economy, 112, no. 2, 319-347.
Hurst, Erik G. and Benjamin W. Pugsley, 2017. “Wealth, Tastes and Entrepreneurial Choice,” in
   Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges, edited by J.
   Haltiwanger, E. Hurst, J. Miranda and A. Schoar.
Hurst, Erik G. and Frank Stafford, 2004. “Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing
   and Household Consumption,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36, no. 6 (December),
   985-1014.
Hyatt, Henry R. and James R. Spletzer, 2013. “The Recent Decline in Employment Dynamics.”
   IZA Journal of Labor Economics, 2, no. 5 (September).
Jensen, Thais Laerkholm, Soren Leth-Petersen and Raman Nanda, 2014. “Housing Collateral,
   Credit Constraints and Entrepreneurship: Evidence from a Mortgage Reform,” NBER
   Working Paper No. 20583.
Karahan, Fatih, Ben Pugsley and Aşegül Şahin, 2015. “Understanding the 30-Year Decline in the
   Business Startup Rate: A GE Approach,” working paper.
Kerr, Sari, William R. Kerr and Ramana Nanda, 2015. “House Money and Entrepreneurship,”
   NBER Working Paper No. 21458.
Khilstrom, Richard E. and Jean-Jacques Laffont, 1979. “A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial
   Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion,” Journal of Political Economy, 87, no. 4
   (August), 719-748.
Lazear, Edward P. and James R. Spletzer, 2012. “Hiring, Churn and the Business Cycle,”
   American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 102, no. 3 (May), 575-579.
Luttmer, Erzo G.J., 2018. “Slow Convergence in Economies with Organization Capital,”
   working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Lux, Marshall and Robert Greene, 2015. “The State and Fate of Community Banking,” Harvard
   Kennedy School, M-RCBG Associate Working Paper Series, No. 37.
Mehrotra, Neil and Dmitriy Sergeyev, 2016. “Financial Shocks and Job Flows,” working paper,
   25 October.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
   from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1449-1496.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2011. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
   Household Leverage Crisis,” American Economic Review, 101 (August), 2132-2156.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2014. “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?”
   Econometrica, 82, no. 6 (November), 2197-2333.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi and Francesco Trebbi, 2015. “Foreclosures, House Prices and the Real
   Economy,” Journal of Finance, 70, no. 6 (December), 2587-2634.
Molloy, Raven, Christopher Smith, Riccardo Trezi and Abigail Wozniak, 2016. “Understanding
   Declining Fluidity in the U.S. Labor Market,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
   Spring, 183-259.
Moreira, Sara, 2016. “Firm Dynamics, Persistent Effects of Entry Conditions, and Business
   Cycles,” working paper, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University.
Ouimet, Paige and Rebecca Zarutskie, 2014. “Who Works for Startups? The Relation between
   Firm Age, Employer Age, and Growth,” Journal of Financial Economics, 112, no. 3, 386-
   407.
                                                                                            33
Pugsley, Benjamin W. and Ayşegül Şahin, 2018. “Grown-Up Business Cycles,” forthcoming in
   the Review of Financial Studies,
Saiz, Albert, 2010. “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply Elasticity,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 125, no. 3 (August), 1253-1296.
Schmalz, Martin C., David A. Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2017. “Housing Collateral and
   Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Finance, 72, no 1, 99-132.
Siemer, Michael, 2018. “Employment Effects of Financial Constraints During the Great
   Recession,” Review of Economics & Statistics, forthcoming.




                                                                                        34
Figure 1. Share of Employees at Young Firms, U.S. Nonfarm Private Economy, 1981-2014




    20
         Percent

    18

    16

    14

    12

    10

     8

     6
         1981

                1983

                       1985

                              1987

                                     1989

                                            1991

                                                   1993

                                                          1995

                                                                 1997

                                                                        1999

                                                                               2001

                                                                                      2003

                                                                                             2005

                                                                                                    2007

                                                                                                           2009

                                                                                                                  2011

                                                                                                                          2013
Notes: Data are from Business Dynamic Statistics (BDS) and reflect mid-March payrolls in the
indicated calendar year. When it first becomes a legal entity, firm age equals the then-current age
of its oldest establishment in years. Thereafter, firm age advances by one with the passage of
each year. Establishment age is the number of years since operations began in the same narrowly
defined industry. “Young” means fewer than five years (60 months) since hiring the first paid
employee.




                                                                                                                         35
Figure 2. Cyclicality of Log Changes in the Young-Firm Share of Private Sector Employees

               3

               2

               1

               0
  Log Points



                          3



                                    0



                                              1



                                                        1



                                                                  3



                                                                            8



                                                                                      0



                                                                                                4
                        -8



                                  -9



                                            -9



                                                      -0



                                                                -0



                                                                          -0



                                                                                    -1



                                                                                              -1
               -1
                      80



                                83



                                          90



                                                    91



                                                              01



                                                                        03



                                                                                  08



                                                                                            10
                    19



                              19



                                        19



                                                  19



                                                            20



                                                                      20



                                                                                20



                                                                                          20
               -2

               -3

               -4

               -5

Notes: Each bar shows the annual average log change in the share of private sector employees at
young firms during the indicated cycle episode, deviated about the sample mean log change of
minus 2.2 log points per year. Green bars denote aggregate expansion episodes, and red bars
denote aggregate contraction episodes. All annual changes are from one mid-March payroll
period to the next. For each cycle episode, the reported interval represents the average annual
log change from March of the initial to March of the ending year. For example, 1980-83
represents the average annual log changes for 1980-81, 1981-82 and 1982-83. See notes to
Figure 1 for additional information and Section 2 for an exact description of the calculations.




                                                                                                    36
Figure 3A. Relationship Between Log Difference in Young-Firm Employment Share and the
Change in the Unemployment Rate, State by Year Cells, 1981-2014




                                                          50
                           Log Diff of Young Emp Share




                                                           0
                                                          -50




                                                                 -4               -2                0            2                4             6
                                                                                                Change in Unemployment

                                                                              Fitted            1980-83     1983-90      1990-91      1991-01
                                                                              2001-03           2003-08     2008-10      2010-14
                                                                 Slope = -1.8153, SE = 0.1277




Figure 3B. Relationship Between Log Difference in Young Employment Share and Growth
Rate of Real Housing Price, State by Year Cells, 1981-2014
                                                         50
         Log Diff of Young Emp Share




                                                         0
                                                         -50




                                                                -40                    -20                 0                 20                 40
                                                                                              Growth in Real Housing Price

                                                                             Fitted             1980-83     1983-90      1990-91      1991-01
                                                                             2001-03            2003-08     2008-10      2010-14
                                                                Slope = 0.3021, SE = 0.0239




Notes: In Panel A, the scale is in log points on the vertical axis and percentage points on the
horizontal axis. In Panel B, the scale is log points on both axis. See notes to Figure 2 for the
timing convention of reported intervals.




                                                                                                                                                     37
Figure 4. Relationship Between Log Difference in Young-Firm Employment Share and Growth
Rate of Real Housing Prices, MSA-level data in Boom and Bust Periods




Note: Each panel displays annualized MSA-level changes as follows: from 2002 to 2006 in the
top panel, and from 2007 to 2010 in the bottom panel.




                                                                                          38
Figure 5. Second-Stage Relationship Between the Log Change in the Local Young-Firm
Employment Share and the IV-Predicted Real Growth Rate of Local Housing Prices




Notes: This figure reflects the estimated specification reported in Column (2) of Table 1. See
Table 1 for the appropriately adjusted standard error. The analogous figure for Column (4) is
very similar.




                                                                                                 39
Figure 6. Co-Movements in Housing Price Growth and Small Business Loan Volume Growth
in State-Year Data, Controlling for State and Year Effects and Local Cycle Variation, 1999-2014




Notes: The scale is in log points on both axes. See notes to Figure 2 for the timing convention of
reported intervals.




                                                                                               40
Figure 7. Contributions of Housing Market Ups and Downs to Aggregate Changes in Young-
Firm Employment Shares from 1980 to 2014

                                            A. Contributions by Cycle Episode
                      3

                      2

                      1

                      0
         Log Points



                             3



                                       0



                                                 1



                                                           1



                                                                     3



                                                                               8



                                                                                           0



                                                                                                     4
                      -1
                           -8



                                     -9



                                               -9



                                                         -0



                                                                   -0



                                                                             -0



                                                                                         -1



                                                                                                   -1
                         80



                                   83



                                             90



                                                       91



                                                                 01



                                                                           03



                                                                                       08



                                                                                                 10
                       19



                                 19



                                           19



                                                     19



                                                               20



                                                                         20



                                                                                     20



                                                                                               20
                      -2

                      -3

                      -4

                      -5


                                             B. Year-by-Year Contributions
                      10
                       8                       Cumulative increase from 1997-2006 from
                       6                       Housing Prices = 11 log points
                       4
                       2
      Log Points




                       0
                      -2
                        81
                        83
                        85
                        87
                        89
                        91
                        93
                        95
                        97
                        99
                        01
                        03
                        05
                        07
                        09
                        11
                        13
                      19
                      19
                      19
                      19
                      19
                      19
                      19
                      19
                      19
                      19
                      20
                      20
                      20
                      20
                      20
                      20
                      20




                      -4
                      -6
                      -8                                 Cumulative decrease from 2008-2014
                   -10                                   From Housing Prices = 10 log points
                                           Actual      Housing Prices (IV Results)


Notes: Solid bars in Panel A show annualized log changes in young-firm employment shares
during the indicated cycle episodes, deviated about the sample mean change of minus 2.2 log
points per year. Striped bars show the aggregated model-implied changes using the estimate for
? in the rightmost column of Table 3 and actual housing price log changes.



                                                                                                         41
Figure 8. Contributions of Housing Market Ups and Downs and Bank Loan Supply Shocks to
Aggregate Changes in Young-Firm Employment Shares from 1999 to 2014

                                               A. Contributions by Cycle Episode
                            3

                            2

                            1
               Log Points




                            0




                                                                                                   4
                                       1




                                                   3




                                                                    8




                                                                                   0
                                     -0




                                                 -0




                                                                  -0




                                                                                 -1




                                                                                                   01
                            -1
                                   99




                                               01




                                                                03




                                                                               08




                                                                                                 -2
                                                                                               10
                                 19




                                             20




                                                              20




                                                                             20




                                                                                             20
                            -2

                            -3

                            -4


                                                    B. Year-by-Year Contributions




          5
          4
          3
          2
          1
  Log Points




          0
         -1      1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
         -2
         -3
         -4
         -5
                                           Actual    Housing Prices + Small Business Loans

Notes: The solid bar in Panel A is the actual log change, the diagonal striped bar is the model-
implied change for housing prices only, the dotted bar is the model-implied change for loan
supply shocks only, and the horizontal striped bar is the sum of the two. Both panels use
coefficient estimates from Column (4) in Table 4. All displayed quantities are deviated about the
actual sample mean decline of 2.4 log points per year from 1999 to 2014.


                                                                                                        42
Table 1. Young-Firm Employment Share Response to Local Housing Price Growth,
IV Approach (1) Applied to MSA-level Data Stacked over Boom and Bust Periods
Dependent Variable: Average annual log change in MSA young-firm employment share
                                 (1)             (2)     (3)     (4)
                                 OLS             IV      OLS     IV
Coefficient on log real          0.171           0.190   0.184   0.194
housing price change (?)         (0.040)         (0.070) (0.049) (0.057)

F-Test for Excluded Instruments                    31.4                35.3
Period Effects                     Yes             Yes       Yes       Yes
MSA Effects                        No              No        Yes       Yes
    2
R                                  0.247           0.247     0.515     0.515
Observations                        466             466       466      466
Notes: We estimate (1) and (2) in the main text using MSA-level data for housing boom (2002-
06) and bust (2007-10) periods. To construct instruments for MSA-level changes in housing
prices, we interact boom and bust period effects with a cubic polynomial in the log of the Saiz
measure of the MSA housing supply elasticity. Robust standard errors in parentheses.


Table 2. Young-Firm Employment Share Response to Local Housing Price Growth,
IV Approach (1) with Additional Controls
Dependent Variable: Average annual log change in MSA young-firm employment share
                                   (1)      (2)     (3)       (4)
                                   IV       IV      IV        IV
Coefficient on log real            0.194    0.174   0.173     0.161
housing price change (?)           (0.057) (0.075) (0.081) (0.079)

F-Test for Excluded Instruments      26.9      26.7       26.0    23.4

Period & MSA Effects                 Yes       Yes        Yes     Yes
MSA Unemployment Rate Change         No        Yes        Yes     Yes
MSA Bartik Demand Control            No        No         Yes     Yes
MSA Population Growth Rate           No        No         No      Yes
    2
R                                    0.515     0.519      0.520   0.522

Notes: See notes to Table 1. There are 466 observations in each column.




                                                                                              43
Table 3. Young-Firm Employment Share Response to Local Housing Price Growth,
IV Approach (2) Applied to Annual MSA-level Data from 1992 to 2014
Dependent Variable: Annual log change in MSA young-firm employment share
                                OLS      IV2    OLS      IV2    IV2
 Coefficient on log real        0.181    0.384  0.092    0.285
                                                                0.300
 Housing price change (?)
                                (0.022) (0.127) (0.027) (0.132) (0.149)
 F-test for Excl. Instruments            45.3            47.1   41.4
 MSA Effects                       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
 Year Effects                      No       No        Yes      Yes      Yes
 MSA Bartik Demand Control No               No        No       No       Yes
 MSA Population Growth Rate No              No        No       No       Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses clustered at MSA level. All specs include the change in
the MSA unemployment rate. Specifications without year effects include a quadratic in the
national GDP growth rate. For IV estimates, overidentification tests show we cannot reject the
null of instrument validity. 5322 observations in each column.



Table 4. Young-Firm Employment Share Response to Local Housing Price Growth and Bank
Loan Supply Shocks, IV Approach 2, Annual MSA-Level Data from 1999 to 2014
Dependent Variable: Annual log change in MSA young-firm employment share
                                    OLS       OLS        IV2        IV2                  IV2
 Coefficient on log real            0.178     0.163      0.297      0.289                0.322
 Housing price change (?)           (0.022)   (0.023)    (0.090)    (0.091)              (0.102)
 Coefficient on SBL (d)                       0.030                 0.024                0.020
                                              (0.010)               (0.011)              (0.012)
 F-test for Excluded Instruments                          43.0       43.7                 38.8
 MSA Effects                           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 MSA Bartik Demand Control             No           No          No           No          Yes
 MSA Population Growth Rate            No           No          No           No          Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses clustered at MSA level. All specifications include the
change in MSA-level unemployment rate and a quadratic in the national GDP growth rate as
additional controls. For IV estimates, overidentification tests show we cannot reject the null of
instrument validity. 3728 Observations.




                                                                                                44
Table 5. Local Employment Growth Rate Responses to Local Housing Price Growth and Bank
Loan Supply Shocks, IV Approach 2, Annual MSA-Level Data from 1999 to 2014
   A. Dependent Variable: Annual Growth Rate of Young-Firm Employment in MSA
                                  OLS         IV2        IV2
 Coefficient on log real          0.221       0.333      0.313
 Housing price change (?)         (0.022)     (0.092)    (0.101)
 Coefficient on SBL (d)           0.064       0.058      0.055
                                  (0.009)     (0.010)    (0.011)
   B. Dependent Variable: Annual Growth Rate of Mature-Firm Employment in MSA
                                  OLS         IV2        IV2
 Coefficient on log real          0.035       0.079      0.047
 Housing price change (?)         (0.008)     (0.036)    (0.035)
 Coefficient on SBL (d)           0.013       0.010      0.008
                                  (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.004)


 F-test for Excluded Instruments                    43.7        38.8
 MSA Effects                           Yes          Yes         Yes
 MSA Bartik Demand Control             No           No          Yes
 MSA Population Growth Rate            No           No          Yes

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses clustered at MSA level. All specifications include the
change in MSA-level unemployment rate and a quadratic in the national GDP growth rate as
additional controls. For IV estimates, overidentification tests show we cannot reject the null of
instrument validity. 3728 Observations.




                                                                                                45
Table 6. Testing the Age-Invariance Proposition: Industry-Level Log Employment Growth
Response to Local House Price Growth, Annual Data from 1999 to 2015

A. Dependent Variable: Annual Log Employment Change at the MSA-Industry Level (fgZ;" )
                                          (1) OLS      (2) OLS    (3) OLS      (4) IV2
 Change in Local Unemployment Rate              -0.94                                   -0.750
 (W:W;" )                                       (0.15)                                  (0.106)
 Log Change in Local House Prices (@A;" )       0.088                                   0.175
                                                (0.011)                                 (0.042)
 Lagged Young-Firm Employment Share             0.029        0.031        0.037         0.031
 (:kl8Y\ℎZ;,"'( )                               (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.010)
 Interaction Term (@A;" ∗ :kl8Y\ℎZ;,"'( )       0.813        0.780        0.588         0.672
                                                (0.059)      (0.075)      (0.091)       (0.118)
 R-squared Value                                0.140        0.267        0.317         0.137

 B. Dynamic Specification (Reporting Interaction Effects Only)
 Interaction Term (@A;" ∗ :kl8Y\ℎZ;,"'( )     1.295        1.187          0.912        1.038
                                              (0.091)      (0.101)        (0.120)      (0.227)
 Interaction Term (@A;"'( ∗ :kl8Y\ℎZ;,"'( ) -0.696          -0.588         -0.479       -0.461
                                               (0.092)      (0.107)        (0.123)      (0.235)
  MSA Fixed Effects                           Yes           No             No           Yes
  Year Fixed Effects                          Yes           No             No           Yes
  Industry Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes            No           Yes
  MSA-by-Year Fixed Effects                   No            Yes            Yes          No
  Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects              No            No             Yes          No

Notes: The sample, which covers 174 MSAs and 14 industries, contains 39,627 observations at
the industry-MSA level from 1999 to 2015. We drop cells with no employment. See text for list
of industries. Column (4) instruments for @A;" and the interaction term using the IV2 approach.
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at MSA level. All reported coefficients statistically
significant at 1% level, except for the lagged interaction term in the fourth column where the
coefficient is statistically significant at the 5% level.




                                                                                             46
Table 7. Quantifying the Departures from Age Invariance
   A. Dispersion in Young-Firm Employment Shares Across Local Industries
Industry-MSA Young-Firm Share            1999-2015 Boom Period Bust Period
90th Percentile                          0.262       0.274        0.255
10th Percentile                          0.049       0.063        0.048
Standard Deviation                       0.086       0.086        0.083
90-10 Difference                         0.213       0.211        0.207
   B. Dispersion in Annual MSA-Level Log House Price Changes
Log MSA House Price Change               1999-2015 Boom Period Bust Period
90th Percentile                          0.078       0.128        0.035
10th Percentile                          -0.062      0.005        -0.138
Standard Deviation                       0.066       0.053        0.082
90-10 Difference                         0.134       0.123        0.173
   C. Calculating the Departures from Age Invariance, Using âä = ã. åçé
                                        Boom Period        Bust Period
@A (w) from Panel B                     P90      P10       P90        P10
    Average Annual Log Changes          0.128 0.005        0.035      -0.138
          |+'(+
:kl8Y\ℎ         from Panel A                 0.211             0.207
Response Differential Per Equation (11)
   Annual, Percentage Points            2.2      0.1       0.6        -2.3
   Cumulative, Percentage Points        9.4      0.3       1.7        -6.8
Notes: Panel C implements the calculation expressed in equation (11) in the main text. Panels A
and B report inputs to the calculation and related summary statistics. The Boom Period runs from
2002 to 2006, and the Bust Period runs from 2007 to 2010.


Table 8. Shares of Employment at Young Firms by Demographic Characteristics, QWI Data
 A. By Worker Age and                          Men                                Women
     Gender                  2000     2008    2010     2015       2000    2008     2010       2015
 19-24 Years of Age          13.90    11.93   10.31     9.98      13.28   12.77    11.24      10.84
 25-44                       12.29    10.35    8.68     8.46      11.58   10.31     8.68       8.51
 45-54                        9.51     8.25    6.70     6.53      10.03    8.67     7.12       6.94
 55-64                        8.85     7.59    5.95     5.62       9.71    8.10     6.45       6.16
 All                         11.57     9.65    7.96     7.69      11.31    9.94     8.29       8.05
 B. By Education and                           Men                                Women
    Gender                   2000     2008    2010     2015       2000    2008     2010        2015
 < High School               12.70    11.37    9.32     8.81      13.10   12.10    10.12        9.40
 High School                 10.76     9.23    7.59     7.39      10.79    9.56     7.94        7.80
 Some College                10.72     9.01    7.39     7.14      10.78    9.21     7.57        7.38
 Undergrad +                 11.33     8.64    7.07     6.72      10.56    8.63     7.09        6.85
 All                         11.20     9.31    7.64     7.37      10.99    9.49     7.85        7.64



                                                                                             47
Table 9. How Employment Shares by Worker Age, Gender and Education Covary with Young-
Firm Employment Shares at the MSA and MSA-Industry Levels, 1999-2015

Dependent variable: One-Year Change in the group-level share of employment at the MSA
Level or the MSA-Industry Level
                                                                 Regressions at the
                         Regressions at the MSA Level         MSA-Industry Level
                          Men                     Women          Men       Women
 Demographic       OLS          Two-        OLS        Two-      Two-        Two-
 Group               (1)     Stage (2)        (3)   Stage (4) Stage (5) Stage (6)
 19-24 Years       0.017        0.258        0.01      0.239     0.259       0.384
 of Age          (0.010)      (0.046)     (0.009)    (0.043)   (0.052)     (0.062)
                   0.028        0.359       0.032      0.550     0.360       0.633
 25-44           (0.010)      (0.074)     (0.009)    (0.108)   (0.076)     (0.119)
                  -0.028       -0.540      -0.031     -0.588    -0.539      -0.786
 45-54           (0.011)      (0.093)     (0.008)    (0.099)   (0.096)     (0.134)
                  -0.017       -0.082      -0.012     -0.201    -0.077      -0.230
 55-64           (0.005)      (0.027)     (0.005)    (0.036)   (0.025)     (0.041)
 < High            0.020        0.283       0.021      0.295     0.289       0.313
 School          (0.007)      (0.053)     (0.007)    (0.053)   (0.048)     (0.051)
                    0.01        0.110       0.016      0.151     0.062       0.089
 High School     (0.007)      (0.024)     (0.007)    (0.027)   (0.019)     (0.023)
                  -0.010       -0.105      -0.017     -0.195    -0.126      -0.166
 Some College (0.002)         (0.021)     (0.005)    (0.031)   (0.024)     (0.026)
 Undergrad or     -0.022       -0.294      -0.020     -0.257    -0.225      -0.238
 More            (0.010)      (0.055)     (0.009)    (0.051)   (0.042)     (0.045)

Notes: Each table entry reports the slope coefficient (standard error) in a regression on young-
firm employment shares at the MSA or MSA-Industry level for the indicated group. All
specifications include MSA fixed effects that vary freely across groups. Regressions at the MSA-
Industry level also include industry fixed effects and their interaction with the national GDP
growth rate. These controls also vary freely across groups. There are about 3,000 observations in
the MSA-level regressions and 53,000 in regressions at the MSA-Industry level. In the two-stage
estimation approach, the first stage instruments for the change in the young-firm employment
share using the MSA-level change in the unemployment rate, the log change in the real MSA-
level housing price index, and the MSA-level small business loan supply shock from Section
IV.D. For regressions at the MSA-Industry level, we weight each observation by the industry’s
share of employment within the MSA to facilitate comparison to the MSA-level results. All
reported coefficients for the two-stage approach are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                                   48
Appendix A: Measurement of Young Firm Dynamics in the BDS
      The Business Dynamic Statistics (BDS) reports tabulations from the Census Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD). The LBD is a longitudinal establishment-level database with
establishment and firm-level characteristics. Firms are defined based on operational control. As
described in section II, firm age is based on the age of the oldest establishment when a new legal
entity originates. Establishment-level net employment growth rates underlying the BDS
tabulations use the Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996) (DHS) growth rate measure:

                 ëíì 'ëíìîï
       Yè" = ê      ñíì
                               ó,     Oè" = 0.5 ∗ (!è" + !è"'( )                             (A.1)

where e indexes establishments and t indexes years. The DHS growth rate measure is a 2nd order
approximation of the log first difference, is bounded between -2 and 2, and accommodates zeros
in t (exit) or t-1 (entry). The employment at the establishment-level in the LBD in year t is the
number of employees of workers on the payroll for the payroll period including March 12th. As
such the net employment growth rates (and all change measures in the LBD and BDS) represent
changes from March in t-1 to March of t.
       The net employment growth rate for establishments classified into a cell S in t (e.g., a
firm age and state cell) is given by:

                        ñíòì
       Y<" = ∑è∈<       ñòì
                               Yè<"                                                          (A.2)

where S is the characteristics of the establishment in year t. The BDS provides net employment
growth rate statistics as well as the decomposition into job creation, job destruction (by
continuing, entering and exiting establishments) by a wide range of cells S defined by industry,
firm age, firm size, establishment age, establishment size, and geographic cells defined by state
and MSA. The BDS also reports these changes in terms of levels as well as the levels of
employment and number of firms in each of classification cells.
       For any given classification into cells of type S, the aggregate net employment growth is
defined as the employment-weighted average of the cell based growth rates:

                  ñòì
       Y" = ∑<     ñì
                        Y<"                                                          (A.3)

       Relating the above measurement concepts to the measures from the BDS used in the
paper, Figures B3 and B5 exploit the BDS net employment growth rate statistics defined by firm
age (specifically, we use broad firm age categories as described in section II). The measures


                                                                                                    49
used in these figures capture within firm age group net employment growth rates. While
instructive, such within firm age group net growth rates don’t permit a characterization of the
changing composition of employment by firm age (and likewise the changing composition of
firms by firm age). For the latter, we use the share of young firm employment and the share of
young firms as described in the main text. These can be directly measured from the BDS since
the number of employees and firms are reported for all classifications in the BDS. Section III
includes discussion of how the changing employment by firm age is related to net change within
firm age groups and the changing composition.
       Firm age is censored in the BDS given that firm and establishment age cannot be
determined for establishments that exist in 1976 (the first year of the LBD). This implies that in
each year subsequent to 1976 more firm age categories can be defined. We commence our
analysis in 1981 where five firm age categories can be defined: firm age 0 (establishments in
1981 whose parent firm have all new establishments in 1981), 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5+. This permits
consistent measures of young firm activity measures starting in 1981. For example, in 1981 we
can measure net employment growth rates for young firms which reflects the growth rate of the
establishments from March 1980 to March 1981.
       The BDS also provides the statistics to compute directly the employment of young firms
(less than five years old) starting in 1981. We use the young-employment shares to compute the
log change in the share of young-firm employment which, our focus in the main text. This
measure is directly computable from BDS statistics starting in 1982 (e.g., the log change in 1982
is the log difference of the young-firm share from 1981 to 1982). Given the focus on cyclical
episodes in our analysis, it is advantageous to define the early 1980s cyclical downturn as the
March 1980 to March 1983 interval. This requires measures of the relevant change statistics
starting in 1981. For net employment growth rates young firms in Figures B3 and B5, this is
readily computable from the BDS. For the log change in the young-firm employment share in
1981, additional computations are required. In 1980, the BDS yields the employment of firms
less than four years old directly, but to measure the employment of firms less than five years old
in 1980 we need an estimate of employment at firms age=4 in 1980. We impute the latter in
1980 using the product of the share of employment of age=4 year firms in 1981 and total
employment in 1980. This imputation is feasible at the national, state and MSA levels of
aggregation. We note that all of our results using the log change in the young-firm employment
share are robust to starting the analysis in 1982 instead of 1981.


                                                                                                  50
                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                            14




                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                          9




            20
                 25
                      30
                           35
                                40
                                     45
                                          50
                                                                                                                       1981
     1981                                                                                                              1982
     1982                                                                                                              1983
     1983                                                                                                              1984
     1984                                                                                                              1985
     1985
                                                                                                                       1986
     1986
                                                                                                                       1987
     1987
                                                                                                                       1988
     1988
                                                                                                                       1989
     1989
                                                                                                                       1990
     1990
                                                                                                                       1991
     1991
     1992                                                                                                              1992
     1993                                                                                                              1993
     1994                                                                                                              1994
     1995                                                                                                              1995
     1996                                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Appendix B: Supplemental Figures and Tables




     1997                                                                                                              1997
     1998                                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure B1. Firm Startup and Exit Rates, 1981 to 2014




     1999                                                                                                              1999
     2000                                                                                                              2000
     2001                                                                                                              2001
     2002                                                                                                              2002
     2003                                                                                                              2003
     2004                                                                                                              2004
     2005
                                               Figure B2. Share of Firms that are Young (<5 years old), 1981 to 2014
                                                                                                                       2005
     2006                                                                                                              2006
     2007                                                                                                              2007
     2008                                                                                                              2008
     2009                                                                                                              2009
     2010                                                                                                              2010
     2011                                                                                                              2011
     2012                                                                                                              2012
     2013
                                                                                                                                                             Exit Rate




                                                                                                                       2013
     2014                                                                                                              2014
                                                                                                                                                                         Startup Rate




51
Figure B3. Annual Net Employment Growth Rates for Young and Mature Firms, 1981-2014

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

   5

   0
               1981
               1982
               1983
               1984
               1985
               1986
               1987
               1988
               1989
               1990
               1991
               1992
               1993
               1994
               1995
               1996
               1997
               1998
               1999
               2000
               2001
               2002
               2003
               2004
               2005
               2006
               2007
               2008
               2009
               2010
               2011
               2012
               2013
               2014
  -5

 -10

                                                  Young     Mature



Notes: For each age group, the figure shows the employment-weighted DHS net growth rate
from March of the previous year to March of the year reported on the horizontal scale. Net
growth is inclusive of entry and exit of establishments.

Figure B4. Cyclicality of Log Changes in the Young-Firm Share of Firms

               2


               1


               0
                          3




                                    0




                                              1




                                                        1




                                                                  3




                                                                            8




                                                                                      0




                                                                                                4
                        -8




                                  -9




                                            -9




                                                      -0




                                                                -0




                                                                          -0




                                                                                    -1




                                                                                              -1
                      80




                                83




                                          90




                                                    91




                                                              01




                                                                        03




                                                                                  08




                                                                                            10
  Log Points




               -1
                    19




                              19




                                        19




                                                  19




                                                            20




                                                                      20




                                                                                20




                                                                                          20




               -2


               -3


               -4


               -5


Notes: Each bar shows the annual average log change in the share of private sector firms that are
young during the indicated cycle episode, deviated about the sample mean log change of minus
1.6 log points per year. See notes to Figures 1 and 2 for additional information.


                                                                                                    52
Figure B5. Cyclicality of the Net Growth Rate Differential Between Young and Mature Firms

               2


               1


               0
                          3




                                    0




                                              1




                                                        1




                                                                  3




                                                                            8




                                                                                      0




                                                                                                4
                        -8




                                  -9




                                            -9




                                                      -0




                                                                -0




                                                                          -0




                                                                                    -1




                                                                                              -1
                      80




                                83




                                          90




                                                    91




                                                              01




                                                                        03




                                                                                  08




                                                                                            10
               -1
  Log Points

                    19




                              19




                                        19




                                                  19




                                                            20




                                                                      20




                                                                                20




                                                                                          20
               -2


               -3


               -4


               -5


Notes: Each bar shows the annual average net employment growth differential between young
and mature firms during the indicated cycle episode, deviated about the sample mean net
differential of 21 percent per year. See notes to Figures 1 and 2 for additional information.




                                                                                                    53
                               Figure B6. Relationship Between Log Difference in Young-Firm Share of Firms and the
                               Growth Rate of Real Housing Price, State by Year Cells, 1981-2014
                                         15
Log Diff of Young Firm Share




                                         10
                                         5
                                         0
                                         -5
                                         -10




                                               -40                  -20                   0                 20          40
                                                                             Growth in Real Housing Price

                                                            Fitted            1980-83      1983-90      1990-91   1991-01
                                                            2001-03           2003-08      2008-10      2010-14
                                               Slope = 0.2810, SE = 0.0097



                               Notes: Scales are log points on each axis. See notes to Figure 2 for the timing convention of
                               reported intervals.




                                                                                                                               54
                                Figure B7. Relationship Between Log Difference in Startup Rate and the Growth Rate of Real
                                Housing Price, State by Year Cells, 1981-2014

                                     50
Log Diff of startup Emp Share




                                      0
                                     -50
                                     -100




                                            -40                  -20                   0                 20                 40
                                                                          Growth in Real Housing Price

                                                         Fitted            1980-83      1983-90      1990-91       1991-01
                                                         2001-03           2003-08      2008-10      2010-14
                                            Slope = 0.2671, SE = 0.0585



                                Notes: Scales are log points on each axis. See notes to Figure 2 for the timing convention of
                                reported intervals. The log difference of the startup rate has been winsorized at the 99.75 and
                                0.25 (quarter of a percentile) levels.




                                                                                                                                  55
Figure B8. Share of Employment at Small Firms, 1981-2014, U.S. Nonfarm Private Economy




    34
    33
    32
    31
Percent




    30
    29
    28
    27
                  1981
                  1982
                  1983
                  1984
                  1985
                  1986
                  1987
                  1988
                  1989
                  1990
                  1991
                  1992
                  1993
                  1994
                  1995
                  1996
                  1997
                  1998
                  1999
                  2000
                  2001
                  2002
                  2003
                  2004
                  2005
                  2006
                  2007
                  2008
                  2009
                  2010
                  2011
                  2012
                  2013
                  2014
Figure B9. Log Differences in Employment Share of Small Firms by Cycle Episode

                    2


                  1.5


                    1
     Log Points




                  0.5


                    0
                            3



                                       0



                                                  1



                                                             1



                                                                        3



                                                                                   8



                                                                                              0



                                                                                                         4
                          -8



                                     -9



                                                -9



                                                           -0



                                                                      -0



                                                                                 -0



                                                                                            -1



                                                                                                       -1
                        80



                                   83



                                              90



                                                         91



                                                                    01



                                                                               03



                                                                                          08



                                                                                                     10




                  -0.5
                     19



                                19



                                           19



                                                      19



                                                                 20



                                                                            20



                                                                                       20



                                                                                                  20




                   -1




                                                                                                             56
Figure B10. Log Differences in Employment Share of Small Firms, Actual and Predicted

               2.5

                 2

               1.5

                 1
  Log Points




               0.5

                 0




                                                                                      4
                             1




                                        3




                                                    8




                                                                    0
                           -0




                                      -0




                                                  -0




                                                                  -1




                                                                                   01
               -0.5
                         99




                                    01




                                                03




                                                                08




                                                                                 -2
                                                                               10
                      19




                                 20




                                             20




                                                             20




                                                                            20
                -1

               -1.5

Notes: Sold Bar is Actual, Diagonal Striped Bar is Counterfactual (Housing Prices only), Dotted
Bar is Counterfactual (Loan Supply only), Horizontal Striped Bar is (Housing Prices + Loan
Supply). Using IV estimates from column 5 of previous table. Annualized deviations from
overall means depicted. The mean decline is 0.6 log points per year from 1999-2014.




                                                                                             57
Figure B11. Annualized Changes in the Share of Employment at Young Firms by Worker Age,
Education and Gender

    A. Worker Age and Gender

          2000-08       2008-10         2010-15           2000-08     2008-10      2010-15
   0
 -0.1
 -0.2
 -0.3
 -0.4
 -0.5
 -0.6
 -0.7
 -0.8
              Males                                         Females
 -0.9
  -1

             19-24 Years of Age       25-44       45-54      55-64    National Average


    B. By Worker Education and Gender

          2000-08       2008-10         2010-15           2000-08     2008-10      2010-15
   0

 -0.2

 -0.4

 -0.6

 -0.8

  -1                                                                 Females

 -1.2

        < High School   High School      Some College        Undergrad +   National Average


Notes: Tabulations from the QWI




                                                                                              58
Table B1. MSA-Level Regressions from 1999-2014. Dependent variables: Log Change in Young-and Small-Firm Employment Shares

                           (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)                (6)

                           Log Change     Log Change       Log Change       Log Change      Log Change in      Log Change in
                           in Young-      in Young-        in Young-        in Small-Firm   Small -Firm        Small-Firm
                           Firm Share     Firm Share       Firm Share       Share           Share              Share
                           (OLS)          (IV)             (IV)             (OLS)           (IV)               (IV)

 Growth Rate in Real       0.163          0.289            0.322            0.048           0.103              0.118
 Housing Price
                           (0.023)        (0.091)          (0.102)          (0.007)         (0.033)            (0.037)

 Local Small Business      0.030          0.024            0.020            0.009           0.007              0.007
 Loan Supply Shock
                           (0.010)        (0.011)          (0.012)          (0.003)         (0.003)            (0.004)

  F-test for Excluded                      43.7             38.8                             43.7              38.8
 Instruments

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses clustered at MSA level. We control for MSA fixed effects in Columns (1) to (6) and the Bartik-like
demand variable and population growth rate in Columns (3) and (6).




                                                                                                                                           59
Table B2. MSA-Level Regressions from 1999-2014. Dependent variables: Annual Employment Growth Rate Differentials for
Young Minus Mature and Small Minus Large Firms

                          (1)       (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)

                          Young     Young         Young         Small         Small         Small
                          Minus     Minus         Minus         Minus         Minus         Minus
                          Mature    Mature        Mature        Large         Large         Large

                          (OLS)     (IV)          (IV)          (OLS)         (IV)          (IV)

 Growth in real housing   0.185     0.254         0.265         0.132         0.253         0.256
 price
                          (0.023)   (0.085)       (0.097)       (0.010)       (0.039)       (0.042)

 Local Small Business     0.052     0.048         0.046         0.001         -0.005        -0.004
 Loan Supply Shock
                          (0.010)   (0.011)       (0.012)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.005)

  F-test for Excluded                43.7          38.8                        43.7         38.8
 Instruments


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses clustered at MSA level. We control for MSA fixed effects in Columns (1) to (6) and the Bartik-like
demand variable and population growth rate in Columns (3) and (6).




                                                                                                                                           60
Appendix C: Details Related to the CRA Data and How We Use Them

        CRA data provide bank-level information by local area and year on the volume of
business loan originations to firms with less than $1 million in revenue. We deflate nominal loan
volumes by the same-year GDP implicit price deflator from the Bureau of Economic Analysis to
obtain real small business loan volumes. As in GMN (2015), we roll up the bank level data to the
bank holding company, using data sources from the FDIC and Federal Reserve call reports. We
also use data from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago that tracks mergers and acquisitions, so
that for any pair of years t-1 and t we assign a bank to its owner in year t.
        We measure the growth rate of small business loan volume for a given bank holding
company in a particular MSA – what we call !"#$ in equation (6) – using the symmetric growth
rate measure in Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996). The DHS measure is equivalent to the log
first difference up to a second-order Taylor Series approximation, but the DHS measure down
weights outliers relative to log changes. As it turns out, DHS growth rates and log changes
produce similar econometric results in Section IV.d.
        One additional detail: We re-time the calendar-year &'()$ measure in equation (7) to
align it with the March-to-March employment changes in the BDS. Specifically, in our
regression analysis, the loan supply shock for MSA m and year t is 0.75 ∗ Raw &'()$23 +
0.25 ∗ Raw &'()$ . The correlation between this re-timed measure for year t and the unadjusted
measure for year t-1 is 0.95 for the MSA-level data used to produce Table 4. Replacing the re-
timed SBL measure for year t with the corresponding lagged Raw SBL measure yields very
similar results.




                                                                                                 61
