NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL RULES AND DISCRETION UNDER LIMITED ENFORCEMENT
Marina Halac
Pierre Yared
Working Paper 25463
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25463

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019

This paper subsumes an earlier working paper "Fiscal Rules and Discretion under SelfEnforcement." We would like to thank Manuel Amador, Dirk Bergemann, Hector Chade, V.V.
Chari, Stephen Coate, Georgy Egorov, Simone Galperti, Johannes Hörner, Zhen Huo,
Navin Kartik, George Mailath, Guido Menzio, Chris Moser, and conference and seminar
audiences for helpful comments. We are grateful to Marco Bassetto, Dana Foarta, Juan
Ortner, and Chris Phelan for valuable discussions of the paper. Jan Knoepfle, George Vojta,
and Weijie Zhong provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Marina Halac and Pierre Yared. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Fiscal Rules and Discretion under Limited Enforcement
Marina Halac and Pierre Yared
NBER Working Paper No. 25463
January 2019
JEL No. C73,D02,D82,E6,H1,P16
ABSTRACT
We study a fiscal policy model in which the government is present-biased towards public
spending. Society chooses a fiscal rule to trade off the benefit of committing the government to
not overspend against the benefit of granting it flexibility to react to privately observed shocks to
the value of spending. Unlike prior work, we examine rules under limited enforcement: the
government has full policy discretion and can only be incentivized to comply with a rule via the
use of penalties which are joint and bounded. We show that optimal incentives must be bangbang. Moreover, under a distributional condition, the optimal rule is a maximally enforced deficit
limit, triggering the largest feasible penalty whenever violated. Violation optimally occurs under
high enough shocks if and only if available penalties are weak and such shocks are rare. If the
rule is self-enforced in a dynamic setting, penalties take the form of temporary overspending.

Marina Halac
Yale University
Department of Economics
30 Hillhouse Avenue, Room 22B
New Haven, CT 06511
and CEPR
marina.halac@yale.edu
Pierre Yared
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 823
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pyared@columbia.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25463

1

Introduction

Countries impose rules on their governments to constrain their policy decisions. Increasingly prevalent are fiscal rules, in place in 92 countries in 2015, compared to only seven
countries in 1990.1 Yet, according to the International Monetary Fund, governments comply with their fiscal rules only about 50 percent of the time.2
Whenever a rule is violated, a formal or informal enforcement mechanism is triggered.
In the European Union, an Excessive Deficit Procedure—a formal procedure specifying a
sequence of costly fiscal adjustments and potential sanctions—applies whenever a fiscal
limit is breached.3 In other countries, penalties for rule violation are more informal. In
Chile, for example, the government’s breach of its fiscal rule in 2009 was punished with
lax fiscal policy by the next administration, which continued to ignore the rule despite
criticism of fiscal irresponsibility.4 The use of penalties, formal or informal, is critical to
incentivize governments to respect the fiscal constraints set by society. Penalties however
are harmful to both the government and society, and they are limited in scope.
In this paper, we study the optimal design of fiscal rules under limited enforcement.
What is the optimal structure of fiscal constraints when available penalties for violation
are joint and bounded, and how are these penalties used in an optimal rule? Should the
government violate fiscal constraints when the economy is in distress? And if rules are
self-enforced by the behavior of future governments, what is the form that endogenous
penalties optimally take?
Our analysis of fiscal rules builds on the approach used in Amador, Werning, and
Angeletos (2006) and Halac and Yared (2014).5 We consider a government that is presentbiased towards public spending and privately informed about shocks affecting the value
of this spending. Society chooses a fiscal rule to trade off the benefit of committing the
government to not overspend against the benefit of granting it flexibility to react to shocks.
Motivated by real-world rules and unlike prior work, we posit that this fiscal rule can only
be enforced via the use of penalties which are limited and socially costly.
Our environment is a small open economy in which the government makes a borrowing
and spending decision. Prior to the choice of policy, a shock to the social value of deficitfinanced government spending is realized. The government is present-biased: for any given
shock, the government overvalues current spending relative to future welfare compared to
1

See
See
3
See
4
See
5
See
(2013).
2

IMF Fiscal Rules Data Set, 2015 and Schaechter et al. (2012).
Caselli et al. (2018).
Lledó et al. (2017, p.81) for a description of this procedure.
Halac and Yared (2017b) for a description of this episode and related references.
also Athey, Atkeson, and Kehoe (2005), Amador and Bagwell (2013), and Ambrus and Egorov

1

society. This preference structure results naturally from the aggregation of heterogeneous,
time-consistent citizens’ preferences (Jackson and Yariv, 2014, 2015), or as a consequence of
turnover in a political economy setting (e.g., Aguiar and Amador, 2011).6 We assume that
the shock to the value of spending is privately observed by the government, capturing the
fact that rules cannot explicitly condition on all contingencies in fiscal policy. Furthermore,
the government has full discretion when choosing borrowing and spending. Society can only
specify a schedule of joint penalties, determining the continuation value to the government
and society as a function of the government’s policy choice. A fiscal rule in this setting
therefore consists of an allocation of debt and continuation value for each shock, where this
allocation must satisfy the government’s private information and enforcement constraints.
To describe the forces underlying our model, suppose first that fiscal rules could be
perfectly enforced. Society then chooses a rule to optimally resolve the tradeoff between
commitment and flexibility. Fully committing the government to a contingent debt plan
would allow to implement the first best policy in the absence of private information, whereas
granting the government full flexibility would yield the first best policy in the absence of a
present bias. Given both private information and a present bias, however, a tradeoff arises,
and the first best is not implementable. Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006) show
that, under perfect enforcement and certain distributional assumptions, the solution to
this tradeoff is a fiscal rule that takes the form of a deficit limit. The government borrows
within the limit if the shock to the value of spending is relatively low and it borrows at
the limit if the shock is higher, without triggering any penalties.
Our focus is on understanding the optimal fiscal rule when enforcement is limited. As
is also true under perfect enforcement, a rule under limited enforcement must satisfy the
government’s private information constraints: given a realized shock, the government must
prefer its assigned debt level and continuation value to those prescribed for any other shock.
In addition, the rule must satisfy the government’s enforcement constraints: given a realized
shock, the government must prefer its assigned debt level and continuation value to any
other level of debt not prescribed for any shock. Any observable (off-path) deviation—where
the government chooses a debt level corresponding to no shock—is optimally punished with
the worst possible continuation value conditional on the choice of debt. In fact, if penalties
are severe enough, enforcement constraints are non-binding: the government always prefers
to abide to the perfect-enforcement deficit limit to avoid punishment.
Our main result is a characterization of the optimal fiscal rule when enforcement constraints are binding. We show that this rule takes the form of a maximally enforced deficit
6

See also Persson and Svensson (1989), Alesina and Tabellini (1990), Lizzeri (1999), Battaglini and
Coate (2008), and Yared (2018). Our formulation corresponds to the quasi-hyperbolic model; see Laibson
(1997).

2

limit, which, if violated, leads to the maximal penalty for the government. The rule is thus
similar to that under perfect enforcement, but it differs in two aspects. First, the deficit
limit imposed on the government is more relaxed than the perfect-enforcement limit. Second, the possibility of on-path penalties emerges, with the government breaching the deficit
limit and triggering punishment under sufficiently high shocks. Our analysis identifies the
conditions under which on-path penalties are optimally used.
To obtain this result, we begin by establishing general properties of optimal incentive
provision. Society incentivizes the government not to overborrow by using continuation
values as reward and punishment. We show that in any optimal rule, continuation values
must be bang-bang, so the government receives either the maximal reward or the worst
punishment (conditional on the level of debt), depending on its policy choice. Using milder
penalties would be less socially costly; however, the harshest future punishment maximizes
the range of shocks under which society can impose fiscal discipline in the present, and
we show that this maximizes social welfare. Our bang-bang result relies only on generic
properties of the distribution of shocks, and it applies under both limited and perfect
enforcement. This result thus has implications for other models of delegation with money
burning, including some of those studied in Amador and Bagwell (2013): we find that
optimal delegation requires money burning to take a bang-bang form.
We complete our characterization of optimal incentives by introducing an assumption
on the distribution of shocks.7 We show that under this assumption, optimal bang-bang
continuation values must be monotonic, with the government either always receiving the
maximal reward or receiving the maximal punishment only under high enough shocks.
Moreover, building on monotonicity, we are able to characterize the optimal borrowing allocation. We establish that our distributional assumption is sufficient, as well as necessary,
for maximally enforced deficit limits to be the unique optimal fiscal rule.
Specifically, we show that the optimal rule takes one of two forms. On the one hand,
society can set a relaxed deficit limit that satisfies the enforcement constraint under all
shocks and thus entails no penalties on path. On the other hand, society can prescribe a
tighter deficit limit with on-path penalties: the government respects the deficit limit and
receives the maximal continuation value under low enough shocks, but it breaches the limit
and receives the worst continuation value under higher shocks. We prove that the optimal
deficit limit is unique, and we provide a necessary and sufficient condition for this limit
to feature on-path penalties. This condition depends on the ease of enforcement and the
distribution of shocks. In particular, we find that society chooses a tight deficit limit with
7

See Assumption 1 in Subsection 3.3. This assumption holds for a broad range of distributions, including
uniform, exponential, log-normal, gamma, and beta for a subset of its parameters. Assumption 1 is similar
to, but stronger than, the assumption used in Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006).

3

punishment on path if and only if available penalties are sufficiently weak and high shocks
are sufficiently unlikely. Intuitively, a deficit limit that is respected under all shocks would
have to be too lax if penalties for violation are not severe. Moreover, tightening the deficit
limit by the use of punishment is optimal when high shocks are rare, as the expected cost
of punishing the government following such shocks is then relatively low.
Our baseline model consists of a two-period environment in which the available penalties, and thus the set of feasible continuation values, is exogenously given. We extend
our analysis to an infinite horizon economy in which penalties are endogenous. That is,
in the absence of an external enforcement authority, we study how a fiscal rule may be
self-enforced by the interaction of a sequence of governments. Under an assumption on preferences, we establish that our main result regarding the unique optimality of maximally
enforced deficit limits extends to this environment. Furthermore, we show that the worst
self-enforcing punishment takes the form of temporary overborrowing, following which the
optimal deficit limit is reinstated. Hence, in an optimal rule with on-path punishment, the
temporary violation of fiscal constraints, as in the Chilean case previously described, is
used as a deterrent for breaking these constraints. The fiscal rule is self-enforced by transitions in and out of the best and worst equilibria, with the economy fluctuating between
periods of fiscal responsibility and periods of fiscal irresponsibility.
Related literature. Our paper fits into the aforementioned literature on mechanism
design that studies the tradeoff between commitment and flexibility.8 This literature is
mainly concerned with environments with perfect enforcement, whereas we examine the
optimal rule under limited enforcement. Closely related is Amador and Bagwell (2016),
which considers the problem of regulating a privately informed monopolist in the absence
of transfers and given an ex-post participation constraint. The paper shows that optimal
regulation takes the form of a threshold which is imposed unless the monopolist chooses to
shut down. In contrast to their work, our analysis does not rely on the perfect enforcement
of thresholds, and it allows for money burning, which is sometimes optimally used on path.
Also related to our paper is the literature on the political economy of fiscal policy.9
Dovis and Kirpalani (2017), in particular, examine deficit limits that are endogenously
8

In addition to the work previously cited, see Sleet (2004). More broadly, our paper relates to the literature on delegation in principal-agent settings, including Holmström (1977, 1984), Alonso and Matouschek
(2008), and Ambrus and Egorov (2015).
9
In addition to Aguiar and Amador (2011) and the work cited in fn. 6, see Krusell and Rios-Rull (1999),
Acemoglu, Golosov, and Tsyvinski (2008), Yared (2010), Azzimonti (2011), and Song, Storesletten, and
Zilibotti (2012). For quantitative analyses of fiscal rules, see Bassetto and Sargent (2006), Alfaro and
Kanczuk (2016), Azzimonti, Battaglini, and Coate (2016), and Hatchondo, Martinez, and Roch (2017),
and for a study of coordinated fiscal rules across countries, see Halac and Yared (2018).

4

enforced by reputational concerns. We instead study the enforcement of optimal fiscal
rules under privately observed shocks and no restrictions on their structure.
Our analysis of self-enforcement in an infinite horizon setting contributes to the literature on hyperbolic discounting and the benefits of commitment devices.10 Bernheim, Ray,
and Yeltekin (2015) is related in that it studies self-enforcing consumption rules for a consumer with quasi-hyperbolic preferences, albeit without any private information. Finally,
the equilibrium dynamics in our infinite horizon economy bear a relationship to the seminal
work of Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti (1990), who establish the optimality of bang-bang
continuation values in a class of repeated games. Their analysis however is constrained to
settings with finite actions and a continuous public signal, and thus it does not apply to
our environment in which the action is continuous. Also related is Athey, Bagwell, and
Sanchirico (2004), which studies a repeated Bertrand game with private information.

2
2.1

Model
Setup

We study a simple model of fiscal policy in which the government makes a borrowing
and spending decision. Our setting is similar to that analyzed in Amador, Werning, and
Angeletos (2006) and Halac and Yared (2014). Our departure is in examining the design
of fiscal rules under only limited, as opposed to perfect, enforcement.
Consider a small open economy. A shock to the economy θ > 0 is drawn from a bounded
 
set Θ ≡ θ, θ , with a continuously differentiable probability density function f (θ) > 0 and
associated cumulative density function F (θ). The realization of this shock is privately
observed by the government, so we refer to θ as the government’s type.
The government chooses debt b ∈ [b, b] and public spending g subject to the budget
constraint
g = ω + b,
(1)
where ω > 0 denotes the exogenous resources of the government, representing collected tax
revenue net of any debt repayment.11
Society can influence policy by imposing socially costly penalties on the government as
10

See for example Phelps and Pollak (1968), Laibson (1997), Krusell and Smith, Jr. (2003), Krusell,
Kruscu, and Smith, Jr. (2010), Lizzeri and Yariv (2014), Bisin, Lizzeri, and Yariv (2015), Cao and Werning
(2017), and Moser and de Souza e Silva (2017).
11
Note that since g − b is independent of θ, cross-subsidization across types is not possible, unlike in
other models such as Atkeson and Lucas (1992), Thomas and Worrall (1990), Phelan (1998), Sleet and
Yeltekin (2006, 2008), and Farhi and Werning (2007).

5

a function of its choice of borrowing and spending. As discussed in the Introduction, these
penalties may take the form of formal sanctions, or they may arise from the continuation
play of future governments in a dynamic environment (see Section 4). We model penalties
by letting society commit ex ante to a continuation value function V (b) ∈ [V (b), V (b)],
specifying a continuation value for the government and society for each level of debt b ∈
[b, b]. Here V (b) denotes the highest feasible continuation value given debt b, and V (b) is
the lowest such value.
The timing and payoffs are as follows. First, society chooses a continuation value
function V (b) in order to maximize social welfare:
E [θU (g) + δV (b)] ,

(2)

where θU (g) is the social utility from public spending and δ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.
Second, the government observes the realized shock θ and, given θ and the function V (b),
chooses debt b and spending g subject to (1) in order to maximize government welfare:
θU (g) + βδV (b),

(3)

where β ∈ (0, 1).
We take U (g) to be strictly increasing, strictly concave, and continuously differentiable.
We also assume that for all b ∈ [b, b], V (b) and V (b) are bounded and continuous and satisfy
V (b) > V (b).
There are three main features of this environment. First, since β < 1, the government’s objective (3) given its realized type does not coincide with the social objective (2).
Compared to society, the government overweighs the importance of current spending relative to the future continuation value. The government would thus want to overborrow:
for example, if V (b) is decreasing and concave, the government’s preferred policy satisfies
θU 0 (g) = −βδV 0 (b), whereas the social optimum sets θU 0 (g) = −δV 0 (b). As mentioned in
the Introduction, this payoff structure arises naturally when the government’s preferences
aggregate heterogeneous citizens’ preferences (see Jackson and Yariv, 2014, 2015). This
formulation can also be motivated by political turnover; for instance, preferences such as
these emerge in settings with political uncertainty where policymakers place a higher value
on public spending when they hold power and can make spending decisions (see Aguiar
and Amador, 2011).12
The second feature of our environment is that the realization of θ—which affects the
marginal social utility of public spending—is privately observed by the government. One
12

For a more detailed discussion of our payoff structure, see Yared (2018).

6

interpretation is that fiscal rules imposed on the government cannot explicitly condition on
the value of θ, even if this shock were observable.13 An alternative interpretation is that
the exact cost of public goods is only observable to the policymaker, who may be inclined
to overspend on these goods. Another possibility is that citizens have heterogeneous preferences or heterogeneous information regarding the optimal level of public spending, and
the government sees an aggregate that the citizens do not see (see Sleet, 2004; Piguillem
and Schneider, 2016).
The third and most critical feature of our environment is that the government has full
discretion when choosing borrowing and spending. Society can only influence policy by
specifying contingent penalties which are limited and socially costly. This is a main distinction from prior work, which assumes that available actions can be restricted arbitrarily and
at no cost. The extent of penalties that society can impose on the government is captured
in our model by the difference V (b) − V (b): the larger the difference between the highest
and lowest feasible continuation values, the larger the potential for punishment.14,15 Note
that V (b) and V (b) are exogenous in our benchmark setting and can take on a number of
possible forms. For example, these values may satisfy V (b) = V (b) − m for some m > 0,
in which case m would represent a maximum additive penalty available for any feasible
level of debt b. In the dynamic setting of Section 4, V (b) and V (b) will be endogenously
determined by the set of equilibrium payoffs.

2.2

Fiscal Rules

Using the budget constraint (1), denote the social utility from public spending by U (ω + b).
Given the continuation value function V (b) specified by society and the realization of its
type θ, the government chooses a level of debt b(θ) which maximizes its welfare in (3),
with associated continuation value V (b(θ)) (and spending g(θ) ≡ ω + b(θ)). We refer to
the resulting allocation, {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ , as the fiscal rule imposed by society. This rule
specifies a level of debt and continuation value for each type θ ∈ Θ, and it satisfies private
information, enforcement, and feasibility constraints, as we describe next.
The private information constraint captures the fact that the government can misrepresent its type. A fiscal rule {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ is such that a government of type θ prefers
13

Halac and Yared (2017a) study a delegation problem in which shocks can be verified by a rule-making
body at a cost.
14
A continuation value V (b) ∈ (V (b), V (b)) corresponds to imposing an intermediate penalty on the
government. Intermediate penalties could also be imposed by introducing a public randomization device.
However, such a device will not be used in the optimum, which we will show has a bang-bang nature.
15
As we will show in Section 3, previous analyses in which available actions can be arbitrarily restricted
correspond to a special case of our model in which V (b) is sufficiently low.

7

to pursue its assigned policy rather than that of any other type θ0 6= θ:
θU (ω + b(θ)) + βδV (b(θ)) ≥ θU (ω + b (θ0 )) + βδV (b(θ0 )) for all θ, θ0 ∈ Θ.

(4)

The enforcement constraint captures the fact that the government can freely choose any
feasible level of debt, including levels not assigned to any other government type. A fiscal
rule {b(θ), V (b(θ)}θ∈Θ is such that a government of type θ prefers to pursue its assigned
policy rather than any other policy b0 ∈ [b, b] such that b0 6= b(θ0 ) for all θ0 ∈ Θ:
θU (ω+b(θ))+βδV (b(θ)) ≥ θU (ω+b0 )+βδV (b0 ) for all θ ∈ Θ and all b0 6= b(θ0 ) for all θ0 ∈ Θ.
Note that since the continuation value satisfies V (b0 ) ≥ V (b0 ) for all b0 ∈ [b, b], the above
inequality must hold under maximal punishment, i.e. when V (b0 ) = V (b0 ). Moreover, since
the inequality must then hold for all b0 ∈ [b, b], it must necessarily hold when b0 corresponds
to type θ’s flexible level of debt conditional on maximal punishment. Specifically, let bp (θ)
be defined by
bp (θ) ∈ arg max {θU (ω + b) + βδV (b)}.
b∈[b,b]

Then a necessary condition for the enforcement constraint to be satisfied is
θU (ω + b(θ)) + βδV (b(θ)) ≥ θU (ω + bp (θ)) + βδV (bp (θ)) for all θ ∈ Θ,

(5)

where note that the right-hand side is the government’s minmax payoff.
Constraints (4) and (5) are clearly necessary for {b(θ), V (b(θ)}θ∈Θ to be incentive compatible. Furthermore, if an allocation satisfies these constraints, then it can be supported
by specifying the worst feasible continuation value following any choice b0 ∈ [b, b] by the
government such that b0 6= b(θ0 ) for all θ0 ∈ Θ. Since such a choice is off path, it is without
loss to assume that it is maximally punished.
Lastly, the feasibility constraints ensure that the continuation value V (b(θ)) is within
the lowest and highest feasible values given the level of debt:
V (b(θ)) ≥ V (b(θ)) and V (b(θ)) ≤ V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ Θ.

(6)

A fiscal rule is incentive compatible if it satisfies (4)-(5), and it is incentive compatible
and feasible, or incentive feasible for short, if it satisfies (4)-(6). The fiscal rule is optimal

8

if it additionally maximizes social welfare, namely if it solves:
max

{b(θ)∈[b,b],V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ



E θU (ω + b(θ)) + δV (b(θ))

(7)

subject to (4), (5), and (6).
Throughout our analysis, we assume that the solution to (7) admits a piecewise continuously differentiable function b(θ), which allows us to establish our results by the use
of perturbations.16 This approach follows Athey, Atkeson, and Kehoe (2005), who use
perturbation arguments to characterize optimal monetary policy rules under perfect enforcement. An alternative approach would be to use Lagrangian methods, as in the work
of Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2003). Since our problem is not globally concave,
however, a Lagrangian approach would not establish uniqueness of the solution, and would
make it difficult to identify necessary and sufficient conditions for the optimality of maximally enforced deficit limits. We are able to provide these results using perturbations, as
we show in the next section.

3

Optimal Fiscal Rule

We characterize the optimal fiscal rule under limited enforcement by solving program (7).
We will establish conditions under which the unique solution to this program is a deficit
limit with maximal enforcement.
Let br (θ) denote type θ’s flexible level of debt conditional on maximal reward:
br (θ) ∈ arg max {θU (ω + b) + βδV (b)}.

(8)

b∈[b,b]

We define:
Definition 1. {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ is a maximally enforced deficit limit if there exist θ∗ ∈
[0, θ) and finite θ∗∗ > max{θ∗ , θ} such that
 
r
r

 b (θ), V (b (θ))
{b(θ), V (b(θ))} =
br (θ∗ ), V (br (θ∗ ))

 p
{b (θ), V (bp (θ))}

if θ < θ∗ ,
if θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ],
if θ > θ∗∗ ,

(9)

16
If the program admits multiple solutions that differ only on a countable set of types, we select the
solution that maximizes social welfare for those types.

9

where
θ∗∗ U (ω + br (θ∗ )) + βδV (br (θ∗ )) = θ∗∗ U (ω + bp (θ∗∗ )) + βδV (bp (θ∗∗ )).

(10)

Figure 1 provides an example.17 We depict the borrowing allocation (top panel) and
the allocation of continuation values (bottom panel) under a maximally enforced deficit
limit with θ∗ > θ and θ∗∗ < θ. Under this rule, types θ ∈ [θ, θ∗ ) choose their flexible debt
levels conditional on maximal reward, br (θ); types θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] choose type θ∗ ’s flexible debt

level conditional on maximal reward, br (θ∗ ); and types θ ∈ θ∗∗ , θ choose their flexible
debt levels conditional on maximal punishment, bp (θ). Types θ ≤ θ∗∗ are maximally
rewarded with continuation value V (b(θ)) whereas types θ > θ∗∗ are maximally punished
with continuation value V (b(θ)). By (10), the enforcement constraint holds with equality
for type θ∗∗ .
We can verify that the fiscal rule described in Definition 1 is incentive compatible:
Lemma 1. If {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ is a maximally enforced deficit limit, then it satisfies the
private information constraint (4) and the enforcement constraint (5).
In terms of implementation, this fiscal rule can be implemented using a maximum deficit
limit, spending limit, or debt limit, where this limit would be associated with the borrowing
level br (θ∗ ). If the government respects the limit, it receives maximal reward given its level
of debt, V (b). If the government breaches the limit, it receives maximal punishment given
its level of debt, V (b). Note that the limit is breached along the equilibrium path if and
only if θ∗∗ < θ; we will provide conditions under which this inequality holds in an optimal
maximally enforced deficit limit.
Our analysis proceeds as follows. First, we present some preliminary results in Subsection 3.1, which yield a convenient formulation of the objective in program (7). Second, we
show in Subsection 3.2 that any (interior) solution to this program must feature bang-bang
continuation values, so any optimal rule provides high-powered incentives for the government not to overborrow. Third, we show in Subsection 3.3 that under a distributional
assumption, optimal bang-bang incentives are monotonic, with either all types receiving
the highest continuation value conditional on debt, or only types above an interior point
being punished with the lowest continuation value conditional on debt. This result facilitates our characterization of the optimal borrowing allocation in Subsection 3.4, which
shows that any solution to (7) is a maximally enforced deficit limit. We further establish
that the optimal limit is unique, and provide a necessary and sufficient condition for the
17

The examples in our figures take V (b(θ)) and V (b(θ)) both strictly decreasing in b(θ), but this is not
required by our model.

10

Figure 1: An example of a maximally enforced deficit limit. The thick grey line depicts
the borrowing allocation in the top panel and the allocation of continuation values in the
bottom panel. The solid and dashed black lines in the bottom panel depict V (b(θ)) and
V (b(θ)) respectively.
government to violate the limit following high enough shocks. Finally, in Subsection 3.5, we
show that the distributional assumption introduced in Subsection 3.3 is not only sufficient
but also necessary for any solution to (7) to be a maximally enforced deficit limit.

3.1

Preliminaries

The next lemma follows from standard arguments; see Fudenberg and Tirole (1991):
Lemma 2. {b (θ) , V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ satisfies the private information constraint (4) if and only
if: (i) b(θ) is nondecreasing, and (ii) the following local private information constraints are
satisfied:

11

1. At any point θ at which b(·), and thus V (·), are differentiable,
db(θ)
(θU 0 (ω + b(θ)) + βδV 0 (b(θ))) = 0.
dθ
2. At any point θ at which b(·) is not differentiable,
lim
{θU (ω + b(θ0 )) + βδV (b(θ0 ))} = lim
{θU (ω + b(θ0 )) + βδV (b(θ0 ))} .
0
0
θ ↑θ

θ ↓θ

Observe that since b(θ) is nondecreasing in θ, satisfaction of (4) requires that V (b(θ))
be nonincreasing in θ.
The local private information constraints imply that the derivative of government welfare with respect to θ is U (ω + b(θ)). Hence, in an incentive compatible rule, government
welfare for type θ ∈ Θ satisfies
Z
θU (ω + b(θ)) + βδV (b(θ)) = θU (ω + b(θ)) + βδV (b(θ)) +

θ

U (ω + b(e
θ))de
θ.

(11)

θ

Following Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006), we can substitute (11) into the social
welfare function in (7) to rewrite social welfare as
1
1
θU (ω + b(θ)) + δV (b(θ)) +
β
β

Z

θ

U (ω + b(θ))Q(θ)dθ,

(12)

θ

where
Q (θ) ≡ 1 − F (θ) − θf (θ) (1 − β) .
This formulation will be useful for our characterization of the optimal fiscal rule, which
will appeal to properties of the function Q(θ). For intuition, note that since the government is biased towards overborrowing relative to society, higher levels of borrowing can
be attributed to larger distortions. In this sense, Q(θ) represents the weight that society
places on allowing distortions by a government of type θ: the higher Q(θ), the lower the
social welfare cost of distorting type θ’s borrowing. The shape of this function will tell us
how society wishes to allocate distortions across different government types.

3.2

Bang-Bang Incentives

Society uses continuation values as rewards and punishments to discipline the government
and limit overborrowing. The next proposition shows that in any optimal rule, these
rewards and punishments are extreme. That is, continuation values are bang-bang: given
12

the feasible set [V (b), V (b)], along the equilibrium path V (b(θ)) only travels to the extreme
points in this set.
Proposition 1 (necessity of bang-bang). Assume Q(θ) satisfies the generic property that
Q0 (θ) 6= 0 almost everywhere. If {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ is an optimal rule with b(θ) ∈ (b, b) for

all θ ∈ Θ, then V (b(θ)) ∈ V (b(θ)), V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ Θ.
This result shows that the bang-bang property is necessary for social welfare maximization. An optimal fiscal rule using only extreme continuation values always exists
in our framework; this is true simply because an interior continuation value V (b(θ)) ∈
(V (b(θ)), V (b(θ))) can be assigned in expectation by randomizing over V (b(θ)) and V (b(θ)).
Proposition 1 proves a stronger result: any rule that prescribes interior continuation values
is strictly dominated by one with high-powered incentives.
Proposition 1 is consistent with other work such as Riley and Zeckhauser (1983) and
Fuchs and Skrzypacz (2015), which also find high-powered incentives to be a feature of
optimal contracting in adverse selection environments. As in those papers, the intuition
for our bang-bang result stems from the linearity of payoffs, together with the richness of the
information structure. Linearity emerges here because the penalties captured by V (b(θ))
are joint for the government and society, entering the objective function and constraint
set linearly in program (7).18 Given a continuum of types, the richness of the information
structure is guaranteed by the condition that we identify in Proposition 1, which says that
the set of types θ for which Q0 (θ) = 0 is nowhere dense.19 Intuitively, since Q(θ) is then
either strictly decreasing or strictly increasing over any sufficiently small interval, society
benefits from moving borrowing distortions towards either lower types or higher types in
the interval. As such, spreading out continuation values always allows to reduce distortions.
These values however must be spread out in an incentive feasible manner, satisfying the
constraints in (11) together with the monotonicity of the allocation.
Before we describe the proof of Proposition 1, it is worth commenting on the scope of
this result. The proposition holds regardless of the tightness of enforcement constraints, and
it therefore continues to hold absent constraint (5). Hence, our bang-bang characterization
applies more generally to other delegation problems with money burning. One example
is the widely studied delegation setting in which the agent’s bias and private information
18

In Riley and Zeckhauser (1983) and Fuchs and Skrzypacz (2015), the bang-bang property applies to
the probability of trade, which enters symmetrically in the objective functions of the seller and buyers. In
contrast to their work, we cannot consider a relaxed problem that ignores or reduces the dimensionality of
the promise-keeping constraint (11), as this constraint binds type by type in our framework.
19
Given f (θ) continuously differentiable, this condition holds generically. Specifically, this condition
fails only if θf 0 (θ)/f (θ) = −(2 − β)/(1 − β) for a positive mass of types θ, but then any arbitrarily small
perturbation of β would render the condition true.

13

take a multiplicative form; see Amador and Bagwell (2013). In our context, that coincides
with the special case in which the highest and lowest feasible continuation values satisfy
V (b) = V (b) − m for some penalty m > 0. Proposition 1 implies that in any interior
solution to this problem, each agent type is assigned either no money burning or maximal
money burning.20,21
We next provide a summary of the proof of Proposition 1. The proof makes use of
perturbation arguments and proceeds in three steps.22
Step 1 shows that in any optimal rule, V (b(θ)) is left-continuous at each θ ∈ (θ, θ], a fact
that we utilize for the rest of our analysis. Suppose this were not true at some θ ∈ (θ, θ].
By Lemma 2, type θ must be indifferent between its allocation, {b(θ), V (b(θ))}, and its leftlimit allocation, call it {b(θ− ), V (b(θ− ))}, where the latter has lower borrowing and higher
continuation value: b(θ− ) < b(θ) and V (b(θ− )) > V (b(θ)). Since the government overweighs
borrowing relative to society, it follows that a perturbation that assigns type θ its left-limit
allocation strictly increases social welfare. Moreover, given this type’s indifference, this
perturbation is incentive feasible. Hence, V (b(θ)) must be left-continuous, and we use a
similar logic to show that V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) must also hold in any optimal rule.
Step 2 rules out incentive provision via locally increasing penalties. We show that an
optimal rule cannot prescribe a continuation value V (b(θ)) that is continuously strictly
decreasing in θ and strictly interior (i.e. strictly between V (b(θ)) and V (b(θ))) over an
interval [θL , θH ]. Suppose by contradiction that such an interval exists. By Lemma 2, b(θ)
must be strictly increasing over [θL , θH ], and by the generic property in Proposition 1, we
can take an interval with either Q0 (θ) > 0 or Q0 (θ) < 0 for all θ ∈ [θL , θH ]. We then show
that there exists an incentive feasible perturbation that strictly increases social welfare. If
Q0 (θ) < 0, we construct a flattening perturbation that rotates the increasing b(θ) schedule
clockwise over [θL , θH ], which entails reducing incentives with a counterclockwise rotation
of the decreasing V (b(θ)) schedule. This perturbation is socially beneficial because, given
Q0 (θ) < 0, society prefers to concentrate distortions on lower rather than higher types.
If instead Q0 (θ) > 0, we construct a steepening perturbation that drills a hole in the b(θ)
schedule by making allocations in (θL , θH ) no longer available, which entails increasing
incentives by moving interior continuation values towards V (b(θL )) or V (b(θH )). This
perturbation is socially beneficial because, given Q0 (θ) > 0, society prefers to concentrate
20

Ambrus and Egorov (2013) provide examples in the setting of Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006)
in which borrowing is at a corner and, as a result, interior punishments can be optimal.
21
We conjecture that the claims may also extend to the monetary policy model of Athey, Atkeson, and
Kehoe (2005).
22
Some of the arguments that we use when Q(θ) is decreasing are similar to those employed by Athey,
Atkeson, and Kehoe (2005) in their analysis of optimal inflation rules. Unlike in their work, where rules
are perfectly enforced, our arguments take into account the constraints due to limited enforcement.

14

Figure 2: Examples of a flattening perturbation (left panel) and a steepening perturbation
(right panel), as used in Step 2 of the proof of Proposition 1.
distortions on higher rather than lower types. Figure 2 illustrates the perturbations.
Step 3 completes the proof by ruling out intermediate penalties. Suppose V (b(θ)) was
strictly interior at some θ ∈ Θ. By the previous steps and Lemma 2, type θ must belong
to a stand-alone segment (θL , θH ] such that b(θ) = b and V (b(θ)) = V for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ],
b ∈ (b, b) and V ∈ (V (b), V (b)) (by assumption), and b(θ) jumps at each boundary unless
θH = θ. We then show that there exists an incentive feasible perturbation that changes
R θH
R θH
b and V slightly and strictly increases social welfare. If θL Q(θ)dθ > θL Q(θL )dθ, we
perform a segment-shifting steepening perturbation over the interval (θL , θH ] as illustrated
in Figure 3: we marginally increase b and reduce V so as to leave the government welfare
of type θH unchanged, thus letting types arbitrarily close to θL jump down to a lower debt
R θH
R θH
level. This perturbation is socially beneficial because, given θL Q(θ)dθ > θL Q(θL )dθ, soR θH
ciety prefers to concentrate distortions on (θL , θH ] compared to θL . If instead θL Q(θ)dθ ≤
R θH
R θh
R θh
Q(θL )dθ, the generic property in Proposition 1 ensures that θL Q(θ)dθ < θL Q(θL )dθ
θL
for some θh ∈ (θL , θH ]. We then perform a segment-shifting flattening perturbation over

15

Figure 3: Example of a segment-shifting steepening perturbation, as used in Step 3 of
the proof of Proposition 1.
the interval (θL , θh ]: we marginally reduce b and increase V so as to leave the government
welfare of type θh unchanged, thus letting types arbitrarily close to θL jump up to this alR θh
R θh
location. This perturbation is socially beneficial because, given θL Q(θ)dθ < θL Q(θL )dθ,
society prefers to concentrate distortions on θL compared to (θL , θh ].

3.3

Monotonic Incentives

To further characterize the schedule of continuation values V (b(θ)), and solve for the optimal fiscal rule in the next subsection, we make the following assumption:
Assumption 1. There exists b
θ ∈ Θ such that Q0 (θ) < 0 if θ < b
θ and Q0 (θ) > 0 if θ > b
θ.
This assumption states that Q(θ) has a minimum value Q(b
θ) ≤ Q(θ) < 0, being strictly
b
b
decreasing for θ < θ and strictly increasing for θ > θ. Note that the assumption allows
for Q(θ) to be strictly decreasing or strictly increasing over the whole set Θ; in this case
b
θ is defined as either the upper bound or the lower bound of the set Θ. Assumption 1
16

implies the generic property required in Proposition 1, and it holds for a broad range of
distribution functions, including uniform, exponential, log-normal, gamma, and beta for a
subset of its parameters. This assumption is similar to, but stronger than, the distributional
assumption used in Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006). We show in Subsection 3.5
that Assumption 1 is necessary for our characterization of optimal rules.
We maintain Assumption 1 for the remainder of our analysis. The next lemma shows
that, given the implied shape of Q(θ), optimal incentives are monotonic.
Lemma 3. If {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ is an optimal rule with b(θ) ∈ (b, b) for all θ ∈ Θ, then
either V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ Θ, or there exists θ∗∗ ∈ (θ, θ) such that V (b(θ)) =
V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ [θ, θ∗∗ ] and V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ].
The intuition for this result is related to the shape of the Q(θ) function, which tells
us how society wishes to allocate borrowing distortions across types. For types θ > b
θ,
where b
θ is defined in Assumption 1, society prefers to concentrate distortions on relatively
high types. This is achieved by using high-powered incentives that punish high levels of
borrowing by lowering the continuation value from V (b(θ)) to V (b(θ)). In contrast, for
types θ < b
θ, society prefers to concentrate distortions on relatively low types. This is
achieved by using flat incentives that keep the continuation value constant at V (b(θ)).
The proof of Lemma 3 consists of three steps, which we summarize here. Step 1
shows that any interval of types receiving the maximal penalty V (b(θ)) must lie above
b
θ. Suppose by contradiction that this were not true, so that an optimal rule prescribes
V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) over an interval [θL , θH ] with Q0 (θ) < 0 for θ ∈ [θL , θH ]. Note that the
enforcement constraint requires b(θ) = bp (θ) for all types θ in the interval. We then show
that there exists an incentive feasible perturbation that strictly increases social welfare. If
dbp (θ)
> 0 for θ ∈ [θL , θH ], we perform a flattening perturbation that rotates the borrowing
dθ
schedule clockwise; by the logic in Step 2 in the proof of Proposition 1 and Q0 (θ) < 0, this
perturbation is socially beneficial. If instead bp (θ) is constant over [θL , θH ], we perform a
segment-shifting flattening perturbation; by the logic in Step 3 in the proof of Proposition 1
and Q0 (θ) < 0, this perturbation is socially beneficial.
Step 2 establishes that incentives are monotonic. We show that if V (b(θ∗∗ )) = V (b(θ∗∗ ))
for some type θ∗∗ ≥ b
θ in an optimal rule, then V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all types θ ≥ θ∗∗ .
Suppose by contradiction that V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for some type θ > θ∗∗ . By our leftcontinuity and bang-bang results, there must exist an interval (θL , θH ], θL ≥ θ∗∗ , such
that V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ]. We then show that there exists an incentive
feasible perturbation that strictly increases social welfare. If db(θ)
> 0 for θ ∈ (θL , θH ], we
dθ
perform a steepening perturbation that drills a hole in the b(θ) schedule; by the logic in
17

Step 2 in the proof of Proposition 1 and Q0 (θ) > 0, this perturbation is socially beneficial.
If instead b(θ) is constant over (θL , θH ], we can take a stand-alone segment with constant
borrowing lying above b
θ. Using similar logic as in Step 3 in the proof of Proposition 1 and
0
Q (θ) > 0, we show that there exists a segment-shifting steepening perturbation that is
socially beneficial.
The previous steps, Proposition 1, and Step 1 in the proof of that proposition imply
the following: if V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for some type θ ∈ Θ, then there exists θ∗∗ ∈ [θ, θ)
such that V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ [θ, θ∗∗ ] and V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ].
Step 3 completes the proof of Lemma 3 by showing that θ∗∗ > θ. The idea is simple: if
θ∗∗ = θ, we can perform a global perturbation that increases the continuation value of
types θ ∈ (θ, θ] by a constant amount ∆ > 0 and assigns type θ the limit allocation to
its right. This perturbation keeps the borrowing level of types θ ∈ (θ, θ] unchanged and is
incentive feasible for ∆ > 0 small enough. Moreover, using the representation in (12), we
show that the perturbation increases social welfare by δ∆ > 0.

3.4

Maximally Enforced Deficit Limit

Proposition 1 and Lemma 3 characterize the schedule of continuation values in any optimal
rule. To provide a characterization of the borrowing schedule, we require:
Assumption 2. For all b ∈ [b, b], V (b) is continuously differentiable and strictly concave.
This assumption ensures that the government’s flexible level of debt conditional on
maximal reward, br (θ), is continuous in its type θ. We maintain this assumption for the
remainder of our analysis.23 The next proposition states the main result of the paper:
Proposition 2 (optimal rule). If {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ is an optimal rule with b(θ) ∈ (b, b)
 
for all θ ∈ Θ, then it satisfies (9)-(10) for some θ∗ ∈ 0, θ and finite θ∗∗ > max {θ∗ , θ}.
Hence, any interior solution is a maximally enforced deficit limit.
Recall from Lemma 3 that in any optimal rule, either all government types θ ∈ Θ
receive the highest continuation value V (b(θ)), or the continuation value jumps down
from V (b(θ)) to V (b(θ)) at a point θ∗∗ ∈ (θ, θ). To establish Proposition 2, we take
θ∗∗ as given and solve for the optimal borrowing allocation above and below this point.
If θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ], the allocation is characterized by the binding enforcement constraint with
{b(θ), V (b(θ))} = {bp (θ), V (bp (θ))}. If θ ∈ [θ, θ∗∗ ], we show that the borrowing schedule
b(θ) must be continuous, so the allocation takes the form of bounded discretion. Since a
23

This assumption holds in our infinite horizon setting in which V (b) is endogenous; see Lemma 4.

18

minimum borrowing requirement would reduce social welfare (given the government’s bias
towards overborrowing), a maximum borrowing limit br (θ∗ ) is optimal for types in this
range. Such a borrowing limit necessarily keeps type θ∗∗ indifferent between the allocations {br (θ∗ ), V (br (θ∗ ))} and {bp (θ∗∗ ), V (bp (θ∗∗ ))}.
The proof that b(θ) is continuous over [θ, θ∗∗ ] builds on perturbation arguments similar
to those used in the previous subsections. Given the absence of penalty incentives below


θ∗∗ , a discontinuity would entail a hole in some range θL , θH . That is, b(θ) would jump


at a point θM ∈ θL , θH , such that types θ ∈ θL , θM borrow at br (θL ) < br (θ) and

types θ ∈ θM , θH borrow at br (θH ) > br (θ). However, if θM < b
θ, an incentive feasible
L
perturbation that slightly closes the hole by raising θ (and thus also raising θM ) would
strictly increase social welfare, by similar logic as in Step 2 in the proof of Proposition 1

and Q0 (θ) < 0. Moreover, if θM ≥ b
θ, the interval θM , θH must belong to a stand-alone
segment with constant borrowing.24 An incentive feasible segment-shifting perturbation
would then strictly increase social welfare, by similar logic as in Step 2 in the proof of
Lemma 3 and Q0 (θ) > 0. It follows that b(θ) cannot be discontinuous below θ∗∗ .
Proposition 2 shows that any interior solution must be a maximally enforced deficit
limit, but it is silent on whether this limit is violated along the equilibrium path, namely
whether θ∗∗ < θ. To address this issue, consider first the problem under perfect enforcement, as in the work of Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006). If the enforcement
constraint (5) can be ignored, and given Assumption 1 and Assumption 2, it follows from
Proposition 2 that the optimal rule solves:
(Z
max
θ ∈[0,θ)
∗

θ∗

θU (ω + br (θ)) + δV (br (θ)) f (θ)dθ +


θ

Z
θ

)

θ

θU (ω + br (θ∗ )) + δV (br (θ∗ )) f (θ)dθ .


∗

 
Denote the solution by θe ∈ 0, θ . Using the definition of br (θ) and integration by parts,
the first-order condition can be shown to be equivalent to25
Z

θ

Q(θ)dθ = 0.

(13)

θe

The optimal deficit limit under perfect enforcement is such that, on average, the distortion
above the limit is zero. Clearly, if this limit can be enforced given {V (b), V (b)}, then it is
also optimal under limited enforcement:
24
Otherwise, by the same logic as in Step 2 in the proof of Lemma 3, social welfare could be increased
by drilling a hole in the borrowing allocation above b
θ.
25
Note that Q(θ) = 1 for θ < θ.

19

Corollary 1. Suppose
θU (ω + br (θe )) + βδV (br (θe )) ≥ θU (ω + bp (θ)) + βδV (bp (θ)).

(14)

If {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ is an optimal rule with b(θ) ∈ (b, b) for all θ ∈ Θ, then it is the
perfect-enforcement deficit limit, with θ∗ = θe and θ∗∗ ≥ θ.
When condition (14) holds, the highest type θ, and therefore all types θ ∈ Θ, prefer
to respect the perfect-enforcement limit br (θe ) and receive maximal reward rather than
spend above the limit and receive maximal punishment. The optimal rule under limited
enforcement therefore coincides with that under perfect enforcement and features no onpath penalties.
Our interest is in characterizing the optimal rule when condition (14) does not hold,
so the perfect-enforcement limit br (θe ) is not enforceable given {V (b), V (b)}. To this end,
we can define a unique type θc as corresponding to the tightest deficit limit that all types
θ ∈ Θ would be willing to respect:
θU (ω + br (θc )) + βδV (br (θc )) = θU (ω + bp (θ)) + βδV (bp (θ)).

(15)

Note that θc ≤ θe whenever the perfect-enforcement limit is enforceable, and θc > θe
otherwise. The value of θc increases if V (b) is increased for every b, holding all else fixed.
Intuitively, if the severity of the penalties that can be imposed on the government is
diminished, then the tightest deficit limit that can be enforced becomes less stringent.
Moreover, note that the value of θc is only a function of preferences (including {V (b), V (b)})
and the value of θ, and is thus independent of the distribution of types over the support
[θ, θ]. Using this definition of θc , the next proposition provides a necessary and sufficient
condition for penalties to be optimally used along the equilibrium path.
Proposition 3 (use of punishment). If {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ is an optimal rule with b(θ) ∈
(b, b) for all θ ∈ Θ, then it is the unique such rule. Moreover, if
Z

θ

(Q(θ) − Q(θ))dθ ≥ 0,

(16)

θc

this rule a maximally enforced deficit limit with θ∗ = max{θc , θe } and θ∗∗ ≥ θ. Otherwise,
this rule is a maximally enforced deficit limit with θ∗ ∈ (θe , θc ) and θ∗∗ < θ.
Whenever the perfect-enforcement limit br (θe ) is enforceable, i.e. θc ≤ θe , Assumption 1
Rθ
Rθ
guarantees that θc Q(θ)dθ ≥ θe Q(θ)dθ = 0. Hence, in this case, condition (16) is satisfied
and the optimal rule coincides with that under perfect enforcement, as noted in Corollary 1.
20

If instead the perfect-enforcement limit br (θe ) is not enforceable, i.e. θc > θe , then
society faces the following tradeoff. On the one hand, society can raise the value of θ∗
to the point that the associated limit br (θ∗ ) satisfies the enforcement constraint of type θ
and thus of all types θ ∈ Θ. This option entails setting θ∗ = θc and θ∗∗ = θ and has the
benefit of avoiding socially costly penalties along the equilibrium path, albeit at the cost
of potentially allowing significant overborrowing within the relaxed deficit limit. On the
other hand, society can impose a tighter limit br (θ∗ ) which does not satisfy the enforcement
constraint of all types. This option sets θ∗ < θc and θ∗∗ < θ and induces higher discipline
on types θ ≤ θ∗∗ , but at the cost of imposing penalties whenever a shock θ > θ∗∗ is realized.
Proposition 3 shows that which of these two options is optimal for society depends on
whether the inequality in (16) holds or not. The proof of this proposition uses the properties
of Q(θ) to show that there exist a unique threshold θ∗ and associated θ∗∗ satisfying (10) that
optimally resolve the tradeoff between imposing fiscal discipline and avoiding punishments.
The intuition for condition (16) is familiar by now: it tells us how society wishes to allocate
borrowing distortions, and in particular whether society prefers to concentrate distortions
on types θ ∈ [θc , θ) versus θ. A relaxed deficit limit that avoids punishments concentrates
distortions on [θc , θ), whereas tightening the deficit limit by the use of punishment moves
distortions towards θ.
Holding fixed the distribution of shocks, condition (16) shows that the use of punishment
depends on the ease of enforcement. Recall that θc increases if V (b) is increased for every
b. Moreover, if b
θ in Assumption 1 is interior, then given this assumption, (16) holds for
θc low enough but cannot be satisfied if θc becomes sufficiently high. Therefore, we find
that for any fixed distribution of shocks admitting an interior value of b
θ, we can make
penalties sufficiently severe that punishment is not imposed on path, or sufficiently weak
that on-path punishment is optimally used. When penalties are weak, the tightest deficit
limit that all government types would be willing to respect is too lax, so society prefers to
set a tighter limit and let high enough types violate it.
Additionally, holding fixed the support [θ, θ] and the value of θc (which, as noted, is
determined by preferences), condition (16) tells us how the use of punishment depends on
the distribution of shocks. To see this, rewrite (16) as follows (see the proof of Proposition 3
for a derivation):
E[θ|θ ≥ θc ]
1
≥ −
θc
β



 


θf θ
θ
1
−1
−1 .
θc
1 − F (θc ) β

(17)

For any fixed [θ, θ] and θc , we can find a distribution of shocks such that on-path punishment
is or is not optimal. Specifically, (17) implies that punishment is not imposed on path if
21

high shocks are likely and expected fiscal needs conditional on the tightest enforceable limit
are large, namely if f (θ)/(1−F (θc )) and E [θ|θ ≥ θc ] /θc are sufficiently high. This situation
arises, for example, under a uniform distribution of shocks. Society in this case benefits
from setting a relaxed deficit limit that is never violated, as punishing the government
following high shocks would be too costly. In contrast, punishment is optimally imposed
on path if f (θ)/(1 − F (θc )) and E [θ|θ ≥ θc ] /θc are sufficiently low. This situation arises
whenever the perfect-enforcement limit is not enforceable (i.e., θc > θe ) and limθ→θ f (θ) =
0, as is true for example under a beta distribution with beta shape parameter greater
than one.26 Society in this case benefits from setting a tight deficit limit that is violated
following high enough shocks, as such events are sufficiently rare that the cost of punishing
the government is then relatively low.

3.5

Discussion of Distributional Assumption

Our characterization in Subsection 3.4 is derived under Assumption 1, which pins down
the shape of the function Q(θ). Assumption 1 is sufficient to obtain the unique optimality
of maximally enforced deficit limits, among interior solutions, under any (bounded and
continuous) functions V (b) and V (b) satisfying Assumption 2. In this section, we explore
the necessity of Assumption 1 for our findings.
Definition 2. Assumption 1 is weakly violated if there exist θL , θH ∈ Θ, θH > θL , and
∆ > 0 such that (i) Q0 (θ) ≥ 0 for θ ∈ [θL , θL + ∆] and (ii) Q0 (θ) ≤ 0 for θ ∈ [θH − ∆, θH ].
Assumption 1 is strictly violated if the inequalities in (i)-(ii) are strict.
We find that both weak and strict violations of Assumption 1 would affect our results:
Proposition 4 (necessity of distributional assumption). Consider functions V (b) and V (b)
satisfying Assumption 2. If Assumption 1 is weakly violated, then for any function V (b),
there exists a function V (b) under which not every optimal rule with b(θ) ∈ (b, b) for all
θ ∈ Θ is a maximally enforced deficit limit. Moreover, if Assumption 1 is strictly violated,
then for any function V (b), there exists a function V (b) under which no such optimal rule
is a maximally enforced deficit limit.
This proposition shows that Assumption 1 is necessary for maximally enforced deficit
limits to be uniquely optimal (among interior solutions) given any functions {V (b), V (b)}.
In this sense, our analysis identifies the minimal structure that guarantees the unique
optimality of this class of rules, a class that resembles fiscal rules commonly used in practice
c]
Note that for limθ→θ f (θ) = 0, condition (17) becomes E[θ|θ≥θ
≥ β1 . Thus, given θc and β < 1, this
θc
condition is violated under distributions of shocks with sufficiently low mass above θc .

26

22

in the form of deficit, spending, and debt limits. Note that both weak and strict violations
of Assumption 1 are possible even when the generic property in Proposition 1 is satisfied.
Under these violations, an optimal rule under limited enforcement would feature bang-bang
incentives yet induce an allocation that is not implementable by a deficit limit. We prove
the first part of Proposition 4 by construction and the second part by contradiction.27

4

Self-Enforcing Fiscal Rule

We have characterized the optimal fiscal rule under limited enforcement when the extent of
penalties that can be imposed on the government is exogenously given. In this section, we
extend our analysis to an infinite horizon environment in which the set of feasible penalties
is endogenously determined. To focus our analysis, we assume that there is no external
enforcement authority that inflicts sanctions. Instead, the government’s policy decision in
each period is self-enforced by the behavior of future governments.
Specifically, we define a self-enforcing fiscal rule as a perfect public equilibrium of the
interaction between successive governments. Such a rule must satisfy a sequence of private
information and self-enforcement constraints which are analogous to those in Section 3.
In fact, the recursive representation of the optimal rule is equivalent to that in our static
environment, where the highest and lowest feasible continuation values given the level of
debt, V (b) and V (b), are now determined by the set of perfect public equilibria of the
game. As such, we are able to establish that our results in Section 3 extend to this
infinite horizon setting, yielding a characterization of the allocation that corresponds to
maximal reward V (b). Additionally, we provide a characterization of the allocation that
corresponds to maximal punishment V (b), and we describe the dynamics of fiscal policy
under the optimal self-enforcing rule.

4.1

Infinite Horizon Setting

Consider an infinite horizon setting with periods t = {0, 1, . . .}. At the beginning of
each period, the government privately observes a shock θt , independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) according to f (θt ) and F (θt ). We denote by bt and gt respectively the
government’s choices of debt and spending in period t. The government’s budget constraint
27

As noted in Subsection 3.3, Assumption 1 is stronger than the distributional assumption used in
Rθ
θ)de
θ ≤ 0 for all
Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006). Define θa as the lowest value such that θ Q(e
θ ≥ θa . Then using our notation and taking f (θ) to be differentiable, Amador, Werning, and Angeletos
(2006) assume Q0 (θ) ≤ 0 for all θ ≤ θa . One can verify that there are distributions F (θ) satisfying this
assumption for which Assumption 1 is strictly violated, and therefore for which there exist continuation
value functions such that no optimal rule with interior borrowing is a maximally enforced deficit limit.

23

is the dynamic analog of (1), given by
gt = τ − Rbt−1 + bt ,

(18)

where τ > 0 is the exogenous tax revenue at every date and R > 1 is the exogenous gross
interest rate on government bonds.
Social welfare at the beginning of date t is
∞
X

δ k E [θt+k U (gt+k )] ,

k=0

whereas the government’s welfare following the realization of its type θt at date t is
θt U (gt ) + β

∞
X

δ k E [θt+k U (gt+k )] .

(19)

k=1

As in our static setting, β ∈ (0, 1) and Q(θt ) = 1 − F (θt ) − θt f (θt )(1 − β) satisfies
Assumption 1. To make the analysis tractable (as we explain subsequently), we take a
social utility of public spending with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA):
 1−γ
g
−1


1−γ
U (g) =

log(g)

for γ > 0, γ 6= 1,
(20)
for γ = 1.

Following Bernheim, Ray, and Yeltekin (2015), we also require the level of debt in each
period t to satisfy
(21)
bt ∈ [b(bt−1 ), b(bt−1 )],


τ
τ
τ
τ
where b(bt−1 ) = R−1
− (1 − ν) R R−1
− bt−1 and b(bt−1 ) = R−1
− νR R−1
− bt−1 for
some small ν ∈ (0, 12 ). Equation (21) thus defines lower and upper bounds on the fraction
of lifetime resources that the government can borrow or save at any time. Note that for
γ ≥ 1, (20) yields U (0) = −∞, and therefore (21) is necessary to guarantee that payoffs
(and thus punishments) are bounded. We then take ν > 0 small enough that this constraint
is otherwise non-binding.28
28

See Laibson (1994) for further discussion of the necessity of these bounds in the quasi-hyperbolic
model.

24

4.2

Equilibrium Definition

We consider the interaction between the governments in each period t = {0, 1, . . .}. Our
equilibrium concept is perfect public equilibrium. Let ht−1 = {b−1 , b0 , . . . , bt−1 } denote the
public history of debt through time t − 1 and Ht−1 the set of all possible such histories. A
public strategy for the government in period t is σ t (ht−1 , θt ), specifying, for each history
ht−1 ∈ Ht−1 and current government type θt ∈ Θ, a feasible level of debt bt (ht−1 , θt ). Note
that given the budget constraint (18), a public history of debt also pins down the public
history of spending, and the government’s strategy also pins down its choice of spending.
Specifically, denoting by ω t (ht−1 ) ≡ τ − Rbt−1 (ht−1 ) the available resources at history ht−1 ,
spending given ht−1 and θt is gt (ht−1 , θt ) = ω t (ht−1 ) + bt (ht−1 , θt ). We define a perfect
∞
public equilibrium as a profile of public strategies σ = (σ t (ht−1 , θt ))t=0 such that, for each
t ∈ {0, 1, . . .}, σ t (ht−1 , θt ) maximizes the t-period government’s welfare (19) given the
∞
continuation strategies σ t+k ht+k−1 , θt+k k=1 of all future governments. We henceforth
refer to perfect public equilibria as simply equilibria.
Given an equilibrium, let Vt (ht−1 ) denote the continuation value to society at date t
starting from a history ht−1 . At any (on- or off-path) history ht−1 , the continuation value
given the equilibrium strategies can be represented recursively:


Vt (ht−1 ) = E θt U (ω t (ht−1 ) + bt (ht−1 , θt )) + δVt+1 (ht−1 , bt (ht−1 , θt ))) .

(22)

Analogous to constraints (4) and (5) in our static environment, a profile of strategies
∞
(σ t (ht−1 , θt ))t=0 constitutes an equilibrium if and only if, for all t ∈ {0, 1 . . .} and all (onand off-path) histories ht−1 , the following private information and enforcement constraints
are satisfied:
θt U (ω t (ht−1 ) + bt (ht−1 , θt )) + βδVt+1 (ht−1 , bt (ht−1 , θt ))

(23)

≥ θt U (ω t (ht−1 ) + bt (ht−1 , θ0t )) + βδVt+1 (ht−1 , bt (ht−1 , θ0t )) for all θt , θ0t ∈ Θ
and
θt U (ω t (ht−1 ) + bt (ht−1 , θt )) + βδVt+1 (ht−1 , bt (ht−1 , θt ))

(24)

≥ θt U (ω t (ht−1 ) + bpt (ht−1 , θt )) + βδV t+1 (ht−1 , bpt (ht−1 , θt )) for all θt ∈ Θ.
Here V t+1 (ht−1 , bpt (ht−1 , θt )) denotes the maximal punishment that can be supported by
equilibrium strategies at history (ht−1 , bpt (ht−1 , θt )), and bpt (ht−1 , θt ) denotes type θt ’s flexible debt level given maximal punishment following history (ht−1 , bt ) for any feasible bt .

25

That is, analogous to our definition in the static environment, we have bpt (ht−1 , θt ) ∈
arg maxbt ∈[b(bt−1 ),b(bt−1 )] {θt U (ω(ht−1 ) + bt ) + βδV t+1 (ht−1 , bt )}.
We examine the equilibrium that maximizes social welfare at date 0; we call this equilibrium the optimal self-enforcing fiscal rule. Let V (b) and V (b) denote respectively the
lowest and highest levels of date-0 social welfare that can be sustained by equilibrium
strategies given an initial level of debt b−1 = b, where we assume V (b) < V (b).29 Note
that given the repeated nature of the game and the fact that shocks are i.i.d., we can
represent initial policies under an optimal self-enforcing rule recursively starting from date
0. That is, as shown in Chade, Prokopovych, and Smith (2008), the recursive structure
of the continuation values implies that the techniques of Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti
(1990) can be applied to our setting. Thus, rather than optimizing over an entire debt
sequence, we can assign each type θ0 ∈ Θ a date-0 level of debt b0 (θ0 ) and continuation
value V1 (b0 (θ0 )), where these must satisfy the private information and self-enforcement constraints, and where the continuation value is itself drawn from the set of continuation values


V (b0 (θ0 )), V (b0 (θ0 )) that satisfy the private information and self-enforcement constraints.
Letting {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ ≡ {b0 (θ0 ), V1 (b0 (θ0 ))}θ0 ∈Θ and ω ≡ ω 0 (h−1 ), it therefore follows
that an optimal self-enforcing rule in the infinite horizon setting solves our static program
in (7).

4.3

Optimal Self-Enforcing Fiscal Rule

Define the savings rate at date t, st , as the fraction of lifetime resources that are not spent
at t:
τ − Rbt−1 + bt
,
(25)
1 − st =
Rτ /(R − 1) − Rbt−1
where, by (21), feasibility requires st ∈ [ν, 1−ν]. Note that for any period t ∈ {0, 1, . . .} and
public history of debt ht−1 = {b−1 , b0 , . . . , bt−1 }, there is a corresponding public history of
initial debt and subsequent savings rates, e
ht−1 = {b−1 , s0 , . . . , st−1 }. Moreover, a strategy
for the government in period t can be equivalently defined as specifying either a debt level
bt (ht−1 , θt ) for each history ht−1 and current type θt , or a savings rate st (e
ht−1 , θt ) for each
history e
ht−1 and current type θt .
In the Online Appendix, we consider the representation of our problem using savings
rates and prove the following results. First, given our assumption on preferences in (20),
we show that whether or not a profile of savings rate strategies constitutes an equilibrium
is independent of the initial level of debt b−1 . The reason is that, while social welfare
29

That is, we assume the equilibrium set is not a singleton. Halac and Yared (2017b) analyze a specific
case of our model and show that this assumption amounts to the discount factor δ being high enough.

26

does depend on b−1 , the private information and enforcement constraints (23) and (24) are
scalable in debt under (20), and therefore only depend on the sequence of savings rates.
Second, as a consequence, we establish that the sequences of savings rates that sustain the
lowest and highest continuation values V (b) and V (b) given initial debt b are independent
of b. Finally, using this result and (20), we show:
Lemma 4. V (b) and V (b) are continuously differentiable and strictly concave in b.
Combined with our observations in the previous subsection and our results in Section 3,
this lemma implies that the optimal date-0 policies, {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ , are characterized
as follows:
Proposition 5 (infinite horizon). If {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ is an optimal rule in the infinite
horizon economy with b(θ) ∈ (b(b−1 ), b(b−1 )) for all θ ∈ Θ, then it satisfies (9)-(10) for
 
some θ∗ ∈ 0, θ and finite θ∗∗ > max {θ∗ , θ}. Hence, any interior solution for the maximal reward is a maximally enforced deficit limit. Moreover, θ∗ and θ∗∗ are unique and
independent of b−1 .
The first part of the proposition, on the optimality of maximally enforced deficit limits,
is a direct application of Proposition 2, taking into account the properties established in
Lemma 4. Observe that given preferences as specified in (20), if γ ≥ 1, then the borrowing
allocation is always interior. The reason is that the bounds on savings rates are defined
as [ν, 1 − ν] for ν arbitrarily close to zero, and thus a corner allocation with st = ν or
st = 1 − ν would imply arbitrarily low social welfare under γ ≥ 1. Hence, any optimal
fiscal rule features interior debt and, as a result, is a maximally enforced deficit limit.
The second part of Proposition 5 shows that the thresholds θ∗ and θ∗∗ that define an
optimal maximally enforced deficit limit are unique and independent of the initial level of
debt b−1 . Uniqueness follows from the results in Proposition 3. To see why the thresholds
do not depend on b−1 , recall that we can represent an optimal fiscal rule as a sequence
of savings rates, and given (20), such a sequence is independent of initial debt. A simple
implementation of this rule is a maximally enforced minimal savings rate s∗ , where s∗
corresponds to type θ∗ ’s flexible savings rate under maximal reward (which is independent
of the level of debt). That is, under this rule, types θ ≤ θ∗ choose a savings rate weakly
higher than s∗ , types θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] are constrained and choose s∗ , and types θ > θ∗∗
choose a savings rate strictly lower than s∗ . Types θ ≤ θ∗∗ are rewarded at date 1 with a
continuation value V 1 (b0 ) whereas types θ > θ∗∗ are punished at date 1 with a continuation
value V 1 (b0 ).
Proposition 5 describes the policies that maximize social welfare given an initial level
of debt, and thus those that sustain the maximal reward V 1 (b0 ). To complete our charac27

terization, we next proceed to describe the policies that minimize social welfare given an
initial level of debt, namely those that sustain the worst punishment V 1 (b0 ).

4.4

Optimal Punishment

In principle, different continuation equilibria could serve as punishment for a government
breaking the deficit limit in a given period. In fact, the result in Proposition 5 holds
independently of the exact structure of V (·). However, the optimal self-enforcing deficit
limit requires that the worst punishment be used, as such a punishment maximally relaxes
the constraints of the problem and thus maximizes social welfare.
Given initial debt b−1 = b, the worst punishment solves an analogous recursive problem
to that in (7), with the only difference that social welfare is now minimized rather than
maximized. The solution to this problem yields that the date-0 policies {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ
corresponding to maximal punishment are characterized as follows:
Proposition 6 (characterization of punishment). If {b(θ), V (b(θ))}θ∈Θ minimizes social
welfare in the infinite horizon economy with b(θ) ∈ (b(b−1 ), b(b−1 )) for all θ ∈ Θ, then there
 ∗
exist finite θ∗n > θ and θ∗∗
n ∈ [θ, min θ n , θ ) such that
 
r
r

 b (θ), V (b (θ))
{b(θ), V (b(θ))} =
br (θ∗n ), V (br (θ∗n ))

 p
{b (θ), V (bp (θ))}

if θ > θ∗n ,
∗
if θ ∈ [θ∗∗
n , θ n ],
if θ < θ∗∗
n ,

where
∗∗
r ∗
p ∗∗
p ∗∗
r ∗
θ∗∗
n U (ω + b (θ n )) + βδV (b (θ n )) = θ n U (ω + b (θ n )) + βδV (b (θ n )).

(26)

Hence, any interior solution for the worst punishment is a maximally enforced surplus
limit. Moreover, θ∗n and θ∗∗
n are unique and independent of b−1 .
In the absence of enforcement constraints, the worst punishment would entail forcing all
government types in all future periods to choose the highest or lowest borrowing level that
is feasible, so as to minimize the value of social welfare. However, such a harsh punishment
would not be self-enforcing. Proposition 6 shows that the worst punishment that is selfenforcing takes the form of a maximally enforced surplus limit, associated with a minimum
debt level br (θ∗n ).30 Government types that respect the surplus limit by choosing debt
weakly above br (θ∗n ) are maximally rewarded; government types that violate the surplus
limit by choosing debt strictly below br (θ∗n ) are maximally punished. Because a positive
mass of types θ ≥ θ∗∗
n respect the limit, the equilibrium transitions back to the optimal
30

This surplus limit can be shown to be incentive compatible by analogous logic as in Lemma 1.

28

Figure 4: An example of a maximally enforced surplus limit. The thick grey line depicts
the borrowing allocation in the top panel and the allocation of continuation values in the
bottom panel. The solid and dashed black lines in the bottom panel depict V (b(θ)) and
V (b(θ)) respectively.
deficit limit yielding maximal reward V (·) with strictly positive probability. Figure 4
provides an illustration.
A maximally enforced surplus limit minimizes social welfare by incentivizing overborrowing. Intuitively, given a government type θ, there are two ways in which society can
reduce welfare: either by inducing too little borrowing or by inducing too much borrowing.
Since the government is biased towards overborrowing in the present, the latter relaxes
self-enforcement constraints, and it is thus a more efficient means of reducing welfare. As
a result, in the worst-punishment allocation, all types borrow above the socially optimal
level, and in fact weakly above the level preferred by the government.31 Moreover, consistent with Proposition 1, overborrowing is incentivized by the use of bang-bang continuation
31

These features are related to the results of Bernheim, Ray, and Yeltekin (2015), who study self-enforcing
consumption rules in an environment without private information. The worst punishment in their model
takes the form of over-consumption.

29

values, with the maximal reward for types that respect the surplus limit and the maximal
punishment for those that violate it. High-powered incentives allow society to maximize
distortions.
The characterization in Proposition 6 follows from analogous arguments to those used
to obtain Proposition 2. As noted, the key difference is that instead of maximizing the
social welfare function in (12), the worst punishment minimizes this function. As a result,
recalling our definition of b
θ in Assumption 1, our claims are now reversed: the arguments
b
that apply to types θ < θ when maximizing welfare—which make use of the fact that Q(θ)
in (12) is strictly decreasing in this region—instead apply to types θ > b
θ when minimizing
welfare—since −Q (θ) is strictly decreasing in this region. The same is true with regards
to the arguments that apply to types θ > b
θ in the maximization of welfare, which apply
b
to types θ < θ in the minimization of welfare. This explains why the worst punishment is
a maximally enforced surplus limit while the optimal rule is a maximally enforced deficit
limit.
One step in the proof of Proposition 6 that requires additional care is establishing
that the optimal surplus limit is indeed respected by a positive mass of government types.
That is, we prove that the worst punishment is not an absorbing state in which V (·) is
sustained by all governments choosing bp (θ) for all θ ∈ Θ. The proof consists of showing
∗∗
that a surplus limit that is respected by types θ ∈ [θ∗∗
n , θ], for θ n < θ, achieves lower social
welfare than such an absorbing state in which all types choose their optimum flexibly given
a continuation value V (·). That is, we show that the social cost of increasing overborrowing
outweighs the benefit of increasing the continuation value for high enough types.
The result that any interior solution for the worst punishment is a maximally enforced
surplus limit does not rely on the preference structure in (20), and it requires only the
assumptions introduced in our static setting to obtain Proposition 2. By assuming that
preferences do satisfy (20), we obtain that the thresholds θ∗n and θ∗∗
n that define an optimal
surplus limit are independent of the initial level of debt b−1 and thus associated with a
maximal savings rate s∗n . Moreover, when such preferences feature γ ≥ 1, the borrowing
allocation is always interior, implying that the worst punishment is always a maximally
enforced surplus limit as described in Proposition 6.

4.5

Dynamics

Proposition 5 and Proposition 6 above imply specific dynamics for the economy under
the optimal self-enforcing fiscal rule. To begin with, the bang-bang property tells us that,
along the equilibrium path, continuation values travel only to extreme points in the feasible
set [V (b), V (b)]. The maximal reward and the maximal punishment therefore sustain each
30

other, being jointly determined in equilibrium. These features remind one of the seminal
work of Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti (1990), who establish the optimality of bang-bang
continuation values in a class of repeated games (see Theorem 7, p.1055 in their paper).
However, their analysis restricts attention to settings with finite actions and a rich continuous public signal, whereas our model features a continuous action. Thus, while the
implications are related, their results do not apply to our environment.
Given the bang-bang property, the dynamics induced by the optimal fiscal rule are
determined by primitives. Specifically, by our results in Proposition 3, the dynamics of
the economy depend on whether condition (16) holds or not, which in turn depends on
the government’s deficit bias and the distribution of shocks. If condition (16) holds (which
includes the case where the perfect-enforcement limit is self-enforcing), then the equilibrium
implements the same deficit limit in every period, associated with the flexible debt level of
a type θ∗ under maximal reward V (·). In contrast, if condition (16) does not hold, then
the economy transitions in and out of the best equilibrium with value V (·) and the worst
punishment with value V (·).
The transitions are stochastic as they depend on the realization of shocks. In particular,
starting from the initial period, the government is subject to a deficit limit associated with
the flexible debt level of a type θ∗ . If the realized shock is θ ≤ θ∗∗ (with θ∗∗ given by (10)),
the government respects the deficit limit and the best equilibrium restarts in the second
period; if the realized shock is θ > θ∗∗ , the government violates the deficit limit and the
equilibrium transitions to punishment in the second period. Starting from a punishment
period, the government is subject to a surplus limit associated with the flexible debt level
∗∗
of a type θ∗n . If the realized shock is θ ≥ θ∗∗
n (with θ n given by (26)), the government
respects the surplus limit and the equilibrium transitions to the best equilibrium in the
next period; if the realized shock is θ < θ∗∗
n , the government violates the surplus limit and
the equilibrium remains in punishment in the next period. Consequently, in resemblance
with real-world experiences such as that of Chile mentioned in the Introduction, we find
that the economy fluctuates between periods of fiscal responsibility and periods of fiscal
irresponsibility, with transitions being triggered by shocks given the optimal self-enforcing
fiscal rule.

5

Concluding Remarks

We have studied the optimal design of fiscal rules when enforcement is limited. Under perfect enforcement, the optimal rule is a deficit limit which is never breached in equilibrium.
Under limited enforcement, the optimal rule is a maximally enforced deficit limit, which, if
31

violated, leads to the maximal penalty for the government. We established necessary and
sufficient conditions under which the optimal deficit limit is violated on path, following
bad enough shocks to the economy. We also showed that if penalties are not externally enforced but endogenously imposed by future governments, then punishment takes the form
of overspending, and periods of reward and punishment self-enforce each other.
We believe there are potentially interesting directions for future research. For example,
one could explore the generality of our result that optimal incentives are bang-bang. As
we discussed, this result does not rely on the presence enforcement constraints and may
apply to other models of delegation and repeated adverse selection. It would be useful to
understand whether this result is robust to different specifications of continuation values:
while joint penalties (as we have assumed) are natural given our focus on fiscal policy, and
are also consistent with the formalization of money burning in delegation models, one could
consider settings in which penalties are experienced asymmetrically by a principal and an
agent. Another possible direction for future work would be to explore environments in
which a group of countries or subnational regions are subject to a coordinated fiscal rule.
The properties of an optimal common rule would depend on governments’ enforcement
constraints and on the nature of feasible collective punishments.
Finally, while we have focused on fiscal policy, the insights of this paper may be applied
to other settings featuring a commitment-versus-flexibility tradeoff and limited enforcement. For example, consider an individual who suffers from a self-control problem and
establishes rules for herself to curb her consumption of a temptation good such as television or alcohol. Such an individual values discipline as well as the flexibility to increase
her consumption when highly valuable. Furthermore, any rule the individual imposes on
herself must be enforced by penalties that either originate from a third party or are sustained by her own future behavior. We find that the optimal such rule is a consumption
threshold, which the individual may violate when her value of the temptation good is high
enough. If penalties are endogenous, then they entail over-consumption, and the individual
may transition in and out of periods of self-enforcing binging.

References
Abreu, D., D. Pearce, and E. Stacchetti (1990): “Toward a Theory of Discounted
Repeated Games with Imperfect Monitoring,” Econometrica, 58, 1041–63.
Acemoglu, D., M. Golosov, and A. Tsyvinski (2008): “Political Economy of Mechanisms,” Econometrica, 76, 619–41.

32

Aguiar, M. and M. Amador (2011): “Growth under the Shadow of Expropriation,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 651–97.
Alesina, A. and G. Tabellini (1990): “A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government Debt,” Review of Economic Studies, 57, 403–14.
Alfaro, L. and F. Kanczuk (2016): “Fiscal Rules and Sovereign Default,” Working
Paper.
Alonso, R. and N. Matouschek (2008): “Optimal Delegation,” Review of Economic
Studies, 75, 259–93.
Amador, M. and K. Bagwell (2013): “The Theory of Delegation with an Application
to Tariff Caps,” Econometrica, 81, 1541–600.
——— (2016): “Regulating a Monopolist With Uncertain Costs Without Transfers,” Working Paper.
Amador, M., I. Werning, and G.-M. Angeletos (2003): “Commitment Vs. Flexibility,” NBER Working Paper.
——— (2006): “Commitment Vs. Flexibility,” Econometrica, 74, 365–396.
Ambrus, A. and G. Egorov (2013): “Comment on ‘Commitment vs. Flexibility’,”
Econometrica, 81, 2113–24.
——— (2015): “Delegation and Nonmonetary Incentives,” Working Paper.
Athey, S., A. Atkeson, and P. J. Kehoe (2005): “The Optimal Degree of Discretion
in Monetary Policy,” Econometrica, 73, 1431–75.
Athey, S., K. Bagwell, and C. Sanchirico (2004): “Collusion and Price Rigidity,”
Review of Economic Studies, 71, 317–49.
Atkeson, A. and R. Lucas (1992): “On Efficient Distribution with Private Information,” Review of Economic Studies, 59, 427–53.
Azzimonti, M. (2011): “Barriers to Investment in Polarized Societies,” American Economic Review, 101, 2182–204.
Azzimonti, M., M. Battaglini, and S. Coate (2016): “The Costs and Benefits of
Balanced Budget Rules: Lessons from a Political Economy Model of Fiscal Policy,”
Journal of Public Economics, 136, 45–61.
33

Bassetto, M. and T. Sargent (2006): “Politics and Efficiency of Separating Capital
and Ordinary Government Budgets,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 1167–
1210.
Battaglini, M. and S. Coate (2008): “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending, Taxation, and Debt,” American Economic Review, 98, 201–36.
Bernheim, B. D., D. Ray, and S. Yeltekin (2015): “Poverty and Self-Control,”
Econometrica, 83, 1877–911.
Bisin, A., A. Lizzeri, and L. Yariv (2015): “Government Policy with Time Inconsistent Voters,” American Economic Review, 105, 1711–37.
Cao, D. and I. Werning (2017): “Saving and Dissaving with Hyperbolic Discounting,”
Working Paper.
Caselli, F., L. Eyraud, A. Hodge, F. D. Kalan, Y. Kim, S. M. Victor Lledó,
A. Popescu, W. H. Reuter, J. Reynaud, E. Ture, and P. Wingender (2018):
“Second-Generation Fiscal Rules: Balancing Simplicity, Flexibility, and Enforceability,”
International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Note 18-04.
Chade, H., P. Prokopovych, and L. Smith (2008): “Repeated Games with PresentBiased Preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory, 139, 157–175.
Dovis, A. and R. Kirpalani (2017): “Fiscal Rules, Bailouts, and Reputation in Federal
Governments,” Working Paper.
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2007): “Inequality and Social Discounting,” Journal of
Political Economy, 115, 365–402.
Fuchs, W. and A. Skrzypacz (2015): “Government Interventions in a Dynamic Market
with Adverse Selection,” Journal of Economic Theory, 158, 371–406.
Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole (1991): Game Theory, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Halac, M. and P. Yared (2014): “Fiscal Rules and Discretion under Persistent Shocks,”
Econometrica, 82, 1557–614.
——— (2017a): “Commitment vs. Flexibility with Costly Verification,” Working Paper.
——— (2017b): “Fiscal Rules and Discretion under Self-Enforcement,” Working Paper.

34

——— (2018): “Fiscal Rules and Discretion in a World Economy,” American Economic
Review, 108, 2305–2334.
Hatchondo, J. C., L. Martinez, and F. Roch (2017): “Fiscal Rules and the
Sovereign Default Premium,” Working Paper.
Holmström, B. (1977): “On Incentives and Control in Organizations,” Ph.D. Thesis,
Stanford University.
——— (1984): “On the Theory of Delegation,” in Bayesian Models in Economic Theory,
ed. by M. Boyer and R. Kihlstrom, North-Holland; New York.
Jackson, M. O. and L. Yariv (2014): “Present Bias and Collective Dynamic Choice
in the Lab,” American Economic Review, 104, 4184–204.
——— (2015): “Collective Dynamic Choice: The Necessity of Time Inconsistency,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7, 150–78.
Krusell, P., B. Kruscu, and A. Smith, Jr. (2010): “Temptation and Taxation,”
Econometrica, 78, 2063–84.
Krusell, P. and J.-V. Rios-Rull (1999): “On the Size of U.S. Government: Political
Economy in the Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Economic Review, 89, 1156–81.
Krusell, P. and A. Smith, Jr. (2003): “Consumption-Savings Decisions with QuasiGeometric Discounting,” Econometrica, 71, 365–75.
Laibson, D. (1994): “Self-Control and Saving,” Department of Economics, Harvard University.
——— (1997): “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 443–77.
Lizzeri, A. (1999): “Budget Deficits and Redistributive Politics,” American Economic
Review, 66, 909–28.
Lizzeri, A. and L. Yariv (2014): “Collective Self-Control,” Working Paper.
Lledó, V., S. Yoon, X. Fang, S. Mbaye, and Y. Kim (2017): “Fiscal Rules at a
Glance,” International Monetary Fund, March.
Moser, C. and P. O. de Souza e Silva (2017): “Optimal Paternalistic Savings Policies,” Working Paper.
35

Persson, T. and L. Svensson (1989): “Why a Stubborn Conservative Would Run a
Deficit: Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
104, 325–45.
Phelan, C. (1998): “On the Long Run Implications of Repeated Moral Hazard,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 79, 174–191.
Phelps, E. and R. Pollak (1968): “On Second Best National Savings and GameEquilibrium Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 35, 185–99.
Piguillem, F. and A. Schneider (2016): “Coordination, Efficiency and Policy Discretion,” Working Paper.
Riley, J. and R. Zeckhauser (1983): “Optimal Selling Strategies: When to Haggle,
When to Hold Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98, 267–89.
Schaechter, A., T. Kinda, N. Budina, and A. Weber (2012): “Fiscal Rules in
Response to the Crisis – Toward the ‘Next-Generation’ Rules. A New Dataset,” IMF
Working Paper WP/12/187.
Sleet, C. (2004): “Optimal Taxation with Private Government Information,” Review of
Economic Studies, 71, 1217–39.
Sleet, C. and S. Yeltekin (2006): “Credibility and Endogenous Societal Discounting,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 9, 410–37.
——— (2008): “Politically Credible Social Insurance,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
55, 129–51.
Song, Z., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2012): “Rotten Parents and Disciplined Children: A Politico-Economic Theory of Public Expenditure and Debt,” Econometrica, 80, 2785–803.
Thomas, J. and T. Worrall (1990): “Income Fluctuation and Asymmetric Information: An Example of a Repeated Principal-Agent Problem,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 51, 367–90.
Yared, P. (2010): “Politicians, Taxes and Debt,” Review of Economic Studies, 77, 806–
40.
——— (2018): “Rising Government Debt: Causes and Solutions for a Decades-Old Trend,”
NBER Working Paper No. 24979.
36

A

Appendix: Proofs

This Appendix contains the proofs of Lemma 1, Proposition 1, Lemma 3, and Proposition 2.
See the Online Appendix for the remaining proofs.

A.1

Preliminaries

We describe two functions that we will use in our proofs.
Lemma 5. Given θ ≤ θL ≤ θM ≤ θH ≤ θ, define the functions
L

L

Z

M

θM


βθ − θL f (θ) dθ + (1 − β) θM f (θM )(θM − θL ),

S (θ , θ ) =
θL
θH

S H (θH , θM ) =

Z


βθ − θH f (θ)dθ + (1 − β) θM f (θM )(θH − θM ).

θM

Then S L (θL , θM ) > 0 if Q0 (θ) < 0 for all θ ∈ (θL , θM ), S L (θL , θM ) < 0 if Q0 (θ) > 0 for
all θ ∈ (θL , θM ), S H (θH , θM ) > 0 if Q0 (θ) > 0 for all θ ∈ (θM , θH ), and S H (θH , θM ) < 0 if
Q0 (θ) < 0 for all θ ∈ (θM , θH ).
Proof. Consider the claims about S L (θL , θM ). Note that S L (θ, θM )|θ=θM = 0, and hence
R θM L M )
S L (θL , θM ) = − θL dS (θ,θ
dθ. Moreover,
dθ
dS L (θ, θM )
=−
dθ
and thus

dS L (θ,θM )
|θ=θM
dθ

Z

θM

f (e
θ)de
θ + (1 − β) θf (θ) − (1 − β) θM f (θM ),

θ

= 0. Therefore, S L (θL , θM ) =

R θM R θM
θL

θ

d2 S L (e
θ,θM ) e
dθdθ,
2
e
dθ

where

d2 S L (θ, θM )
= (2 − β) f (θ) + (1 − β) θf 0 (θ) .
2
dθ
2

L

M

2

L

M

2

L

)
)
Note that d S dθ(θ,θ
> 0 if Q0 (θ) < 0, d S dθ(θ,θ
= 0 if Q0 (θ) = 0, and d S dθ(θ,θ
2
2
2
0
L L M
Q (θ) > 0. The claims about S (θ , θ ) follow.
The proof for the claims about S H (θH , θM ) is analogous and thus omitted.

A.2

M

)

< 0 if

Proof of Lemma 1

We proceed in three steps.
Step 1. Suppose θ∗ ≥ θ. We show that constraints (4) and (5) are satisfied for types
θ ∈ [θ, θ∗ ].
37

The claim follows immediately from the fact that all types θ ∈ [θ, θ∗ ] are assigned their
flexible debt levels with maximum continuation value. Thus, given θ ∈ [θ, θ∗ ], type θ’s
welfare cannot be increased, and (4) and (5) are trivially satisfied.
Step 2. We show that constraints (4) and (5) are satisfied for types θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ].
Take first the enforcement constraint (5). We can rewrite this constraint for θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ]
as
θU (ω + br (θ∗ )) + βδV (br (θ∗ )) − θU (ω + bp (θ)) − βδV (bp (θ)) ≥ 0.

(27)

Differentiating the left-hand side with respect to θ, given θ∗ and the definition of bp (θ),
yields
U (ω + br (θ∗ )) − U (ω + bp (θ)),
(28)
which is weakly decreasing in θ, since bp (θ) is nondecreasing. This means that the lefthand side of (27) is weakly concave. Since (27) holds as a strict inequality for θ = θ∗
and as an equality for θ = θ∗∗ (by (10)), this weak concavity implies that (27) holds as a
strict inequality for all θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ). Thus, the enforcement constraint is satisfied for all
θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ].
Consider next the private information constraint (4). This constraint is trivially satisfied for all θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] given θ0 ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], since all types θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] are assigned the same
allocation. We next show that the constraint is also satisfied given θ0 > θ∗∗ and θ0 < θ∗ :
Step 2a: We show that (4) is satisfied for all θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] given θ0 > θ∗∗ . Note that
{b(θ0 ), V (b(θ0 )} = {bp (θ0 ), V (bp (θ0 ))} for all θ0 > θ∗∗ , and by the definition of bp (θ),
θU (ω + bp (θ)) + βδV (bp (θ)) ≥ θU (ω + bp (θ0 )) + βδV (bp (θ0 ))
for all θ0 ∈ Θ. Thus, the fact that the enforcement constraint (5) is satisfied for all
θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] implies that (4) is satisfied for all such types given θ0 > θ∗∗ .
Step 2b: We show that (4) is satisfied for all θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] given θ0 < θ∗ . Suppose by
contradiction that this is not the case, that is,
θ(U (ω + br (θ∗ )) − U (ω + br (θ0 ))) < βδ V (br (θ0 )) − V (br (θ∗ ))



(29)

for some θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] and θ0 < θ∗ . Note that by Step 1, (4) holds as a strict inequality for
type θ∗ given θ0 < θ∗ :

θ∗ (U (ω + br (θ∗ )) − U (ω + br (θ0 ))) > βδ V (br (θ0 )) − V (br (θ∗ )) .
38

(30)

Combining (29) and (30) yields
(θ∗ − θ)(U (ω + br (θ∗ )) − U (ω + br (θ0 ))) > 0,
which is a contradiction since θ > θ∗ and br (θ0 ) ≤ br (θ∗ ). Therefore, (4) is satisfied for all
types θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] given θ0 < θ∗ .
Step 3. Suppose θ∗∗ < θ. We show that constraints (4) and (5) are satisfied for types
θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ].
Constraint (5) holds as an equality for all θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ] and is thus satisfied for all
these types. It is also immediate that constraint (4) is satisfied for all θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ] given
θ0 ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ], since all such types are assigned their flexible debt level with minimum continuation value. Consider next constraint (4) for θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ] given θ0 ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ]. Note
that {b(θ0 ), V (b(θ0 )} = {br (θ∗ ), V (br (θ∗ ))} for all θ0 ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ]. Thus, satisfaction of this
constraint is ensured if (27) is violated for θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ]. The latter follows from the fact
that, as shown above, the left-hand side of (27) is weakly concave and (27) holds as an
equality for θ = θ∗∗ and a strict inequality for θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ).
Finally, consider constraint (4) for θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ] given θ0 < θ∗ . Since (4) is satisfied given
θ0 ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], satisfaction of this constraint given θ0 < θ∗ is ensured if
θ(U (ω + br (θ∗ )) − U (ω + b(θ0 ))) ≥ βδV (br (θ0 )) − V (br (θ∗ ))
for θ ∈ (θ∗∗ , θ]. The latter follows from the same logic as in Step 2b above.

A.3

Proof of Proposition 1

Take any solution to program (7) with b(θ) ∈ (b, b) for all θ ∈ Θ. We proceed in three
steps.
Step 1. We show that V (b(θ)) is left-continuous at each θ ∈ (θ, θ] and V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)).
Consider the first claim. Suppose by contradiction that there exists θ ∈ (θ, θ] at which
V (b(θ)) is not left-continuous. Denote the left limit by {b(θ− ), V (b(θ− ))} = limθ0 ↑θ {b(θ0 ), V (b(θ0 ))}.
By Lemma 2,


0 < θ U (ω + b(θ)) − U (ω + b(θ− )) = βδ V (b(θ− )) − V (b(θ)) .
Given β ∈ (0, 1), this implies


θ U (ω + b(θ)) − U (ω + b(θ− )) < δ V (b(θ− )) − V (b(θ)) .
39

It follows that a perturbation that assigns {b(θ− ), V (b(θ− ))} to type θ is incentive feasible,
strictly increases social welfare from type θ, and does not affect social welfare from types
other than θ. Hence, V (b(θ)) must be left-continuous at each θ ∈ (θ, θ].
Consider next the second claim. Suppose by contradiction that V (b(θ)) < V (b(θ)).
Then we can perform a perturbation where we change b(θ) ∈ (b, b) by db(θ) < 0 arbitrarily
small and increase V (b(θ)) so as to keep type θ equally well off:
−θU 0 (ω + b(θ)) + βδ

dV (b(θ))
= 0.
db(θ)

This perturbation is incentive feasible and does not affect social welfare from types θ ∈
(θ, θ]. The change in social welfare from type θ is equal to


dV (b(θ))
1
0
−θU (ω + b(θ)) + δ
= −θU (ω + b(θ)) 1 −
> 0.
db(θ)
β
0

Hence, the perturbation strictly increases social welfare, yielding a contradiction.
Step 2. We show that V (b(θ)) is a step function over any interval [θL , θH ] with V (b(θ)) ∈
(V (b(θ)), V (b(θ))) for θ ∈ [θL , θH ].
By the private information constraints, V (b(θ)) is piecewise continuously differentiable
and nonincreasing. Suppose by contradiction that there is an interval [θL , θH ] over which
V (b(θ)) is continuously strictly decreasing in θ and satisfies V (b(θ)) < V (b(θ)) < V (b(θ)).
By Lemma 2, b(θ) must be continuously strictly increasing over the interval, and without
loss we can take an interval over which b(θ) is continuously differentiable. Moreover, by
the generic property in Proposition 1, we can take an interval with either Q0 (θ) > 0 or
Q0 (θ) < 0 for all θ ∈ [θL , θH ]. We consider each possibility in turn.
Case 1: Suppose Q0 (θ) < 0 for all θ ∈ [θL , θH ]. We show that there exists an incentive feasible flattening perturbation that rotates the increasing borrowing schedule b(θ) clockwise
over [θL , θH ] and strictly increases social welfare. Define
1

U= H
θ − θL

Z

θH

U (ω + b(θ))dθ.
θL

For given κ ∈ [0, 1], let eb (θ, κ) be the solution to
U (ω + eb (θ, κ)) = κU + (1 − κ) U (ω + b(θ)) ,

40

(31)

which clearly exists. Define Ve (eb(θ), κ) as the solution to
θU (ω + eb (θ, κ)) + βδ Ve (eb(θ, κ), κ)
L

L

L

θ

Z

= θ U (ω + b(θ )) + βδV (b(θ )) +
θ

L

U (ω + eb(e
θ, κ))de
θ.

(32)

The original allocation corresponds to κ = 0. We consider a perturbation where we
increase κ marginally above zero if and only if θ ∈ [θL , θH ]. Note that differentiating (31)
and (32) with respect to κ yields
deb (θ, κ)
U − U (ω + b(θ))
=
,
dκ
U 0 (ω + eb (θ, κ))
Z θ ee
deb (θ, κ) 0
dVe (eb(θ, κ), κ)
db(θ, κ) 0
e
θU (ω + b (θ, κ)) + βδ
=
U (ω + eb(e
θ, κ))de
θ.
dκ
dκ
dκ
θL

(33)
(34)

Substituting (33) in (34) yields that for a type θ ∈ [θL , θH ], the change in government
welfare from a marginal increase in κ, starting from κ = 0, is equal to
Z

θ

D (θ) ≡
θL




e
U − U (ω + b(θ)) de
θ.

We begin by showing that the perturbation satisfies constraints (4)-(6). For the private
information constraint (4), note that D(θL ) = D(θH ) = 0, so the perturbation leaves the
government welfare of types θL and θH (and that of types θ < θL and θ > θH ) unchanged.
Using Lemma 2 and the representation in (11), it then follows from equation (32) and the
fact that eb(θ, κ) is nondecreasing that the perturbation satisfies constraint (4) for all θ ∈ Θ
and any κ ∈ [0, 1].
To prove that the perturbation satisfies the enforcement constraint (5), we show that
the government welfare of types θ ∈ [θL , θH ] weakly rises when κ increases marginally.
Since D(θL ) = D(θH ) = 0, it is sufficient to show that D(θ) is concave over (θL , θH ) to
prove that D(θ) ≥ 0 for all θ in this interval. Indeed, we verify:
D0 (θ) = U − U (ω + b (θ)),
db(θ)
D00 (θ) = −U 0 (ω + b (θ))
< 0.
dθ
Lastly, observe that constraint (6) is satisfied for κ > 0 small enough. This follows from
V (b(θ)) and V (b(θ)) being continuous and the fact that V (b(θ)) ∈ (V (b(θ)), V (b(θ))) for
θ ∈ [θL , θH ] in the original allocation.

41

We next show that the perturbation strictly increases social welfare. Using the representation in (12), the change in social welfare from an increase in κ is equal to
1
β

Z

θH

θL

deb (θ, κ) 0
U (ω + eb (θ, κ))Q(θ)dθ.
dκ

Substituting with (33) and the expression for Q(θ) yields that at κ = 0, this is equal to
1
β

Z

θH


U − U (ω + b(θ)) (1 − F (θ) − θf (θ) (1 − β)) dθ.

θL

This is an integral over the product of two terms. The first term is strictly decreasing in
θ since b(θ) is strictly increasing over [θL , θH ]. The second term is also strictly decreasing in
θ; this follows from Q0 (θ) < 0 for all θ ∈ [θL , θH ]. Therefore, these two terms are positively
correlated with one another, and thus the change in social welfare is strictly greater than
1
β

Z

θH



Z

θH

(1 − F (θ) − (1 − β) θf (θ)) dθ,

U − U (ω + b(θ)) dθ
θL

θL

which is equal to 0. It follows that the change in social welfare from the perturbation is
strictly positive. Hence, if V (b(θ)) is strictly interior and Q0 (θ) < 0 over a given interval,
then V (b(θ)) must be a step function over the interval.
Case 2: Suppose Q0 (θ) > 0 for all θ ∈ [θL , θH ]. Recall that b(θ) is continuously strictly
increasing over [θL , θH ]. We begin by showing that the enforcement constraint cannot bind
for all θ ∈ [θL , θH ]. Suppose by contradiction that it does. Using the representation of
government welfare in (11), this implies
Z

θH

(U (ω + bp (e
θ)) − U (ω + b(e
θ)))de
θ=0

θ

for all θ ∈ [θL , θH ], which requires {b(θ), V (b(θ))} = {bp (θ), V (bp (θ))} for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ).
However, this contradicts the assumption that V (b(θ)) ∈ (V (b(θ)), V (b(θ))) for all θ ∈
[θL , θH ]. Hence, the enforcement constraint cannot bind for all types in the interval, and
without loss we can take an interval with this constraint being slack for all θ ∈ [θL , θH ].
We next show that there exists a steepening perturbation that is incentive feasible and
strictly increases social welfare. Specifically, consider drilling a hole around a type θM
within [θL , θH ] so that we marginally remove the allocation around this type. That is, type
θM can no longer choose {b(θM ), V (b(θM ))} and is indifferent between jumping to the lower
or upper limit of the hole. With some abuse of notation, denote the limits of the hole by θL
42

and θH , where the perturbation marginally increases θH from θM . Since the enforcement
constraint is slack for all θ ∈ [θL , θH ], the perturbation is incentive feasible. The change in
social welfare from the perturbation is equal to
Z

θH

θM


db(θH )
θU 0 (ω + b(θH )) + δV 0 (b(θH )) f (θ)dθ
H
dθ

M

+


dθ
M
L
L
M
H
H
θ
U
(ω
+
b(θ
))
+
δV
(b(θ
))
−
θ
U
(ω
+
b(θ
))
−
δV
(b(θ
))
f (θM ).
H
dθ

Note that by the private information constraint for type θH ,

db(θH ) H 0
H
H
0
θ
U
(ω
+
b(θ
))
+
βδV
(b(θ
))
= 0,
dθH

(35)

and by indifference of type θM ,
θM U (ω + b(θL )) + βδV (b(θL )) = θM U (ω + b(θH )) + βδV (b(θH )).

(36)

Substituting with these expressions, the change in social welfare is equal to
db(θH ) 0
U (ω + b(θH ))
H
dθ
+

dθM M
θ
dθH

θH



θH
θ−
f (θ)dθ
β
θM



1
L
H
U (ω + b(θ )) − U (ω + b(θ )) 1 −
f (θM ).
β
Z

(37)

Differentiating (36) with respect to θH and substituting with (35) yields
db(θH ) 0
(θH − θM )
dθM
H
.
=
U
(ω
+
b(θ
))
dθH
dθH
U (ω + b(θH )) − U (ω + b(θL ))
H

) 0
Substituting back into (37) and dividing by β1 db(θ
U (ω + b(θH )) > 0, we find that the
dθH
change in social welfare takes the same sign as

H

H

M

Z

θH

S (θ , θ ) =


βθ − θH f (θ)dθ + (1 − β) θM f (θM )(θH − θM ).

θM

Since Q0 (θ) > 0 for all θ ∈ [θM , θH ], Lemma 5 implies S H (θH , θM ) > 0, and thus the
perturbation strictly increases social welfare. Hence, if V (b(θ)) is strictly interior and
Q0 (θ) > 0 over a given interval, then V (b(θ)) must be a step function over the interval.
Step 3. We show that V (b(θ)) ∈ {V (b(θ)), V (b(θ))} for all θ ∈ Θ.
43

Suppose by contradiction that V (b(θ)) ∈ (V (b(θ)), V (b(θ)) for some θ ∈ Θ. By the
previous steps and Lemma 2, type θ belongs to a stand-alone segment (θL , θH ], such that
b(θ) = b and V (b(θ)) = V for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ], b ∈ (b, b) and V ∈ (V (b), V (b)) (by
assumption), b(θ) jumps at θL , and b(θ) jumps at θH unless θH = θ.
We first show that the enforcement constraint must be slack for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ). Express
the enforcement constraint as the difference between the left-hand and right-hand sides of
(5), so that this constraint must be weakly positive and it is equal to zero if it binds.
By the private information constraints, the derivative of the enforcement constraint with
respect to θ is equal to U (ω + b(θ)) − U (ω + bp (θ)). Since b(θ) is constant over (θL , θH ]
and bp (θ) is nondecreasing, it follows that the enforcement constraint is weakly concave
over the interval. Then the constraint can only bind at a point θ0 ∈ (θL , θH ) if it binds at
all θ ∈ (θL , θH ). However, by the arguments used in Case 2 in Step 2 above, that would
require b = bp (θ) and V = V (b) for θ ∈ (θL , θH ), contradicting the assumption that V is
strictly interior.
We next show that there exists an incentive feasible perturbation that strictly increases
social welfare. We consider segment-shifting perturbations that marginally change the
constant borrowing level b and continuation value V . As we describe next, the perturbation
that we perform depends on the shape of the function Q(θ) over (θL , θH ]:
R θH
R θH
Case 1: Suppose θL Q(θL )dθ < θL Q(θ)dθ. Consider a perturbation that marginally
changes the borrowing level by db > 0 and reduces V in order to keep type θH equally well
off. This means that dV
is given by
db
θH U 0 (ω + b) + βδ

dV
= 0.
db

(38)

Note that for any arbitrarily small db > 0, this perturbation makes the lowest types in
(θL , θH ], arbitrarily close to θL , jump either to the allocation of type θL or to their flexible
allocation under maximal punishment {bp (θ), V (bp (θ))}, where we let the perturbation
introduce the latter. In the limit as db goes to zero, the change in social welfare due to the
perturbation is thus equal to32
Z

θH

θL



dV
0
θU (ω + b) + δ
f (θ) dθ
db

(39)


dθL L
+
θ U (ω + b(θL )) + δV (b(θL )) − θL U (ω + b) − δV f (θL ),
db
The arguments that follow are unchanged if {b(θL ), V (b(θL ))} is replaced with {bp (θL ), V (bp (θL ))} for
the cases where the enforcement constraint binds.
32

44

where the following indifference condition holds:
θL U (ω + b) + βδV = θL U (ω + b(θL )) + βδV (b(θL )).
To verify that the perturbation is incentive feasible, note that the enforcement constraint is slack for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ), V is strictly interior, and the government welfare of
types θL and θH remains unchanged with the perturbation. Hence, the perturbation is
incentive feasible for db arbitrarily close to zero.
To verify that the perturbation strictly increases social welfare, substitute (38) and the
indifference condition of type θL into (39) to obtain:
0

Z

θH



U (ω+b)
θL

θH
θ−
β






dθL L
1
L
f (θ)dθ+
θ U (ω + b(θ )) − U (ω + b) 1 −
f (θL ). (40)
db
β

Differentiating the indifference condition of type θL and substituting with (38) yields

θH − θL
dθL
0
= −U (ω + b)
.
db
U (ω + b(θL )) − U (ω + b)
Substituting back into (40) and dividing by
social welfare takes the same sign as
H

H

Z

L

1 0
U (ω
β

+ b) > 0, we find that the change in

θH


βθ − θH f (θ)dθ + (1 − β) θL f (θL )(θH − θL ),

S (θ , θ ) =
θL

which can be rewritten as
H

H

L

Z

θH

Z

θ

S (θ , θ ) =
θL

θL

Z

0

Q (e
θ)de
θdθ =

θH

(Q(θ) − Q(θL ))dθ.

θL

R θH
R θH
By the assumption that θL Q(θL )dθ < θL Q(θ)dθ, the above expression is strictly positive. The perturbation therefore strictly increases social welfare, yielding a contradiction.
R θH
R θH
Case 2: Suppose θL Q(θL )dθ ≥ θL Q(θ)dθ. By the generic property in Proposition 1,
R θh
R θh
there must exist θh ∈ (θL , θH ] such that θL Q(θL )dθ > θL Q(θ)dθ. Then consider a perturbation where, for θ ∈ (θL , θh ], we marginally change the borrowing level by db < 0
and increase V in order to keep type θh equally well off. This perturbation makes types
arbitrarily close to θL jump up to the allocation of the stand-alone segment. Arguments
analogous to those in Case 1 above imply that the perturbation is incentive feasible. Moreover, following analogous steps as in that case yields that the implied change in social
45

welfare takes the same sign as
H

h

L

Z

θh


βθ − θh f (θ)dθ − (1 − β) θL f (θL )(θh − θL ),

−S (θ , θ ) = −
θL

which can be rewritten as
H

h

L

Z

θh

Z

θ

−S (θ , θ ) = −
θ

L

θ

Z

0

L

Q (e
θ)de
θdθ = −
θ

θh

(Q(θ) − Q(θL ))dθ.
L

R θh
R θh
By the assumption that θL Q(θL )dθ > θL Q(θ)dθ, the above expression is strictly positive.
The perturbation therefore strictly increases social welfare, yielding a contradiction.

A.4

Proof of Lemma 3

Take any solution to program (7) with b(θ) ∈ (b, b) for all θ ∈ Θ. We proceed in three
steps.
Step 1. We show that if V (b(θ∗∗ )) = V (b(θ∗∗ )), then θ∗∗ ≥ b
θ.
By Proposition 1 and Step 1 in the proof of that proposition, if V (b(θ∗∗ )) = V (b(θ∗∗ ))
for some θ∗∗ ∈ Θ, then V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) over an interval (θL , θH ] that contains θ∗∗ . Take
the largest such interval. We establish that θL ≥ b
θ. Suppose by contradiction that θL < b
θ.
L
H
Note that the enforcement constraint (5) requires b(θ) = bp (θ) for all θ ∈ (θ , θ ]. There
are two cases to consider:
θ, and without
Case 1: Suppose bp (θ) is strictly increasing over a subset of (θL , θH ] below b
p
loss take a subset over which b (θ) is continuously differentiable. Then we can perform
a flattening perturbation that rotates the borrowing schedule clockwise over this subset,
analogous to the perturbation used in Step 2 in the proof of Proposition 1. By the arguments in that step, this perturbation is incentive feasible. In particular, note that since
the perturbation weakly increases the government welfare of all types θ in the subset
while simultaneously changing their borrowing allocation, it follows from the definition of
bp (θ) that the perturbation must necessarily increase V (b(θ)) above V (b(θ)). Moreover, by
Q0 (θ) < 0 for all types θ in the subset (by the subset being below b
θ and Assumption 1),
the perturbation strictly increases social welfare, yielding a contradiction.
Case 2: Suppose bp (θ) is constant for θ ∈ (θL , θM ], where θM ≡ min{θH , b
θ}. Then we can
perform an incentive feasible segment-shifting perturbation analogous to that described in
Step 3 in the proof of Proposition 1: for θ ∈ (θL , θM ], we marginally reduce the constant
46

borrowing level and increase the constant continuation value so as to keep the government
R θM
welfare of type θM unchanged. Since Q0 (θ) < 0 over (θL , θM ] implies θL Q(θL )dθ >
R θM
Q(θ)dθ, this perturbation strictly increases social welfare, yielding a contradiction.
θL
Step 2. We show that if V (b(θ∗∗ )) = V (b(θ∗∗ )), then V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ≥ θ∗∗ .
Suppose by contradiction that V (b(θ∗∗ )) = V (b(θ∗∗ )) for θ∗∗ ∈ Θ and V (b(θ)) > V (b(θ))
for some θ > θ∗∗ . By Step 1, θ∗∗ ≥ b
θ. Moreover, by Proposition 1 and Step 1 in the proof of
H
that proposition, there exist θ > θL ≥ θ∗∗ such that V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ].
We begin by establishing that b(θ) = b for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ] and some b ∈ (b, b). Suppose
by contradiction that the borrowing schedule b(θ) is strictly increasing at some point θ0 ∈
(θL , θH ]. Note that the private information constraint (4) implies b(θ) = br (θ), and thus a
slack enforcement constraint, in the neighborhood of such a type θ0 . Then we can perform
an incentive feasible steepening perturbation that drills a hole in the b(θ) schedule in this
neighborhood, as that described in Step 2 (Case 2) in the proof of Proposition 1. By
the arguments in that step, this perturbation strictly increases social welfare, yielding a
contradiction.
We next show that a segment (θL , θH ] with b(θ) = b and V (b(θ)) = V (b) for all θ ∈
(θL , θH ] and θL ≥ θ∗∗ cannot exist. Suppose by contradiction that it does. Take θL to be
the lowest point weakly above θ∗∗ at which V (b(θ)) jumps, and take θH to be the lowest
point above θL at which V (b(θ)) jumps again, or θH = θ if V (b(θ)) does not jump above θL .
Then (θL , θH ] is a stand-alone segment with constant borrowing b and continuation value
V (b). Note that by arguments analogous to those in Step 3 of the proof of Proposition 1,
the enforcement constraint must be slack for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ). We then show that there
exists an incentive feasible segment-shifting perturbation that is socially beneficial. There
are three cases to consider:
Case 1: Suppose θH U (ω+b)+βδV (b) ≤ θH U (ω+b0 )+βδV (b0 ) for b0 = b+ε, ε > 0 arbitrarily
small. Then we perform a segment-shifting perturbation as that in Step 3 in the proof of
Proposition 1, where we increase b marginally to b0 and set V (b0 ) weakly below V (b0 ) so as
to keep type θH ’s welfare under this allocation unchanged. This perturbation is incentive
R θH
R θH
feasible. Moreover, since θL ≥ θ∗∗ and Assumption 1 imply θL Q(θL )dθ < θL Q(θ)dθ,
this perturbation strictly increases social welfare, yielding a contradiction.
Case 2: Suppose θH U (ω + b) + βδV (b) > θH U (ω + b0 ) + βδV (b0 ) for b0 = b + ε, ε > 0
arbitrarily small, and θH < θ. Then we perform a segment-shifting perturbation where we
reduce b marginally to b00 = b − ε and set V (b00 ) weakly below V (b00 ) so as to keep type θL ’s
welfare under this allocation unchanged. This perturbation is incentive feasible. Denote by
47

{b(θh ), V (b(θh ))} the allocation above θH over which type θH is initially indifferent. Note
that analogous to the perturbation in Step 3 in the proof of Proposition 1, this perturbation
makes the highest types in (θL , θH ], arbitrarily close to θH , jump either to {b(θh ), V (b(θh ))}
or to their flexible allocation under maximal punishment {bp (θ), V (bp (θ))}, where we let
the perturbation introduce the latter. In the limit as ε goes to zero, the change in social
welfare due to the perturbation is thus equal to33
Z

θH

θL

−



dV
0
f (θ) dθ
−θU (ω + b) + δ
db

(41)


dθH H
θ U (ω + b(θh )) + δV (b(θh )) − θH U (ω + b) − δV f (θH ),
db

where V = V (b),

dV
db

solves
− θL U 0 (ω + b) + βδ

dV
= 0,
db

(42)

and the following indifference condition holds:
θH U (ω + b) + βδV = θH U (ω + b(θh )) + βδV (b(θh )).
To verify that the perturbation strictly increases social welfare, substitute (42) and the
indifference condition of type θH into (41) to obtain:
θH






θL
dθH H
1
h
f (θ)dθ −
θ U (ω + b(θ )) − U (ω + b) 1 −
f (θH ).
− U (ω + b)
θ−
β
db
β
θL
(43)
H
Differentiating the indifference condition of type θ and substituting with (42) yields
0

Z


θH − θL
dθH
0
= −U (ω + b)
.
db
U (ω + b(θh )) − U (ω + b)
Substituting back into (43) and dividing by
social welfare takes the same sign as
−S L (θL , θH ) = −

"Z

+ b) > 0, we find that the change in

#

θH

βθ − θ
θ

1 0
U (ω
β


L

f (θ)dθ + (1 − β) θH f (θH )(θH − θL ) .

L

By θL ≥ θ∗∗ , Assumption 1, and Step 1 above, Q0 (θ) > 0 for all θ ∈ (θL , θH ). It then
The arguments that follow are unchanged if {b(θh ), V (b(θh ))} is replaced with {bp (θH ), V (bp (θH ))}
for the cases where the enforcement constraint binds.
33

48

follows from Lemma 5 that S L (θL , θH ) < 0. Hence, the perturbation strictly increases
social welfare, yielding a contradiction.
Case 3: Suppose θH U (ω + b) + βδV (b) > θH U (ω + b0 ) + βδV (b0 ) for b0 = b + ε, ε > 0
arbitrarily small, and θH = θ. Then we perform a segment-shifting perturbation as that
in Case 2 above, where we reduce b marginally to b00 = b − ε and set V (b00 ) weakly below
V (b00 ) so as to keep type θL ’s welfare under this allocation unchanged. This perturbation
is incentive feasible. Note that analogous to Case 2, this perturbation makes the highest
types in (θL , θH ], arbitrarily close to θH , either jump to their flexible allocation under
maximal punishment {bp (θ), V (bp (θ))} or remain with the perturbed allocation. In the
former case, the same arguments as in Case 2 apply, yielding that the perturbation strictly
increases social welfare by −S L (θL , θH ) > 0. In the latter case, those arguments imply
that the change in social welfare is equal to
Z

θH

−


βθ − θL f (θ)dθ > −S L (θL , θH ) > 0.

θL

Hence, the perturbation strictly increases social welfare, yielding a contradiction.
Step 3. We show that V (b(θ)) is right-continuous at θ.
Suppose by contradiction that this is not the case. Then by the previous steps, Proposition 1, and Step 1 in the proof of Proposition 1, V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ (θ, θ] and
V (b(θ)) jumps down at θ from V (b(θ)). Note that the enforcement constraint (5) implies
b(θ) = bp (θ) for all θ ∈ (θ, θ], and indifference of θ requires
θU (ω + b(θ)) + βδV (b(θ)) = lim{θU (ω + bp (θ)) + βδV (bp (θ))}.
θ↓θ

Take ∆ ∈ (0, minθ∈Θ {V (b(θ)) − V (b(θ))}). Then consider a global perturbation that
assigns V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) + ∆ to all θ ∈ (θ, θ] and assigns type θ the limit allocation to
its right. This perturbation keeps the borrowing allocation of types θ ∈ (θ, θ] unchanged
and is incentive feasible. Moreover, using the representation in (12), the change in social
welfare from this perturbation is equal to δ∆. Thus, the perturbation strictly increases
social welfare, yielding a contradiction.

A.5

Proof of Proposition 2

Take any solution to program (7) with b(θ) ∈ (b, b) for all θ ∈ Θ. By Lemma 3 and the enforcement constraint (5), there exists θ∗∗ > θ such that {b(θ), V (b(θ))} = {bp (θ), V (bp (θ))}
49

for all θ > θ∗∗ and V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ≤ θ∗∗ (where it is possible that θ∗∗ > θ).
Moreover, since the enforcement constraint holds with equality at θ∗∗ , this type’s allocation
satisfies
θ∗∗ U (ω + b(θ∗∗ )) + βδV (b(θ∗∗ )) = θ∗∗ U (ω + bp (θ∗∗ )) + βδV (bp (θ∗∗ )).

(44)

These results characterize the allocation for types θ ≥ θ∗∗ . To characterize the allocation
for types θ < θ∗∗ , we proceed in three steps.
Step 1. We show that b(θ) is continuous over [θ, θ∗∗ ].
Recall from Step 1 in the proof of Lemma 3 that θ∗∗ ≥ b
θ. There are two cases to
consider:
Case 1: Suppose by contradiction that b(θ) has a point of discontinuity below b
θ: there is
a type θM < b
θ which is indifferent between choosing lim b(θ) and lim b(θ) > lim b(θ).
θ↑θM

θ↓θM

θ↑θM

Note that given V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ [θ, θ∗∗ ] and θ∗∗ ≥ b
θ, there must be a hole
L M
L
M
H
with types θ ∈ [θ , θ ) bunched at br (θ ) and types θ ∈ (θ , θ ] bunched at br (θH ), for
some θL < θM < θH . Now consider perturbing the rule by marginally increasing θL , in an
effort to slightly close the hole. This perturbation leaves the government welfare of types
strictly above θM unchanged and is incentive feasible. The change in social welfare from
the perturbation is equal to
dbr (θL )
dθL

Z

θM




0
θU 0 (ω + br (θL )) + δV (br (θL )) f (θ) dθ

θL

M

+


dθ  M
M
r L
r L
r H
r H
θ
U
(ω
+
b
(θ
))
+
δV
(b
(θ
))
−
θ
U
(ω
+
b
(θ
))
−
δV
(b
(θ
))
f (θM ).
L
dθ
0

By the definition of br (θ), we have θL U 0 (ω + br (θL )) = −βδV (br (θL )). Moreover, by
indifference of type θM , we have
θM U (ω + br (θL )) + βδV (br (θL )) = θM U (ω + br (θH )) + βδV (br (θH )).

(45)

Substituting these into the expression above yields that the change in social welfare due
to the perturbation is equal to

Z θM 
dbr (θL ) 0
θL
r L
U (ω + b (θ ))
θ−
f (θ) dθ
β
dθL
θL



dθM 1
+ L
− 1 θM f (θM ) U (ω + br (θH )) − U (ω + br (θL )) .
β
dθ
50

(46)

Note that differentiating the indifference condition (45) with respect to θL (and substituting
0
again with θL U 0 (ω + br (θL )) = −βδV (br (θL ))) yields
dθM
dbr (θL ) 0
(θM − θL )
r L
=
U (ω + b (θ ))
.
dθL
dθL
U (ω + br (θH )) − U (ω + br (θL ))
r

L

Substituting this back into (46) and dividing by β1 dbdθ(θL ) U 0 (ω + br (θL )) > 0, we find that
the change in social welfare takes the same sign as
L

L

M

Z

θM

S (θ , θ ) =


βθ − θL f (θ) dθ + (1 − β) θM f (θM )(θM − θL ).

θL

If θL ≥ θ, it follows from θM < b
θ, Assumption 1, and Lemma 5 that S L (θL , θM ) > 0.
Moreover, if θL < θ, then S L (θL , θM ) > S L (θ, θM ) > 0. Thus, the perturbation strictly
increases social welfare, showing that b(θ) cannot jump at a point below b
θ.
Case 2: Suppose by contradiction that b(θ) is discontinuous at a point θ ∈ [b
θ, θ∗∗ ]. Note
that since V (b(θ)) = V (b(θ)) for all θ ∈ [b
θ, θ∗∗ ], we can apply the same logic as in Step 2 in
the proof of Lemma 3 to show that db(θ)
= 0 over any continuous interval in [b
θ, θ∗∗ ]. Hence,
dθ
if b(θ) jumps at a point θ ∈ [b
θ, θ∗∗ ], then there exists a stand-alone segment (θL , θH ] with
θ. However,
constant borrowing b ∈ (b, b) and continuation value V = V (b), satisfying θL ≥ b
using again the arguments in Step 2 in the proof of Lemma 3, we can then perform an
incentive feasible segment-shifting perturbation that strictly increases social welfare. Thus,
b(θ) cannot jump at a point θ ∈ [b
θ, θ∗∗ ].
Step 2. We show that b(θ) ≤ br (θ) for all θ ∈ [θ, θ∗∗ ].
By Step 1 above, the allocation over [θ, θ∗∗ ] must be bounded discretion, with either
a minimum borrowing level or a maximum borrowing level or both. We next show that
a binding minimum borrowing requirement is strictly suboptimal. Suppose by contradiction that this is not the case, namely there exist θ? > θ and an optimal rule prescribing {b(θ), V (b(θ))} = {br (θ? ), V (br (θ? ))} for all θ ∈ [θ, θ? ], where br (θ) < br (θ? ) for all
θ ∈ [θ, θ? ). Consider a perturbation where we remove this minimum borrowing requirement, that is, we set {b(θ), V (b(θ))} = {br (θ), V (br (θ))} for all θ ∈ [θ, θ? ). Clearly, this
perturbation is incentive feasible, and it keeps the allocation of types θ ∈ [θ? , θ], and thus
the social welfare from these types, unchanged. The change in social welfare from each
type θ ∈ [θ, θ? ) is equal to
θU (ω + br (θ)) + δV (br (θ)) − θU (ω + br (θ? )) − δV (br (θ? )).
51

Note that by the definition of br (θ),
δV (br (θ)) − δV (br (θ? )) ≥

1
[θU (ω + br (θ? )) − θU (ω + br (θ))] .
β

Substituting back into the previous expression, we obtain that the change in social welfare
from each θ ∈ [θ, θ? ) is greater than



1
− 1 [θU (ω + br (θ? )) − θU (ω + br (θ))] ,
β

which is strictly positive. Thus, the perturbation strictly increases social welfare, implying
that a binding minimum borrowing requirement is strictly suboptimal.
Step 3. We show that b(θ) < br (θ) for some θ ∈ Θ.
By Step 1 and Step 2, the allocation for types θ ∈ [θ, θ∗∗ ] is as described in Definition 1
for some θ∗ ≥ 0. That is, equation (44) necessarily holds for b(θ∗∗ ) = br (θ∗ ). All that
remains to be shown is that θ∗ < θ. Suppose by contradiction that this is not true, which
implies {b(θ), V (b(θ))} = {br (θ), V (br (θ))} for all θ ∈ Θ. Consider an incentive feasible
perturbation that assigns {b(θ), V (b(θ))} = {br (θ − ε), V (br (θ − ε))} to all θ ∈ [θ − ε, θ],
where ε > 0 is chosen to be small enough as to continue to satisfy the enforcement constraint
(5) for all types θ ∈ Θ. Using the representation in (12), the change in social welfare from
this perturbation is equal to
1
β

Z

θ

(U (ω + br (θ − ε)) − U (ω + br (θ)))Q(θ)dθ.

θ−ε

For ε > 0 arbitrarily small, br (θ − ε) < br (θ) and Q(θ) < 0 for all θ ∈ (θ − ε, θ). Thus, the
perturbation strictly increases social welfare.

52

