                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 SECURITIES LAWS, BANK MONITORING, AND THE CHOICE BETWEEN COV-LITE
                LOANS AND BONDS FOR HIGHLY LEVERED

                                          Robert Prilmeier
                                           René M. Stulz

                                        Working Paper 25467
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25467


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2019




We thank Mark Carey, Sergey Chernenko, Victoria Ivashina (EFA discussant), Justin Murfin,
Greg Nini (AFA discussant), Mike Schwert, Phil Strahan, participants at presentations at City
University of Hong Kong, Tulane University, the European Finance Association Meeting in
Lisbon, the American Finance Association meeting in San Diego, and the FDIC Annual Bank
Research Conference for helpful comments. We are grateful for excellent research assistance
from Andrei Gonçalves, Byungwook Kim, and Leandro Sanz. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25467.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Robert Prilmeier and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Securities Laws, Bank Monitoring, and the Choice Between Cov-lite Loans and Bonds for
Highly Levered
Robert Prilmeier and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 25467
January 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. D82,G18,G23,G32

                                          ABSTRACT

In contrast to bonds, cov-lite loans do not require SEC registration and are not subject to
securities laws. We show that this distinction plays an important role in firms’ choice between
funding through cov-lite loans and bonds and helps understand why the market share of cov-lite
loans has been so high in recent normal times. Compared to cov-heavy loans, cov-lite loans are
closer substitutes for bonds in that they have similar covenants, have tighter bid-ask spreads, have
more trading, and are more likely to be used to refinance bonds than cov-heavy loans.


Robert Prilmeier
Tulane University
A.B. Freeman School of Business
7 McAlister Drive
New Orleans, LA 70118
rprilmei@tulane.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
1.       Introduction

     There is a considerable literature that examines theoretically and empirically the choice of firms

between borrowing from public markets and from banks. In this literature, reviewed in the next section,

bank loans differ from bonds because banks monitor the borrower through covenants and have information

that capital market investors do not have. This literature cannot explain why the typical leveraged loan

outstanding is a cov-lite loan. Like bonds but unlike traditional bank loans, cov-lite loans do not have

maintenance covenants. The absence of maintenance covenants means that the lender cannot monitor the

loan at regular intervals, so that compared to a traditional bank loan, a cov-lite loan is an unmonitored loan.

     Partly or mostly because of data availability, the literature has heavily focused on choices made by

public firms. We argue in this paper that the literature misses an important dimension of the choices made

by firms. A firm can only issue public bonds if it registers these bonds with the SEC and commits to regular

filings. Hence, borrowing from the public markets would change drastically the public reporting

requirements of a private firm. In contrast, borrowing in the form of a loan would have no impact on these

requirements. Further, because of the Trust Indenture Act, the firms that issue bonds publicly face severe

limitations in restructuring these bonds. Such legal limitations do not exist for bank loans (but they may be

included in loan contracts as discussed in Demiroglu and James (2015)). Lastly, bonds are securities but

loans are not, so that bonds issued by non-registrants, such as bonds issued pursuant to Rule 144a, are

subject to securities laws.

     We investigate in this paper whether the different legal status of bonds and loans is an important factor

in firms’ decisions to borrow in the form of loans or through issuance of bonds and in how loans are

structured. If a firm borrows in the form of a loan but would prefer to raise funds through a bond issuance

if not for the legal status of bonds, we would expect that firm to structure the loan so that it would be as

similar to a bond as possible. We call the motivation to borrow in the form of loans because of their legal

status the legal status motivation for loan issuance. We find that the legal status motivation plays an

important role in firms’ use of banks to raise funds through cov-lite loans and helps understand the dramatic




                                                           1
growth of the cov-lite market following the global financial crisis (GFC). If firms value bond-like loans,

we would expect the design of these loans to evolve so that they become better substitutes for bonds. We

show that cov-lite loans have many features of bonds.

    Though we show the importance of legal considerations in firms’ loan and bond issuance decisions, we

do not imply that other considerations raised in the literature are not relevant and provide further support

for the role of some of these considerations. In particular, our evidence that cov-heavy loans have higher

credit spreads than cov-lite loans for private firms is supportive of theories that covenants may have adverse

selection costs for investors (Parlour and Plantin (2008)), that covenants may be costly because of

coordination costs (Becker and Ivashina (2017)), and that monitoring may be better allocated to tranches

of loans that do not involve institutional investors (Berlin, Nini, and Yu (2020)).

    There is now a large literature documenting the drop in IPOs in the 2000s and the decrease in the

willingness of firms to be publicly listed (see Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2013, 2017) and Gao, Ritter, and

Zhu (2013)). It is often argued that firms shy from the public markets in part because going public changes

their disclosure obligations and puts them under the regulatory umbrella of the SEC. If the change in

disclosure obligations leads firms to avoid going public, we would also expect private firms to refrain from

issuing bonds publicly and would expect public firms that might want to go private to do the same. The role

of SEC registration requirements in the decision of firms to borrow through loans instead of bonds is largely

obscured by the fact that firm-level data is available almost exclusively for SEC registered firms. Any

analysis of the decision to borrow through bonds or loans that uses a conventional database such as

Compustat is limited to SEC registered firms. Yet, though the typical issuer of a bond is an SEC registered

firm, the typical borrower through a highly levered loan is a private firm.

    Historically, loans differed from bonds because loans were illiquid and held by banks that monitored

borrowers while bonds were liquid and there was no bank-like monitoring for bond issuers. These sharp

distinctions between loans and bonds started to disappear in the 1980s and the disappearance has

accelerated. Now, firms that do not qualify for an investment-grade rating can borrow through loans that

resemble bonds along many dimensions. Cov-lite loans enable firms to borrow in a way that is very similar



                                                          2
to issuing a bond but without having to register the bond with the SEC and be subject to the disclosure

requirements of securities laws and the Trust Indenture Act. The most important difference between cov-

lite loans and bonds is that bonds are rarely secured while cov-lite loans almost always are. The

development of cov-lite loans has made it cheaper for firms to stay private in that it has made the financing

opportunities of private firms closer to the financing opportunities of public firms.

    If covenant-lite loans are advantageous for firms because they effectively constitute bond financing

without the disclosure requirements and without the restructuring restrictions of public bonds, we would

expect cov-lite loans to be relatively more favored by firms not traded on exchanges and by firms that are

more likely to exit exchanges. We find that this is the case. Firms that borrow through cov-lite loans are

less likely to be public firms than firms that borrow through cov-heavy loans or bonds. Further, a public

firm that borrows through a cov-lite loan is much more likely to exit public markets than a firm that borrows

through a cov-heavy loan or a bond. Strikingly, firms refinancing a bond are more likely to borrow through

a cov-lite loan than through a cov-heavy loan. Again, this evidence is supportive of the view that bonds and

cov-lite loans are substitutes in a way that bonds and cov-heavy loans are not.

    By borrowing through a cov-lite loan, a firm escapes disclosure requirements that it would have if it

issued a public bond. However, for the cov-lite loan to be a substitute for issuing a public bond, it should

be tradeable like a public bond and investors should require a similar credit spread for cov-lites and bonds

adjusting for risk differences. Because loans are secured while bonds typically are not, we expect credit

spreads to be lower for loans than for bonds. We find that this is the case. One way to interpret this result

is that, if the main differences between cov-lite loans and registered bonds are the SEC registration of bonds

and the fact that cov-lite loans are secured, investors place higher value on the fact that cov-lite loans are

secured than on the benefits that accrue to bonds from registration. We show that the difference in credit

spreads can plausibly be explained fully by the fact that loans are secured and bonds are not.

    With a cov-heavy loan, lenders monitor the borrower and hence have information that outsiders do not

have. As a result, an adverse selection problem arises that can make the market for a loan less liquid or

illiquid as shown in Parlour and Plantin (2008). In contrast, the lack of maintenance covenants with cov-



                                                          3
lite loans reduces the adverse selection problem that results from the lenders being better informed and

hence increases the liquidity of the loans. To the extent that institutional cov-lite loans are often

accompanied by a bank-held cov-heavy loan in the issuer’s capital structure (Berlin, Nini, and Yu, 2020),

cov-lite issuance does not necessarily result in less bank monitoring. However, monitoring is costly.

Bondholders do not have to expend these costs and cov-lites are designed so that the holders of the

institutional tranche do not have to expend these costs either. This is because the cov-lite structure of the

institutional tranche amounts to a pre-commitment not to acquire private information and not to monitor.

Such a pre-commitment makes the cov-lite tranche more comparable to a bond and less informationally

sensitive to private information than a cov-heavy tranche (Gorton and Pennacchi, 1990; Dang, Gorton, and

Holmstrom, 2019).

    Though we cannot directly compare the liquidity of cov-lite loans and the liquidity of high yield bonds,

we show that the bid-ask spreads for cov-lite loans are not out of line with some estimates of trading costs

for high-yield bonds. We also compare the credit spreads and liquidity of cov-heavy and cov-lite loans.

Consistent with bank monitoring creating an adverse selection problem, we find that for private firms cov-

lites have a lower credit spread than cov-heavy loans controlling for when the loan is entered into, for the

characteristics of the loan, and for the issuer’s credit rating and industry. Importantly, however, this credit

spread difference could also be explained by issuer or issuance differences that are not observable to us. As

expected, we find that cov-lite loans are substantially more liquid than cov-heavy loans. In particular, cov-

lite loans start trading more quickly, have a higher break price, have lower bid-ask spreads, and trade more

often. Consistent with an adverse selection problem, this liquidity advantage is greater for private firms,

which tend to be more opaque.

    As noted by Becker and Ivashina (2017), there is a cyclical pattern in cov-lite issuance. Specifically,

cov-lite issuance increased sharply before the global financial crisis (GFC), essentially disappeared during

the GFC and its immediate aftermath, and then increased at a fast pace. Not surprisingly, as cov-lite issuance

fell sharply during the GFC, it also decreased sharply with the COVID-19 crisis (see IMF, 2020). The

existence of such a pattern suggests that the costs and benefits of issuing cov-lite loans vary depending on



                                                           4
business conditions. Diamond, Hu, and Rajan (2019) build a model where the value of maintenance

covenants falls when liquidity is high as lenders are more concerned about the market value of a firm’s

assets than about their ability to appropriate its cash flows. We account for business conditions through

year indicator variables and through a variable that measures the intensity of cov-lite issuance. We find as

expected that a firm’s probability of issuing a cov-lite loan increases when cov-lite issuance is more

prevalent.

    Our paper contributes to four literatures. First, there is a literature on the decrease in the number of

listed firms. Our paper shows that firms’ listing status and plans concerning that listing status if they are

public affect their choice of debt financing and the structure of debt markets. The development of cov-lite

loans is one factor that makes it less costly for firms to stay private or to delist voluntarily. Second, there is

a literature that investigates how firms decide between borrowing through loans and through bond issuance.

By combining bond-like features with the legal status advantages of a loan, cov-lite loans significantly

expand the menu of choices available to firms. Third, there is a literature on loan trading and its implications

for banks and borrowers. We show that for firms with the highest information asymmetries, namely the

private firms, the adverse selection problem associated with covenants discussed in the literature may

explain why cov-lite loans have lower credit spreads than cov-heavy loans. Fourth, there is an emerging

literature on cov-lite loans. This literature so far focuses on the choice between cov-lite loans and cov-

heavy loans as opposed to the use of cov-lite loans as substitutes for bonds. We show that the liquidity of

cov-lite loans is close or equivalent to the liquidity of bonds.

    We review the relevant literatures in the next section before developing our hypotheses. After

presenting our data in section 3, we examine substitutability between bond issuance and cov-lite financing

in section 4. In section 5, we examine differences in credit spreads and liquidity between cov-lite loans and

bonds. In section 6, we show that cov-lite loans and cov-heavy loans differ in such a way that cov-lite loans

are better substitutes for bonds. We conclude in section 7.




                                                            5
2.       Review of the literature and hypothesis development

     In this section, we briefly review the relevant literatures and develop our main hypotheses. We first

discuss the theoretical and empirical literature on the choice between raising funds through bank loans and

through bond issuance. We then turn to the small literature on cov-lite loans before formulating our main

hypotheses.



2.1. The choice between bank loans and bonds

     Diamond (1991) provides a theory of the choice between bank loans and bonds. In his model, lenders

are concerned about moral hazard but this concern differs across firms. The concern is more important for

young firms than for firms that have developed a reputation as good borrowers. When the concern about

moral hazard is important enough, firms borrow through bank loans that are monitored in contrast to bonds.

     The distinction between monitored and unmonitored sources of finance is central to the literature. It

would be inefficient for individual bondholders to monitor firms as each bondholder is likely to hold a small

fraction of the bond issue (Berlin and Loeys (1988)). If monitoring is important, it is more efficient for a

specialist to do so, namely a financial intermediary, and for investors to invest in the financial intermediary

rather than in securities issued by corporate borrowers (Diamond (1984)). Covenants provide incentives for

banks to monitor and enable them to take actions to reduce the risk of their loans (Rajan and Winton (1995)).

     Coordination among bondholders makes renegotiation difficult. In addition, the Trust Indenture Act

and bankruptcy laws complicate renegotiation by diffuse bondholders even more. In contrast, a loan held

by a bank or a handful of lenders can be renegotiated more easily (but loan contracts may remove some of

that flexibility as discussed in Demiroglu and James (2015)). Relatedly, specialized lenders such as banks

have incentives to invest in making sure that they make the right decisions when a borrower is in distress,

namely whether to renegotiate the loan or liquidate the firm (Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1994)).

     Fama (1985) distinguishes between inside and outside debt. Bank loans are inside debt in that banks

have access to information that public investors do not have. Banks acquire that information in a variety of




                                                           6
ways that improve their ability to monitor. The fact that a bank has access to information that enables it to

monitor more efficiently means that it will be willing to lend to a borrower with which it has a relationship

in states of the world where arms-length investors will not be willing to lend (Bolton and Freixas (2000),

Rajan (1992)). However, when banks have inside information, they effectively can hold up borrowers

(Rajan (1992)). Consequently, firms may choose to have both bank debt and bonds in their capital structure.

    The existing literature generally predicts that the safest firms issue bonds, less safe firms borrow from

banks, and the least safe firms cannot borrow at all. Empirical evidence supports this view as Denis and

Mihov (2003) find that “the primary determinant of the choice of debt source is the credit quality of the

issuer.”

    More recent literature has emphasized business conditions and loan supply effects in the choice between

bank loans and bonds. Becker and Ivashina (2014) show evidence that firms that can borrow both from

banks and from the capital markets switch to the capital markets for their funding when lending standards

by banks are tight and bank share prices are low. Erel, Julio, Kim, and Weisbach (2011) show that the fund

raising of non-investment grade borrowers is pro-cyclical, which implies that these borrowers raise fewer

funds in tough times. Further, recent empirical literature shows that the riskiest firms often borrow from

non-bank lenders (Chernenko, Erel, and Prilmeier (2018)).



2.2. The choice of covenants

    The existing literature examines the determinants of the strictness of bank loan covenants for firms. A

number of papers conclude that riskier firms have stricter covenants, which is consistent with the literature

on bank loans discussed above (e.g., Berlin and Mester (1992), Billett, King, and Mauer (2007), and Rauh

and Sufi (2010)). The literature also shows that maintenance covenants are frequently violated and that

these violations have material implications for firm policies and firm performance (e.g., Chava and Roberts

(2008), and Nini, Smith, and Sufi (2012)). Roberts and Sufi (2009) show that over 90% of contracts with

maturities of more than one year have a major contract term renegotiated. When a major contract term is

changed, the syndicate participants generally have to be unanimous in approving the change. One would



                                                         7
expect, therefore, that the covenant package depends on the size of the syndicate. Saavendra (2018) shows

that it does. Loans with larger syndicates have fewer covenants that reduce flexibility in good states, such

as covenants limiting capital expenditures. Firms with longer relationships with lenders have looser

covenants (Prilmeier (2017)). As for the literature on the volume of bank loans, the literature explores the

role of supply effects on covenant packages. Murfin (2012) shows that banks experiencing recent defaults

tighten the covenant packages, which he attributes to lenders reassessing their screening ability.



2.3. Why cov-lite loans?

    The literature on cov-lite loans is extremely limited. Ayotte and Bolton (2011) model the choice

between cov-heavy and cov-lite loans. In their model, loans are securitized, so that investors have to expend

reading costs to learn about loans. With a cov-lite loan, reading costs are low, but investors assume that any

terms they do not know are adverse to them. With a cov-heavy loan, reading costs are high, but investors

have lower moral hazard costs. In good times, expected moral hazard costs are lower, so that cov-lite loans

are more advantageous. In their model, cov-lite loans are more liquid than cov-heavy loans because of

lower reading costs. The model predicts pro-cyclical issuance of cov-lite loans. It also predicts that cov-lite

loans have higher credit spreads and are more likely to be securitized.

     Billett, Elkamhi, Popov, and Pungaliya (2016) use a different approach based on the existence of two

agency problems with loans. One problem is between the borrower and the lender; the other problem is

between the bank and the non-bank investors. In their model, the number of covenants increases as the bank

participation in a loan falls, but only up to some threshold level of bank participation. The logic for this

result is that the bank’s incentive to monitor falls as it holds a smaller share of the loan. An increase in the

number of covenants increases the bank’s incentive to monitor. However, if the bank’s skin in the game is

really low, it may be optimal for the loan to be a cov-lite loan as the monitoring costs may be too high

compared to the benefits of monitoring for some types of loans. The bank’s skin in the game will be pushed

down if there is a lot of investor demand for loans or if the cost of capital for banks is high. In their model,

cov-lite loans have higher spreads than cov-heavy loans. The authors find that the value-weighted spread



                                                           8
on a deal involving a cov-lite loan is higher and that loans sponsored by private equity groups are more

likely to be cov-lite loans because these groups have reputation incentives that reduce moral hazard risks

for investors.

    Becker and Ivashina (2017) test three explanations for the growth of cov-lite loans. The first explanation

is that borrowers, following the crisis, learned that renegotiation costs are high and are willing to pay to

obtain unmonitored loans. The second explanation is that coordination costs for monitoring when a loan is

held by many institutional investors are high, so that it can be optimal to have an unmonitored loan. The

third explanation is that investors are chasing yields, so that they would rather have a higher yield with

fewer protections. They find results that are strongly supportive of the coordination cost hypothesis. Berlin,

Nini, and Yu (2020) investigate a large set of levered loan contracts. Like Becker and Ivashina (2017), they

conclude that cov-lite loans reduce renegotiation frictions. They argue that the typical levered loan package

with a cov-lite loan also has a cov-heavy tranche not held by institutional investors. This tranche has the

traditional monitoring associated with banks. Hence, cov-lite packages put the lenders with a comparative

advantage in monitoring, namely the banks, in charge of renegotiation.

    Lastly, Diamond, Hu, and Rajan (2019) develop a theory where in boom times firm leverage depends

mostly on the value of firm assets as debt can be repaid out of the proceeds from selling firm assets. In

contrast, when liquidity goes away, loans are repaid out of cash flows and the pledgeability of cash flows

becomes critical. Maintenance covenants increase pledgeability of cash flows, so that we would expect

these covenants to be more important in periods of low liquidity. This theory suggests that covenant-lite

loans are more likely to be issued in periods of high liquidity.



2.4. Hypotheses development

    We observe equilibrium outcomes where a firm borrows either through a bond or through a levered

loan. If the firm borrows through a levered loan, the loan either has maintenance covenants or it does not.

For an equilibrium outcome to occur, there has to be an intersection of a demand curve for funds of a




                                                          9
particular type from the borrower and of a supply curve for that type of funds from investors. In this section,

we develop two hypotheses we investigate in the remainder of the paper. The first hypothesis is that a firm’s

decision to borrow through a cov-lite loan instead of a bond is affected by the legal status of loans and

bonds (legal status hypothesis). The second hypothesis is that the cost of choosing to borrow with a cov-

lite loan instead of a bond is low because cov-lite loans are designed so that they have attributes that make

them acceptable substitutes for bonds for a subset of institutional investors (investor substitution

hypothesis).



2.4.a. The legal status hypothesis

    The existing literature focuses on the optimal choice of covenants conditional on the financing taking

place through a loan, but we focus here on the choice between cov-lite loan issuance and bond issuance.

Cov-lite loans are unmonitored loans and hence are more similar to bonds than to traditional monitored

bank loans. If a loan and a bond have the same covenant package, a critical difference between a loan and

a bond is that, under the current regulatory regime, a bond is a security while an investment in a syndicated

loan is not (de Fontenay (2014)). If a bond is issued publicly, the issuer is subject to periodic disclosure

requirements. Further, the bond is a security subject to the anti-fraud provisions of securities laws. As

discussed later, a bond can also be issued subject to Rule 144a. With such an issuance, the bond is subject

to securities laws but the issuer is not subject to periodic disclosures because of having issued the bond.

    If a firm is a public firm subject to SEC regulation, issuing a bond publicly does not change its

disclosure obligations. Hence, for such a firm, the fact that a loan is not a security has a limited disclosure

benefit unless the firm expects that it might choose to deregister during the life of the bond. If the firm

decides that it is better off private, it likely would have to buy back the bonds to avoid periodic disclosures,

so that it would then have to raise funds through a leveraged loan. It is obviously easier for a firm that

believes it likely that it will go private to raise funds through a loan in the first place.

    Being subject to securities laws has both costs and benefits for firms issuing bonds. Investors benefit

from greater protections, which can lead to a lower cost of funds. However, the public disclosures required



                                                            10
in the bond offering and the subsequent periodic disclosures have costs for firms. First, there are

administrative costs. Second, there are potential competitive costs, as a firm may have to disclose

information publicly that is useful to its current or potential competitors. If a private firm issues a bond to

the public that requires it to register the offering with the SEC, it essentially becomes a public firm. Some

firms choose to become public through bond issuance. Glushkov, Khorana, Rau, and Zhang (2018) find

that 18% of firms going public do so through bond issuance from 1987 to 2016. Public firms are subject to

the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which imposes further obligations on firms. These obligations are controversial

and many firms view them as costly. Lastly, and importantly, a lender through a loan can receive

confidential information from a borrower that is not public information. An investor through a bond cannot

receive such information.

    The typical public firm is a firm listed on a major exchange. As shown by Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz

(2017), the propensity of firms to be listed in the US has fallen dramatically since 1997. Such a decrease in

the propensity of firms to list must be the result of a decrease in the benefit from being listed and/or of an

increase in the costs of being listed. If being public has become less attractive, it should make bond

financing less attractive compared to bank loans for non-public firms. Firms that want to stop being SEC

registered also would want to finance themselves with bank loans rather than bond issuance. If firms prefer

bank loans to bond financing to avoid being SEC registered, we would expect them to choose bank loans

that resemble bonds if such bank loans are available. Contractually, cov-lite loans are more similar to bonds

than to typical bank loans. Like bonds, they do not have maintenance covenants.

    This leads to our first hypothesis:



    H1. Legal status motivation for loan issuance. Everything else equal, firms that find the legal status

    of bonds to be costly relative to the legal status of loans are more likely to borrow through loans than

    bonds and if they borrow through a loan are more likely to do so using a cov-lite loan.




                                                          11
    Empirically, an important dimension along which cov-lite loans often but not always differ from bonds

is that most bonds are unsecured (see Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan (2020) for the decline of use of

collateral in bonds) and cov-lite loans are almost always secured. For borrowers, putting up collateral

against borrowing is costly as it reduces financial flexibility (see Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan (2020)).

Hence, one might be concerned that if cov-lite borrowers have to put up collateral against their borrowing

but bond issuers do not, this makes cov-lite loans less attractive compared to bonds. It is important to note

that a cov-lite loan being secured while a bond is not secured is not a defining contractual difference

between the two borrowing instruments because bonds can be secured. In our sample, 16% of bonds are

secured. The advantage of security for a cov-lite loan is that it enhances a benefit of the cov-lite loan, which

is the lack of monitoring costs. Having access to collateral means that the investors in a cov-lite loan do not

have to be as informed about the firm than they would otherwise have to be. Though allowing a borrower

to modify the collateral would be difficult in a bond because of the large number of investors, it is much

easier for a loan. Consequently, the loss of financial flexibility that arises because of collateralization may

be quite limited with a cov-lite loan.

    For firms, cov-heavy loan issuances and Rule 144a issuances are ways to borrow without having to

register with the SEC. Cov-lite loans could be poor substitutes for bonds compared to cov-heavy loans for

issuers. Cov-heavy loans potentially benefit from monitoring that cov-lite loans do not benefit from. 1 This

monitoring makes the loans safer to the extent that coordination costs, free-riding costs, and adverse

selection costs are not too high. Hence, cov-heavy loans could have lower spreads than cov-lite loans, which

would weaken our hypothesis that legal status is an important consideration in the decision to borrow

through a cov-lite loan. Alternatively, firms can issue bonds without having to register the issue as a public

issuance using a Rule 144a offering. A Rule 144a bond differs from a loan in that it is a security subject to




1
  Even if the cov-lite loan is accompanied by a cov-heavy tranche, there may be frictions that limit the effectiveness
of bank monitoring from the institutional investors’ perspective. For example, Billett et al. (2016) find that the bank
revolver accompanying a cov-lite often has so-called springing covenants that are inactive until the borrower draws
down a certain proportion of the line of credit.



                                                              12
securities laws. Again, if the credit spread on a Rule 144a bond were to be sufficiently low compared to a

cov-lite loan, this would weaken our hypothesis.



2.4.b. Investor substitution hypothesis

    Historically, public bond markets met large financing needs of companies. In the 19th century, the bond

market was a major source of funding for railroads. Though small firms could meet their financing needs

through bank loans, eventually, as a firm became large and established, it would have to access the bond

market. Banks face regulatory limits and risk management limits on how much they can lend to an

individual firm. If the amounts that firms can borrow through bank loans are smaller than what they can

borrow through the bond market, then firms can prefer loans to bonds because of their legal status only up

to a given size. When banks are limited in how much of a loan they can hold, they can sell parts of the loan

to non-bank investors. For the amount raised through loans to be comparable to amounts that can be raised

through bonds, banks have to make investment in loans attractive to institutional investors so that some

investors are willing to buy positions in loans instead of bonds. 2 However, these loans cannot be structured

in such a way as to make them much more expensive than bonds, since from the borrower’s perspective

expensive loans would be poor substitutes for bonds besides the legal status difference.

    Loans are better substitutes for bonds for institutional investors concerned about liquidity if they are

tradable under conditions similar to bonds. The literature on the trading of loans predicts that when banks

have valuable non-public information loan trading is limited because of the resulting adverse selection

problem (Parlour and Plantin (2008)). With cov-lite loans, institutional lenders have less information than

with cov-heavy loans because they do not monitor maintenance covenants. Although banks could hold a

cov-heavy tranche issued by the same borrower so that monitoring benefits still apply (Berlin, Nini, and

Yu, 2020), the banks do not participate in trading the institutional tranche, except potentially as market


2
  It is important to note that there are institutional investment vehicles such as CLOs or certain mutual funds that are
contractually or legally restricted to either investing in loans or bonds. However, substitution can still occur at the
level of the institutional investors that invest in these vehicles, and substitutability of loans vs. bonds will affect flows
from these end investors into vehicles that either invest in loans or bonds.



                                                                 13
makers. With this structure, institutional investors have no incentive to monitor the lender, so that they do

not have to expend monitoring costs. The lack of maintenance covenants therefore amounts to a pre-

commitment not to monitor. With this pre-commitment, the cov-lite loan is less information sensitive than

a cov-heavy loan. As a result, the cov-lite loan is more similar to a bond than it would be if it were more

information sensitive and made it optimal for its holders to monitor. In this sense, the cov-lite loan can be

structured similarly to a bond that may or may not be accompanied by a traditional loan, allowing the

bondholders to trade in debt that is less informationally sensitive while the bank monitors the information

sensitive debt. Hence, we would expect cov-lite loans to be more liquid than cov-heavy loans. Note that if

cov-heavy loans were more liquid, then this would suggest that in some dimensions cov-heavy loans would

be better substitutes for bonds.

    If cov-lites are designed to be substitutes for registered bonds for investors who do not monitor, we

would expect these loans to be rated since bonds typically are, revealing a preference of such investors for

information production by rating agencies. Further, evidence that investors require a higher credit spread

for cov-lites than comparable bonds would suggest that bonds have advantages for investors that cov-lites

do not have since otherwise we would expect cov-lites to have lower credit spreads. The difficulty in

comparing yields for bonds and yields for cov-lites is that cov-lite loans, as already discussed, are typically

secured but bonds are not. Consequently, we would expect cov-lites to have a lower spread compared to

bonds as long as investors do not value the benefits of securities laws more than they value the fact that

cov-lites are secured. It follows from this that evidence that cov-lites trade at a higher spread than bonds

would be evidence against our substitution hypothesis.

    The substitution hypothesis is about cov-lites being designed so that some investors are willing to hold

cov-lite loans instead of bonds without asking for a costly premium to do so. Obviously, some institutional

investors cannot switch between bonds and loans because their investment mandate restricts them to invest

either in loans, such as CLOs, or in bonds, but the hypothesis only requires that there are investors who

view cov-lite loans and bonds as substitutes.

    Our second hypothesis is therefore:



                                                          14
       H2. Investor substitution hypothesis. If cov-lite loans are designed to be substitutes for bonds for

       investors so that firms would not have to pay investors more for borrowing through a cov-lite loan than

       a bond, we would expect cov-lite loans to be rated, to trade more similarly to bonds than cov-heavy

       loans, and their credit spreads should not be higher than those of bonds.



3.         The data

       We create two samples: a leveraged loan sample and a speculative grade debt sample. The leveraged

loan sample includes 5,560 loans by US issuers on the US leveraged loan market from January 1, 2005

through April 30, 2015. 3 Our main data source is Capital IQ Leveraged Commentary and Data (LCD). The

sample is limited to deals that LCD reports as completed as of May 12, 2015 (the date of our data extract).

The LCD database provides information on loan characteristics such as the size, yield spread, and maturity

of each loan facility. Importantly, it identifies covenant-lite facilities and second lien facilities. Unlike data

available to academic researchers in DealScan, the LCD data allow us to determine what portion of the loan

amount actually represents new money and they contain information on the borrower’s first lien bank loan

rating along with the corporate credit rating. In addition, LCD focuses primarily on loan originations, with

83% of the recorded deals consisting entirely of new money and the remainder consisting of amendments.

By contrast, for a random sample of 114 firms, Roberts (2015) finds that 59% of DealScan observations

are originations and 41% are renegotiations, and DealScan does not distinguish between the two. To

enhance comparability with bonds, for which only original issuance is observable, we limit the leveraged

loan sample to originations.

       The speculative grade debt sample includes both bonds and leveraged loans. Because 96% of covenant-

lite loans are rated and fewer than 2% of covenant-lite loans have an investment grade rating, this sample

focuses on all leveraged loans and bonds that have a speculative grade rating at the time of issuance. Bond


3
    We exclude financial firms and utilities from both of our samples.



                                                                15
issuance data during the sample period from January 1, 2005 through April 30, 2015 are taken from Mergent

FISD. We exclude private placements, foreign currency bonds, global offerings, convertible, putable, and

exchangeable bonds. We include bonds issued pursuant to Rule 144a. The speculative grade debt sample

contains 7,759 deals, of which 4,413 are bonds.

    Following Billett et al. (2016), we classify all leveraged loans that contain a covenant-lite facility as

covenant-lite. 4 The remaining leveraged loans are referred to as covenant-heavy. For bonds, we distinguish

between public bonds that are registered with the SEC and bonds issued pursuant to Rule 144a. Bonds

issued through Rule 144a can be subsequently registered with the SEC. Fenn (2000) documents that in his

sample period, domestic speculative-grade Rule 144a bonds are almost always subsequently registered with

the SEC. Subsequently, Huang and Ramirez (2010) reach a similar conclusion. We use the action type field

in Mergent FISD to distinguish Rule 144a bonds that were subsequently exchanged from those that were

never exchanged.

    Several of our analyses require matching LCD loan observations to DealScan. We match loans based

on the identity of the borrower, identity of the lead arranger, approximate origination date, 5 as well as the

size, yield spread, and maturity of the loan tranches. We require substantial overlap in tranche

characteristics, but do not require all characteristics to match since the two databases may record the same

loan differently. For example, DealScan contains tranche type classifications that are not reported as

separate types in LCD, such as bridge loans or delay draw term loans, and whose mapping can be

ambiguous. We are able to match 91% of LCD borrowers and 70% of LCD loan observations to DealScan.



4
  While covenant-lite loan facilities are generally structured as term loans B, roughly half of the deals that contain a
covenant-lite facility also contain a revolving line of credit. Billett et al. (2016) examine 53 such revolvers in detail
and conclude that 49% of revolvers accompanied by a covenant-lite facility have no maintenance covenants, 40%
have springing covenants, and only 11% have traditional maintenance covenants. By contrast, in a recent paper, Berlin
et al. (2018) argue that most covenant-lite loan facilities are accompanied by a tranche that does contain maintenance
covenants. One reason for the difference in findings is that, as Berlin et al. (2018) show, firms that borrow using a
covenant-lite term loan often already have a revolver with maintenance covenants in their capital structure. Further,
Berlin et al. (2018) classify springing covenants as heavy, while Billett et al. (2016) classify them as lite. In any event,
as discussed in section 2.4, a borrower that has both covenant-lite and covenant-heavy loans at the same time can be
compared to a borrower that issues both a bond and a traditional bank loan.
5
  Origination dates cannot be matched exactly since LCD reports the date on which a loan launches for syndication,
while DealScan reports the date on which the deal closes, with launch dates reported only for a subset of the deals.



                                                                 16
The most frequent reason for a failure to match is that, for about 20% of LCD loan observations, DealScan

does not record any loan observation for that borrower within 180 days after the LCD launch date.

    We match borrowers to Compustat based on name and date, making use of the spedis function in SAS

along with manual verification of similar names in Capital IQ. For loans that match to DealScan, we also

obtain matches to Compustat from the link file provided by Chava and Roberts (2008). Compustat

borrowers are matched to Capital IQ using GVKEY. We perform another name match to link non-

Compustat borrowers to Capital IQ since this database includes privately held firms. Of the 2,830 distinct

borrowers in the leveraged loan sample, we are able to find 52% in Compustat and 98% in Capital IQ.

Bankruptcy announcement dates are obtained from Capital IQ.

    Two databases are used to gauge the liquidity of the leveraged loans in the secondary trading market.

The CRSP mutual fund database provides information on loan shares held by loan participation mutual

funds on a monthly basis along with mark-to-market prices as of the reporting date. Changes in shares held

from month to month allow us to infer that a given mutual fund traded shares in the loan. We match loans

to the CRSP mutual fund database using the security name indicated in CRSP. These data are consistently

available from June 30, 2010 onwards.

    We obtain secondary market loan pricing data from the Thomson Reuters/LSTA Mark-to-market

pricing service. These data are available to us for the period of January 2010 through December 2016. We

calculate bid-ask spreads as the difference between the average bid quote and the average ask quote divided

by the average ask quote multiplied by 100. As a measure of market depth, the data also report on the

number of brokers providing a quote. Figure 1 shows the evolution of total new money raised by speculative

grade borrowers from 2005 through April 2015. To avoid undercounting covenant-heavy loans, which are

more frequently unrated than cov-lite loans, we include unrated leveraged loans when constructing this

graph even though we are not including them in the speculative grade sample. Note that unrated leveraged

loans on average have a spread of 378 basis points above LIBOR (median of 350 basis points), comparable

to the average loan of a B+ rated issuer (mean spread of 387 basis points, median of 375 basis points).

Figure 1 shows that prior to the GFC, covenant-heavy loans were the most important source of debt funding



                                                        17
for speculative grade borrowers. There was a brief first wave of covenant-lite loans immediately prior to

the GFC, but issuance of such instruments ceased almost entirely during the GFC. Although bond markets

recovered more quickly from the GFC than the leveraged loan market, after 2010 almost all growth in the

speculative grade debt market is driven by covenant-lite loans. 6 By 2014, the majority of leveraged loans

are cov-lite loans, and total issuance volume of cov-lite loans is as large as total bond issuance. Obviously,

as already discussed, the importance of cov-lite loans depends on the stage of the business cycle, so the

importance of these loans changes with the COVID-19 crisis.



4.         Cov-lite loan issuance versus bond issuance

      In this section, we investigate the legal status hypothesis. With this hypothesis, firms are more likely to

raise funds with a cov-lite loan than a public bond if they are private or are likely to become private. To

examine the hypothesis, we use our sample of speculative grade debt issuance, which includes both loans

and bonds with a non-investment grade rating and excludes unrated issuers. Table 1 provides univariate

comparisons of cov-lite loans with public bonds (Panel A) and Rule 144a private placements (Panel B). We

first compare cov-lite loans and issuers to public bonds and issuers. A simple alternative hypothesis to the

legal status hypothesis is that firms use cov-lite loans because the size of their debt issuance is too small to

justify accessing the public bond market. Table 1 shows that there is no support for this alternative

hypothesis as cov-lite loans are considerably larger than bond issuances. The average size of cov-lite loans

in our sample is $839 million compared to $530 million for public bonds. It would make sense for a firm

to use bank lending if the maturity of the debt is short. Though the maturity of cov-lite loans is shorter than

the maturity of public bonds, the average maturity of cov-lite loans is slightly more than six years, so that

maturity is not a reason for issuing a cov-lite loan instead of a bond. Practically all cov-lite loans are senior

secured, while most bonds are senior unsecured. Among speculative grade borrowers, cov-lite loans have

slightly higher ratings, with a median rating of B+ compared to B for bonds.


6
    This effect is even more pronounced when excluding unrated leveraged loans.



                                                             18
    Some of the theories discussed in Section 2 predict that younger firms are more likely to use bank debt.

However, there is no difference in the average or the median firm age between cov-lite issuers and bond

issuers. For a subset of our speculative debt sample, issuers are SEC filers and we can obtain balance sheet

data for them. Compared to bond issuers, cov-lite issuers that file with the SEC have similar firm size, lower

pre-existing leverage, a higher current ratio, and lower asset tangibility in the form of property, plant and

equipment. Average profitability is the same between cov-lite issuers and bond issuers.

    Panel B compares cov-lite loans and issuers to Rule 144a bonds and issuers. The biggest difference

between Panel A and Panel B is the size of the issue. The average and median sizes for cov-lite loans are

much larger than for Rule 144a bonds. For average size, the average cov-lite issue is for $839 million in

contrast to the average size of a Rule 144a bond issue of $484 million.

    We now turn to a test of two key predictions of the regulatory legal status hypothesis: 1) cov-lite loans

attract unregistered issuers, and 2) they attract issuers that intend to deregister. Table 2 suggests that both

effects are present. In this table, we count issuers as unregistered if they were not previously registered with

the SEC. An issuer is considered registered with the SEC if we are able to obtain data on total assets for the

fiscal year prior to debt issuance. Although Compustat tracks substantially all publicly traded firms, the

database does not adequately track firms registered with the SEC that do not have publicly listed equity.

Therefore, we search for additional asset data in Capital IQ, examining the filing source to make sure that

the asset data we find comes from an SEC filing. We are able to find additional asset data for 668

observations by non-public firms compared to the 1,132 observations that Compustat does track. Thus,

Compustat tracks only about 63% of SEC registered firms with no public equity.

    One reason a bond issuer might be registered with the SEC is because of the bond issue itself. Because

the registration statement includes asset data for the previous two years, we would find asset data in

Compustat/Capital IQ for an issuer who was not registered with the SEC prior to the bond issue. To assess

accurately the choices of previously unregistered firms, we treat such privately held first-time bond issuers

as unregistered. We identify them by checking whether asset data are already available three years prior to




                                                          19
bond issuance and making sure that SDC does not report any initial public offering for the firm during those

three years. 7

    As already discussed, many Rule 144a bond offerings are subsequently registered. These registrations

typically take the form of an exchange of the Rule 144a bond for a registered bond. Hence, Table 2

distinguishes between Rule 144a offerings that were subsequently exchanged and those that were never

exchanged. Table 2 shows that roughly two thirds of Rule 144a bonds are subsequently exchanged during

our sample period.

    About 51% of cov-lite issuers are unregistered, compared to 42% of cov-heavy issuers, 43% of Rule

144a bond issuers that never exchange the bond, 19% of Rule 144a bond issuers who subsequently

exchange the bond, and 15% of public bond issuers. In addition, among registered firms, cov-lite borrowers

are much more likely to deregister within three years after debt issuance than other borrowers. About 19%

of cov-lite issuers deregister subsequently, compared to 10% of cov-heavy issuers and only about 3% of

issuers of public bonds and 3% of issuers of Rule 144a bonds that are subsequently exchanged, and 7% of

Rule 144a bond issuers that never exchange the bond. 8

    Existing theories of the decision to borrow through bank debt versus through bond issuance are not

well-equipped to address the facts in Table 2. No theory we know of predicts that a cov-lite issuer is more

likely to be a firm that does not currently file with the SEC or will stop filing within three years rather than

a SEC filer. This result is especially surprising since the opposite result holds for cov-heavy loans. A cov-

heavy issuer is more likely to be a filer than a non-filer or a firm that will stop filing within three years.



7
  We do not apply this criterion to loan issuances since they do not create registration requirements. We do apply the
same criterion to Rule 144a private placements since domestic issuers frequently register their privately placed bonds
subsequent to issuance (Fenn, 2000; Huang and Ramirez, 2010). Note that, if anything, this approach may cause us to
understate the difference in prior registration status between bond and loan issuers.
8
  The reader may wonder whether firms deregister due to distress or mergers. We note that we code bankrupt issuers
as well as issuers that subsequently become a merger target as not having deregistered. Within three years after
issuance, 4% of bond issuers are bankrupt, compared to 2.2% of cov-heavy loan borrowers and 1.9% of cov-lite loan
borrowers. For 176 deregistering loan borrowers we can also observe secondary market loan quotes. We examine the
last known bid-ask midpoint up to three years after loan origination. We find that the loans of 9% of covenant-heavy
borrowers that subsequently deregister are priced as distressed (i.e. less than 90 cents per dollar of principal), compared
to 7% of covenant-lite loans.




                                                                20
    Although the tabulation in Table 2 is suggestive, it is clear from Table 1 that issue characteristics and

firm characteristics differ across the five types of debt instruments. To account for these differences, we

model the choice between a cov-lite loan, a cov-heavy loan, a public bond, an exchanged Rule 144a bond,

and a Rule 144a bond that is never exchanged using a multinomial logit model that controls for firm age,

deal maturity and size, rating as well as year and industry fixed effects. We use the LCD industry

classification to create industry fixed effects. After filtering out utilities and financial firms, we have firms

belonging to 31 industries. Table 3 reports relative risk ratios for the multinomial logit model with public

bonds acting as the base outcome. The model includes indicator variables for unregistered firms and

registered firms that deregister within three years after debt issuance, so that continuously registered firms

act as the base group. Compared to continuously registered firms, unregistered firms are considerably more

likely to issue cov-lite loans, with a relative risk ratio of 7.75. This estimate implies that the ratio of the

number of cov-lite loans issued to the number of public bonds issued is 7.75 times larger for unregistered

firms than for registered firms. Unregistered firms are generally more likely to issue loans than bonds, as

evidenced by the relative risk ratio of 6.75 for cov-heavy loans. A Wald test of the difference in coefficients

between cov-lite and cov-heavy loans is not significant with a p-value of 0.173. In section 6, we show that

the difference is statistically significant at the 5% level when controlling for additional loan characteristics

that are not available for the bond sample.

    Compared to registered firms, previously unregistered firms are also more likely to issue Rule 144a

bonds, with a relative risk ratio of 1.26 for firms that subsequently exchange their bonds and 4.34 for firms

that do not exchange them. The difference between these two coefficients is highly significant with a p-

value of 0.000. Although issuing a Rule 144a bond that is never exchanged could be viewed as an alternative

way to issue debt without maintenance covenants and without SEC registration, a comparison of the relative

risk ratios in Table 3 shows that unregistered firms are significantly more likely to issue a cov-lite loan than

to issue a Rule 144a bond that they do not exchange (p-value of 0.021). This result suggests that a cov-lite

loan affords the unregistered issuer with additional advantages relative to a Rule 144a bond issue. An

obvious advantage is that the Rule 144a bond is a security but the loan is not, so that borrowing in the form



                                                           21
of a cov-lite loan does not subject an issuer to securities laws. In addition, however, the issuer of a cov-lite

loan also benefits from bank screening.

    The results in Table 3 suggest that cov-lite loans are particularly attractive for registered firms that

deregister subsequently to borrowing. Many of these firms likely know that they may deregister at the time

of issuing the debt. Among such firms, the relative risk ratio for cov-lite issuance is 11.27, significantly

larger than the ratio of 4.35 for cov-heavy loans, 2.20 for never exchanged Rule 144a bonds, and 0.94 for

exchanged Rule 144a bonds (all Wald test p-values are 0.000). This result is consistent with the existence

of a group of firms that want to deregister and avoid being subject to the provisions of securities laws and

the Trust Indenture Act while still issuing an instrument that resembles a bond. The advent of cov-lite loans

allows them to do so. A concern with these results is that the deregistering firms might be mostly firms that

go private through an LBO. In section 6.1, we show that our results are not affected if we use an indicator

variable for firms associated with an LBO.

    A few findings for the control variables are worth commenting on. First, loan issuers are younger than

public bond issuers. To the extent that cov-lite loans are commonly accompanied by a monitored bank loan

(Berlin, Nini, and Yu (2020)), this result is consistent with models that predict that younger firms may

choose to issue monitored debt. Second, firms with very poor ratings are unlikely to issue either cov-lite or

cov-heavy loans, but instead issue bonds. This result contrasts with the findings of Denis and Mihov (2004).

The restrictions on banks from issuing loans to excessively risky firms during our sample period may help

explain this result. The relative risk ratio for cov-lite (cov-heavy) issuance among issuers with a rating of

B- is 0.30 (0.07). The relative risk ratios for loan issuance among issuers rated CCC+ or worse are close to

zero, meaning that such loans are very rare. Compared to bonds, cov-lite loans are relatively more likely to

be rated BB-, B+, or B, and cov-heavy loans are relatively more likely to be rated BB-. Rule 144a bonds

that are never exchanged appear to be issued by borrowers that are similar to issuers of public debt except

in their registration status, while Rule 144a bonds that are subsequently exchanged appear to be issued by

borrowers of lower credit quality than public bond issuers, and especially by borrowers with very poor

credit ratings such as CCC+ or worse.



                                                          22
5.      Credit spreads and liquidity differences between cov-lite loans and bonds

     The analysis thus far suggests that cov-lite loans are in many ways similar to speculative grade bonds:

they do not have maintenance covenants, they are large, and they have long maturities, albeit about one

year shorter than bonds. However, for cov-lite loans to be useful substitutes for bonds from the investors’

perspective (H2), it is also important to assess whether the secondary market trading is as liquid for cov-

lite loans as it is for bonds. Further, relatively high credit spreads for cov-lites compared to bonds or cov-

heavy loans of similar risk would be evidence that would weaken the substitution hypothesis. Using our

speculative debt sample, we discuss first credit spread differences and second liquidity differences. In the

next section, we examine liquidity differences between cov-lite loans and cov-heavy loans in more detail

using our leveraged loan sample.

     Comparing credit spreads across bonds and loans is quite difficult for many reasons. Schwert (2019)

studies the pricing differences between loans and bonds and finds that loans are especially expensive

relative to bonds for safer loans in that credit spreads are similar even though loans are secured. He discusses

many of the reasons why assessing credit spread differences is difficult for firms that have both publicly

registered bonds and loans. The difficulties he encounters are magnified in our sample in such a way that

the exercise he undertakes is impossible to conduct in our study. Our focus is on the importance of

registration status and securities laws for the decision to raise funding through bonds versus loans. The

approach used by Schwert (2019) requires Compustat data and, therefore, cannot be used for unregistered

firms. As a result, our comparison of credit spreads is much more limited in purpose and more caveats apply

than in the Schwert (2019) study. As discussed in Section 2, evidence of high credit spreads on cov-lites

compared to bonds, accounting for observable differences in issuer and issuance characteristics, would be

evidence casting doubt about the substitution hypothesis.

     We obtain yield data for bonds from FISD. The difficulty with these data is that FISD has the coupon

rate for 96% of bonds, but has the yield only for 60% of bonds. We therefore show results using the yield

and results using the coupon rate. It turns out that for the bonds where we have both the coupon rate and




                                                          23
the yield, the two are close to each other (the means are essentially the same). Bonds for which the yield is

unavailable tend to have worse ratings and higher coupons. The second issue is that the bank loans have

generally floating rate payments, so that they have a spread above LIBOR. In contrast, public debt generally

has a fixed rate payment. To make the two debt instruments comparable, we compute the spread for the

public bond as the bond yield minus the linearly interpolated rate for swapping a fixed rate interest into 3-

month LIBOR.

    The two instruments can differ in the probability of default, in the expected loss given default, in early

repayment likelihood, and in liquidity. As we discuss later, liquidity differences between bonds and cov-

lite loans seem second-order. In general, callable debt will have a higher yield, but leveraged loans can be

prepaid. Since the cov-lite debt would not be subject to the Trust Indenture Act, it is possible that it would

be more easily renegotiated. Easier renegotiation would mean that the debt has a lower probability of default

and lower loss given default than public debt, which again would imply a lower yield. Lastly, the loan is

not subject to securities laws compared to a public bond or a bond issued under Rule 144a. The lack of

these attributes would be expected to increase the credit spread of a loan assuming that investors find these

attributes valuable. Any evidence that credit spreads of cov-lite loans are higher than those of public bonds

or bonds issued under Rule 144a would be evidence that investors value attributes of securities laws more

than they value the fact that cov-lite loans are secured. Such evidence would be inconsistent with the

substitution hypothesis.

    In Table 4, we compare the credit spreads of loans and senior bonds. Because we are interested in the

spreads charged by institutional investors, we discard loans that do not have an institutional tranche and

consider only the spread of a loan’s first lien institutional tranche. We find that cov-lite loans have a lower

yield than public bonds or bonds issued under Rule 144a when we control for firm age, deal size, deal

maturity, industry, rating, and year-quarter effects. This evidence suggests that the cov-lite loans are safer

for investors relative to bonds, so that investors value the fact that these loans are secured more than they

value the benefits associated with the bonds because they are issued by SEC registrants and/or because they

are securities. We find evidence that registration is associated with lower credit spreads for bonds and loans.



                                                          24
However, when we allow for a different impact of registration on cov-lite loans and cov-heavy loans, we

find that the lack of registration is not associated with a higher credit spread for cov-lite loans. If we restrict

the sample to only firms with registered securities, so that Compustat data is available, we find again that

cov-lite loans have a lower credit spread than bonds.

    If a firm, everything else equal, issues a cov-heavy loan instead of a cov-lite loan, the cov-heavy loan

should be safer than the cov-lite loan if the additional monitoring of cov-heavy loans is effective and hence

should have a lower credit spread. However, this effect would be reduced if cov-heavy loans are less liquid

than cov-lite loans as we show later. It would also be reduced to the extent that institutional investors are

ill-equipped to monitor loans (see Berlin, Nini, and Yu, 2020) and to the extent that monitoring might have

excessive coordination costs (see Becker and Ivashina, 2017). We find evidence that the credit spread on

cov-heavy loans is higher than the credit spread on cov-lite loans for issuers for the whole sample. This

difference is driven by unregistered borrowers. There is no difference for registered borrowers.

Interestingly, for registered borrowers, controlling for variables available on Compustat has a similar impact

on cov-heavy and cov-lite loan credit spreads. The evidence on the comparison of credit spreads for cov-

heavy and cov-lite loans is consistent with adverse selection costs associated with bank monitoring and

monitoring limitations for institutional investors. However, we cannot exclude that arrangers have

information about a cov-heavy issuer that makes them unwilling to arrange a cov-lite loan for that issuer.

In this case, the creditworthiness of the cov-heavy issuer would be worse for reasons we cannot observe.

Irrespective of the explanation, the results support the legal status hypothesis.

    Panel A of Table 4 distinguishes between Rule 144a bonds that are never exchanged and those that are

subsequently exchanged. A Rule 144a bond that is never exchanged for a public bond shares some similarity

with a cov-lite loan in that it allows the issuer to borrow without maintenance covenants and without SEC

registration. However, it is still subject to securities laws. As stated in section 2, if the credit spread on such

a Rule 144a bond were to be sufficiently low compared to a cov-lite loan, this would weaken support for

the legal status hypothesis. Panel A of Table 4 shows to the contrary that Rule 144a bonds that are never

exchanged have higher credit spreads than public bonds and, hence, than cov-lite loans.



                                                            25
    Several concerns arise with these regressions. First, since almost all public bonds are callable, we

cannot control for callability. However, some bonds are callable at a fixed price while others have a make-

whole provision. If we control for the type of callability, our results do not change. Second, we use the

coupon spread instead of the yield because we are missing the yield for many bonds. If we restrict our

sample to those issues for which we have both yield and coupon, our results are very similar. Third, some

cov-lites are issued as part of a package as discussed earlier and the investors may benefit from this

association (see Berlin, Nini, and Yu (2020)). However, when we add an indicator variable for whether the

cov-lite is a stand-alone cov-lite, we find that the indicator variable has a negative significant coefficient.

Lastly, we add firm fixed-effects. The result that unregistered cov-lite loans have a lower credit spread than

unregistered cov-heavy loans continues to hold, but the economic magnitude of the difference is cut in half.

This result suggests that the adverse selection advantage of cov-lites is potentially smaller when a firm has

borrowed through a bond or a cov-heavy loan as well.

    As stated above, a legitimate concern is that the difference in spreads between cov-lite loans and cov-

heavy loans is driven by a selection effect. While this concern is difficult to address, in Table 5 we take a

step towards the logic used by Schwert (2019) of comparing debt instruments by the same firm at the same

point in time. Although we do not observe institutional cov-lite loans and institutional cov-heavy loans

issued simultaneously by the same firm, in Column (1) of Panel A of Table 5, we match each institutional

cov-lite loan with an institutional cov-heavy loan issued by the same firm in the same year. In the rare case

in which more than one potential match is available, we choose the nearest neighbor in terms of deal size

and maturity using the Mahalanobis distance. We find a match for only 22 cov-lite loans, for which the

average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) is a statistically significant negative 84 basis points. To

expand the comparison, in Column (2) we perform an exact match only on the issuer and find the nearest

neighbor in terms of the launch date of the loan, but we restrict the sample to those matched pairs that are

issued within the same or two adjacent calendar years instead of within the same year. Doing so expands

the usable sample to 150 loan pairs, with an ATET of minus 73 basis points. Allowing (in the extreme)

almost two years to pass between loans raises the question of whether the issuers’ creditworthiness still



                                                          26
remains the same. To address this concern, in Column (3) we additionally require an exact match on the

firm’s rating across both loans. Sample size is reduced by about 40%, but the ATET remains virtually

identical at minus 76 basis points.

       Matching loans within firm is inherently difficult due to infrequent originations. In Panel B, we instead

follow the approach of Ivashina and Sun (2011) and Nadauld and Weisbach (2012) and analyze how the

within-deal difference in the credit spread of the institutional tranche vs. the bank revolving line of credit

varies across deals that have either a cov-lite or cov-heavy institutional tranche. Since both the institutional

tranche and the bank tranche are issued at the same time and have the same priority, the pricing of the bank

tranche can be expected to reflect any omitted variables related to the riskiness of the firm’s cash flows

and/or the value of its collateral. Subtracting the credit spread paid on the bank tranche from the spread

paid on the institutional tranche should thus purge the effect of such omitted firm fundamentals. Table 5

shows that we continue to find that cov-lite loans are cheaper than cov-heavy loans for unregistered firms,

while credit spreads are statistically indistinguishable for registered firms. Compared with the results in

Table 4, the effect is reduced from about 30 basis points to 13 basis points.

       The evidence presented so far in this section supports the substitution hypothesis in that there is no

evidence that investors charge a premium to hold cov-lite loans instead of bonds. Moreover, we find

evidence that cov-lite loans trade at spreads that are lower than those at which bonds trade. Though we

cannot value directly the impact on credit spreads of the fact that cov-lite loans are secured, we can get a

sense of the benefit of loan collateral by considering the differences in recovery rates for bank loans and

unsecured bonds. According to Moody’s, loss given default for bank loans (senior unsecured bonds) was

19.6% (52.1%) from 1987-2017. 9 The average cov-lite loan in our sample is rated B+ and has a maturity

of six years. The probability of default for a B+ rated issuer over six years is 20.1% according to Moody’s.

The difference in credit spreads between bonds and bank loans should be at least large enough to

compensate bondholders for the greater loss given default in a perfect markets risk-neutral world.



9
    Ultimate recovery rates are taken from Moody’s Investors Service Data Report (Ou et al., 2018).



                                                              27
Therefore, assuming that Moody’s estimate of the difference in loss given default is an appropriate measure

of expected loss differences, the collateral justifies a difference in the credit spread of 0.325x0.201/6 = 109

basis points, which is very similar to the difference we find. This back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests

that the value of collateral can explain the difference in spreads between cov-lite loans and bonds and that

investors do not appear to charge a premium on loans to compensate for the fact that they are not securities.

    We turn next to a comparison of liquidity between bonds and loans. It is difficult to compare directly

the liquidity of loans versus bonds since there is no database that tracks actual trade prices for loans.

However, the LSTA/Thomson Reuters Mark-to-Market Pricing Service provides market-maker quotes for

the secondary loan market, which we can compare to quoted spreads in the bond pricing literature. We

obtain average quoted spreads for bonds from Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007). We use the average bid-

ask spreads they report for noncallable bonds of maturity between one and seven years from 1995 through

2003 (with most quotes available from 2000 onwards). This maturity range matches well with our sample

since 94% of sample loans have a maturity between one and seven years.

    We then match our loans to the bond results in Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) based on the rating.

We compute the average bid-ask spread for both cov-lite loans and cov-heavy loans over the first three

months, and the first, second, and third year after the launch date of the loan. A breakdown of spreads based

on years since issuance is not available for bonds. Notice that Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) use up-to-

date bond ratings while our loan data is limited to at-issue ratings. To improve comparability, loans that are

priced as distressed and likely would have been downgraded during the time period in question are excluded

from the analysis. In Panel A of Table 6, we classify a loan as distressed if it trades below 90 cents per one

dollar of principal. In Panel B, loans are excluded if they trade below 95 cents. Note that these conservative

criteria may cause us to overstate the difference between cov-lite loans and bonds, if anything. For a loan

with five years to maturity, a drop in price to 90 cents represents a change in yield approximately equivalent

to a downgrade from straight BB to B- (priced at LIBOR plus 284 basis points and LIBOR plus 497 basis

points, respectively, on average). A drop in price to 95 cents represents a change in yield about equal to a

downgrade from straight BB to B+ (the latter being priced at LIBOR plus 387 basis points on average).



                                                          28
     Table 6 shows that quoted spreads are very similar for covenant-lite loans and bonds. For BB rated

debt, bonds have a quoted spread of 54 basis points compared to 58 basis points for cov-lite loans. Cov-

heavy loans trade at a wider spread of 70 basis points. For B rated debt, bonds trade at a spread of 59 basis

points, compared to 63 basis points for cov-lite loans and 77 basis points for cov-heavy loans. Note that

statistical significance tests cannot be performed for bonds vs. loans since we do not have the underlying

data on bonds. However, in section 6, we verify that the difference in liquidity between cov-lite loans and

cov-heavy loans is statistically significant.

     Table 6 also suggests that loans become slightly less liquid in the secondary loan market over time.

This effect is more pronounced for B rated loans than BB rated loans. A comparison of Panels A and B

suggests that a significant portion of the increase in average spreads over time is due to some loans

deteriorating in credit quality rather than an actual widening of spreads for a given credit quality. For

example, the median loan has a maturity of six years. If such a loan trades below 95 cents in its third year,

this would represent a significant increase in its yield, which would likely be accompanied by a downgrade.

When we exclude loans trading below 95 cents, spreads for loans with an at-issue rating of BB do not widen

over time and spreads for B rated cov-lite loans widen only by five basis points from the first three months

through year 3.



6.       Cov-lite loans versus cov-heavy loans

     We now turn to comparing cov-lite loans with cov-heavy loans in more detail. Such a comparison will

allow us to evaluate the substitution hypothesis, which predicts that cov-lite loans are better substitutes for

bonds than cov-heavy loans. Because a richer set of variables is available for leveraged loans than for bonds,

this allows us to establish that cov-lite loans are substitutes for bonds in ways that cov-heavy loans are not.

In addition, this analysis allows us to assess how the differences in information asymmetries between banks

and investors are related to differences in liquidity between cov-lite loans and cov-heavy loans. We would

expect banks to have more of an information advantage for non-registered firms than for registered firms,




                                                          29
as many registered firms are publicly listed firms and as registered firms file regularly with the SEC. Hence,

the difference in liquidity due to the difference in adverse selection should be stronger for loans issued by

non-registered firms.

    Our leveraged loan sample includes all US leveraged loans from LCD from January 2005 through April

2015. Unlike the speculative grade debt sample, the leveraged loan sample consists of all loans found in

LCD, including those that do not have a rating. This allows for a more accurate comparison between cov-

lite loans and the full set of cov-heavy loans. In the first part of the section, we consider the decision to

issue a cov-lite loan instead of a cov-heavy loan. In the second part, we compare the liquidity of cov-lite

loans to the liquidity of cov-heavy loans.



6.1. The decision to issue a cov-lite loan instead of a cov-heavy loan

    Table 7 shows univariate tests of differences between cov-lite and cov-heavy loans. Cov-lite loans are

$310 million dollars larger, on average, than cov-heavy loans. Although some cov-heavy loans are large so

that mean deal size is around $548 million, the median deal size of $302 million is smaller than the median

deal size reported for bonds in Table 1. The maturity of cov-lite loans is about one year longer than the

maturity of cov-heavy loans. Consistent with the substitution hypothesis, 96% of cov-lite loans are rated,

while only 65% of cov-heavy loans are rated. In further support of the substitution hypothesis, we find that

90% of cov-lite loans trade on the secondary market compared to 44% of cov-heavy loans.

    Among traded loans, various indicators suggest that cov-lite loans are significantly more liquid. Time-

to-break, which is the time from loan launch to the time the loan starts trading (referred to as the “break

date” in industry parlance) is only 14 days for cov-lite loans compared to 20 days for cov-heavy loans. Cov-

heavy loans are more than twice as likely to break into trading at a price below 99 cents on one dollar of

principal. Because these instruments are floating rate and time-to-break is less than two months for 99% of

sample loans, a low break price cannot be caused by changes in LIBOR and is unlikely to be caused by a




                                                         30
change in borrower creditworthiness between loan launch and break date. Thus, a low break price is

consistent with a liquidity discount.

    We track secondary market loan trading volumes for loan participation mutual funds using the CRSP

Mutual Funds database. In the average month, loan participation funds trade 1.4% of a cov-lite loan’s

principal compared to 0.9% for cov-heavy loans. We observe at least one trade for 60% of all calendar

months for the average cov-lite loan compared to 41% for cov-heavy loans. Data from the LSTA/Thomson

Reuters Mark-to-Market Pricing Service suggest that cov-lite loans have lower bid-ask spreads and attract

more quotes from brokers.

    We note that having more loan participation funds holding shares of a cov-lite loan could reflect that

they prefer loans that are easily tradable, but it could also be that the presence of loan participation funds

in the lending syndicate causes the loan to be structured as cov-lite because such loans have lower

coordination costs (Becker and Ivashina (2017)). To account for this possibility, we collect the number of

loan participation funds that initially report holding shares in the loan when it breaks into secondary market

trading. We use this variable as a proxy for differences that may be due to coordination cost considerations.

The average cov-lite loan has five loan participation funds in the syndicate, compared to two funds for the

average cov-heavy loan.

    We also report differences in a variety of other loan and firm characteristics. Cov-lite loans are more

likely to be used in deals sponsored by private equity firms, especially the initial LBO financing, they are

less likely to include bank tranches such as revolvers or term loans A, and are more likely to include a

second lien facility and be structured as asset based loans, which tend to be heavily collateralized typically

by inventory and/or accounts receivable. Cov-lite loans are much less common among small firms, whether

measured by firms’ total assets or by LCD’s middle market indicator. Even for this revised sample that

includes unrated loans, cov-lite loans are more common among unregistered and deregistering firms and

cov-lite issuers are older. Consistent with asset based lending practices, cov-lite loans are issued by firms

with higher current ratios, but these firms also have higher pre-existing leverage and lower property, plant

and equipment than cov-heavy issuers.



                                                         31
    In Table 8, we investigate the role of SEC registration for the decision to issue a cov-lite loan instead

of a cov-heavy loan. With the legal status hypothesis, firms issue cov-lite loans as substitutes for bonds to

avoid SEC registration. In contrast, cov-heavy loans are not substitutes for bonds, and firms do not issue

them to avoid SEC registration that would occur if they issued bonds. Columns (1) through (3) focus on

firms that are registered with the SEC at the time of loan issuance and assesses whether cov-lite issuers are

more likely to subsequently deregister. The results show that they are. Average marginal effects for cov-

lite loans are positive and statistically significant throughout, with the vast majority of the additional

deregistrations taking place during the first year after loan issuance. The average marginal effect of cov-

lite issuance on being deregistered after three years is a 5.8 percentage point increase in the probability of

being deregistered after three years, compared to a 10.8% baseline probability. Note that these

deregistrations are voluntary deregistrations. Firms that disappear due to bankruptcy or a merger are not

coded as deregistrations. Larger deals with longer maturities are marginally less likely to result in

deregistration, while sponsored deals, and particularly LBOs are more likely to result in deregistration.

Table 8 also includes an interaction between the LBO indicator and the cov-lite indicator to allow for the

possibility that deregistration following cov-lite issuance might be driven by LBOs. We do not find any

evidence in favor of this explanation.

    An important result in Table 8 is that bond refinancings are positively associated with deregistration. If

firms were to substitute loans for bonds to benefit from bank monitoring, they would use cov-heavy loans

to refinance bonds. Instead, in column (4) we see that they are more likely to use a cov-lite loan for a bond

refinancing. Refinancing a bond with a cov-lite loan is especially advantageous for a firm that plans to

deregister since the major difference between a cov-lite loan and a bond is that the bond requires SEC

registration and the loan does not, so having an outstanding bond would be an obstacle to deregistering but

an outstanding loan would not be. We see that firms that use a cov-lite loan to refinance a bond are more

likely to deregister immediately.

    Column (4) of Table 8 reports average marginal effects from a probit regression of cov-lite issuance on

an unregistered firm indicator, a deregistering firm indicator, and control variables. Due to the lack of cov-



                                                         32
lite issuance during the GFC, perfect predictability precludes the use of time fixed effects in a probit

regression. 10 To remedy this issue, we calculate the prevailing percentage of cov-lite loans at the time of

loan issuance, which corresponds to the percentage of loans issued over the past 60 days that are cov-lite

loans. This variable very strongly predicts cov-lite issuance, which is supportive of the Diamond, Hu, and

Rajan (2019) model. At the margin, a 1% increase in the prevailing percentage of cov-lite loans is associated

with a 0.7% increase in the probability that the current loan is cov-lite. We also include the net percentage

of senior loan officers that report a tightening of credit standards in the previous quarterly Fed loan officer

survey, although this variable does not capture any additional information beyond that contained in

prevailing cov-lite issuance. Column (4) of Table 8 shows that both unregistered and deregistering firms

are more likely to take out cov-lite loans than cov-heavy loans. On average, being unregistered increases

the probability of cov-lite issuance by 2.6 percentage points and being a deregistering firm increases the

probability of cov-lite issuance by 5.7 percentage points relative to a baseline probability of 17.7%.

Findings for control variables remain similar to those noted in Table 7, except that the sign on second lien

facilities turns negative, likely because 95% of second lien facilities accompanied by a cov-lite loan are

sponsored by a private equity firm. Consistent with the legal status hypothesis, when firms use a loan to

refinance a bond, this loan is 4.3 percentage points more likely to be cov-lite.



6.2. Comparison of the liquidity of cov-lite loans and of cov-heavy loans

     We now discuss the liquidity of cov-lite loans compared to cov-heavy loans. In Table 9, we ask whether

cov-lite loans are more likely to be traded on the secondary loan market. We consider a loan to be traded if

LCD reports a break price. Regardless of whether we consider all firms, only rated firms, or only registered

firms with all financial data available in Compustat or Capital IQ, we find that cov-lite loans are

significantly more likely to be traded. Using all loans, cov-lite loans are associated with a 15.9 percentage

point increase in the probability of trading on the secondary market compared to a baseline probability of


10
  This problem does not apply to the multinomial logit in Table 3 since we do observe both bond issuances and cov-
heavy issuances during the GFC.



                                                           33
52%. The marginal effects in column (2) suggest that cov-lite loans are as likely to trade for registered firms

as they are for unregistered firms since the sum of the effects for registered plus the interaction of registered

with cov-lite is indistinguishable from zero (Wald test p-value for probit coefficients of 0.256). The negative

effect for registered firms suggests that cov-heavy loans of registered firms are even less likely to trade than

cov-heavy loans of unregistered firms.

    Next, we ask whether cov-lite loans break into secondary market trading more quickly. In Table 10, the

dependent variable is time-to-break. As Table 10 shows, the average cov-lite loan breaks into trading one

day earlier. This difference is significant although the economic magnitude is smaller than in the univariate

tests reported in Table 7. In an unreported regression, we find that the reason appears to be the addition of

year fixed effects, without which the difference is five days. Hence, time-to-break has become faster for all

loans, but is especially fast for cov-lite loans. Table 10 reveals an interesting difference between cov-lite

loans of registered issuers and those of unregistered issuers. Compared to cov-heavy loans, time-to-break

is two days faster for cov-lite loans of unregistered issuers, but not faster for cov-lite loans of registered

issuers. This finding appears consistent with theories pointing to a lower adverse selection problem of cov-

lite loans compared to cov-heavy loans (Ayotte and Bolton (2011), Parlour and Plantin (2008)) as any

potential information advantage of the initial lenders may be greater for unregistered issuers.

    In Table 11, we examine break prices reported by LCD. The break price represents the first price at

which the loan starts trading in the secondary market. As discussed earlier, break prices can be used as a

measure of liquidity so long as the instrument is floating rate and differences in break prices are not due to

changes in creditworthiness before the loan breaks into trading. Table 11 shows that cov-lite loans break

into trading at a price that is 0.24 cents higher per dollar of principal than cov-heavy loans. To further

alleviate concerns about changes in creditworthiness, in an unreported regression, we exclude the 8% of

loans with time-to-break of more than 30 days. We continue to find a difference of 0.23 cents.

    Columns (6) through (10) report marginal effects from probit regressions of whether or not a loan

breaks into trading below a price of 99 cents, which represents the 10th percentile of the break price

distribution. Cov-lite loans are 8.2% less likely to have a low break price than cov-heavy loans. The



                                                           34
interactions of the cov-lite loan indicator with the registered indicator again suggest that the liquidity

advantage of cov-lite loans over cov-heavy loans is stronger for unregistered issuers than for registered

issuers, although the difference in break price between the two types of loans for registered issuers is still

significant.

    Tables 8 through 10 only assess whether cov-lite loans are more liquid immediately after loan

origination, but do not make it possible to make statements about liquidity over the entire life of the loan.

In Table 12, we use data from the CRSP Mutual Funds database to test whether covenant-lite loans trade

more frequently than covenant-heavy loans. Data availability starts in June 30, 2010 and our download

tracks loan trading until August 31, 2016. Loans originated prior to June 30, 2010 are excluded from this

analysis.

    We find that cov-lite loans are indeed traded more frequently. In Panel A, we calculate trading volume

as the monthly absolute change in the holdings of principal each loan participation fund reports for a given

loan. The average monthly percentage of total principal traded among loan participation funds is 0.3%

higher for cov-lite loans than for cov-heavy loans, a large difference compared to the sample mean of 1.1%.

We also find that there are 5% more months in which loan participation funds report at least one trade for

a cov-lite loan than at least one trade for a cov-heavy loan. The average loan has at least one trade in 49%

of all months between the first and last month that CRSP reports at least one fund holding shares in the

loan. As before, the liquidity advantage appears stronger for cov-lite loans of unregistered firms. The

interaction between the cov-lite indicator and the registered firm indicator is negative and significant both

in columns (2) and (7). In a Wald test for column (2), the liquidity advantage of cov-lite loans continues to

be strongly significant even among registered issuers with a p-value of 0.000.

    One problem with tracking trades using the absolute change is that we double count trades in which a

loan participation fund acts as buyer and another fund acts as seller. To remedy this issue, Panel B only

looks at purchases of principal as evidenced by an increase in the loan shares held. We continue to find that

cov-lite loans are more liquid, and the difference continues to be larger for unregistered issuers.




                                                         35
    In our last test, we use quote data from the Thomson Reuters/LSTA Mark-to-market Pricing Service to

examine loan liquidity. Because these data are available to us starting in January 2010, the sample includes

only those loans that were originated between January 2010 and April 2015. Panel A uses quoted bid-ask

spreads as a measure of liquidity and Panel B uses the number of brokers providing quotes. One problem

with measuring secondary market quotes for loans is that distressed loans have dramatically wider bid-ask

spreads than non-distressed loans. There are also fewer brokers willing to provide quotes for such loans.

Therefore, we control for the average bid-ask midpoint during the time period that the regression examines

in each regression in Table 13. In addition, in columns (5) through (8), we exclude distressed loans, defined

as loans with an average bid-ask midpoint below 90 cents per one dollar of principal. Panel A shows that

covenant-lite loans have tighter bid-ask spreads than covenant-heavy loans. During the first three months

of a loan’s life, cov-lite loans of unregistered issuers have a four basis points tighter spread than cov-heavy

loans of such issuers. The sample average spread is 74 basis points. By contrast, for registered issuers the

bid-ask spreads of cov-lite loans and cov-heavy loans do not differ significantly, consistent with market

makers having fewer concerns about adverse selection when SEC filings provide public information about

the firm. Importantly, while the number of loan participation funds in the syndicate is positively associated

with cov-lite issuance (see Table 7), it is not associated with tighter bid-ask spreads immediately after loan

origination. This result suggests that the coordination cost motive of cov-lite issuance and liquidity effects

are distinct from one another.

    The longer we follow a loan, the more likely it is that the borrower’s creditworthiness will change, so

that an increasing fraction of loans will be priced as distressed. When including distressed loans, the

liquidity advantage for cov-lite loans disappears after the first year. However, this is due to cov-lite loans

facing a greater likelihood of being priced as distressed at some point during the loan’s life. 11 Once we


11
   Cov-heavy loans are more likely to be repriced following adverse developments for the borrower, which means that
they are also more likely to trade close to par after such developments. Due to the lack of financial maintenance
covenants, it is much more difficult for lenders to initiate renegotiation of cov-lite loans when the borrower’s
performance deteriorates. By contrast, a cov-heavy loan can be renegotiated to allow for an increase in the interest
rate. If the interest rate is increased so that it again reflects the borrower’s current creditworthiness, then the price of
the loan should increase such that it again approaches one dollar per dollar of principal.



                                                                 36
exclude distressed loans, cov-lite loans have consistently lower bid-ask spreads than cov-heavy loans

throughout years 2 and 3 as well.

     In Panel B, we analyze the number of quotes as a measure of market depth. Again, cov-lite loans attract

more brokers than cov-heavy loans. Compared to a cov-heavy loan, a cov-lite loan has about a 20%

probability of attracting a quote by one additional broker. The sample median loan has quotes from two

brokers, with an average of 2.5. However, the pattern for the number of quotes does not perfectly match the

pattern for bid-ask spreads. During the first year, unregistered issuers have more quotes for their cov-lite

loans than their cov-heavy loans. However, in years 2 and 3, the difference is driven by registered issuers,

which in general are covered by more brokers. Yet this pattern in market depth does not seem to affect the

actual quotes provided as shown in Panel A.

     Overall, the results in this section are consistent with both the legal status and the substitution

hypotheses introduced in Section 2. Unregistered issuers and those about to deregister are more likely to

use cov-lite loans conditional on the credit rating of the issuer. Cov-lite loans are better substitutes for bonds

than cov-heavy loans in that they are much more likely to be rated, much more likely to be traded on the

secondary market, and all of our secondary market liquidity measures indicate that traded cov-lite loans are

more liquid than traded cov-heavy loans. In addition, the fact that much of the liquidity difference is driven

by unregistered issuers about whom information is much harder to obtain is consistent with an adverse

selection explanation for the difference in liquidity between cov-lite loans and cov-heavy loans.



7.       Conclusion

     Cov-lite loans share an important characteristic with bonds that other loans do not have in that they

include incurrence covenants, but no maintenance covenants. In this paper, we examine whether firms use

cov-lite loans as substitutes for bonds to avoid costs associated with having SEC registered securities.

Compared to bond issuers as well as cov-heavy loan issuers, cov-lite loan issuers are less likely to be




                                                           37
registered with the SEC and, if currently registered, much more likely to subsequently deregister. Firms

that refinance a bond with a loan do so using a cov-lite loan.

    Though comparisons of credit spreads are difficult when issuers include private firms, we find that cov-

lite loans have lower credit spreads than bonds and, for private issuers, lower credit spreads than cov-heavy

loans. This evidence on spreads is supportive of our hypotheses. The bond/cov-lite spread comparison is

consistent with the substitution hypothesis. The cov-lite/cov-heavy comparison is supportive of the legal

status hypothesis since, if the comparison went the other way, cov-heavy loans would likely be more

attractive for some firms seeking to avoid registration than cov-lite loans. One way to interpret the

bond/cov-lite comparison is that institutional investors appear to place a higher value on the fact that loans

are secured than on the benefits of securities laws that accrue to bond holders. In fact, indirect evidence

suggests that the spread difference can be wholly explained by the fact that cov-lite loans are secured and

bonds are not. The evidence also suggests that investors do not value highly the control rights associated

with cov-heavy loans, consistent with coordination costs rendering these control rights ineffective and/or

institutional investors benefitting from a debt structure in which a bank still holds another loan that does

have maintenance covenants.

    We find that cov-lite loans are similarly tradeable compared to bonds. Like bonds, cov-lite loans are

almost always rated. Quoted bid-ask spreads for cov-lite loans, but not cov-heavy loans, are similar to those

reported in the literature for bonds. Various additional measures of secondary market liquidity suggest that

cov-lite loans are significantly more liquid than cov-heavy bonds. The liquidity advantage of cov-lite loans

is larger for unregistered issuers, consistent with financial covenants creating an adverse selection problem

in secondary market trading.

    Taken together, our results are consistent with the hypothesis that legal status is an important factor in

the decision to borrow by entering a cov-lite loan rather than a bond and that it is an important driver for

the growth in cov-lite loans among leveraged borrowers. They are also consistent with the hypothesis that

bonds and cov-lite loans are priced and trade in similar ways, so that they are substitutes for some investors.




                                                          38
Appendix A. Variable definitions
 Variable                 Definition                                     Source
 Deal characteristics (loans and bonds)
 Deal size                Total deal amount combining all tranches of a LCD, Mergent FISD, Bureau
                          deal, expressed in 2014 US dollars            of Labor Statistics

 Maturity                 Maturity of the debt expressed in years        LCD, Mergent FISD

 Senior                   Indicator equals one if the debt is senior, zero LCD, Mergent FISD
                          otherwise

 Rating                   Loans: First lien bank loan rating from S&P. LCD, Mergent FISD
                          Moody’s rating substituted where not
                          available. Corporate issuer rating substituted if
                          no first lien rating available.
                          Bonds: At-issue corporate issuer rating from
                          S&P. Moody’s rating substituted if
                          unavailable. Fitch rating substituted if neither
                          S&P nor Moody’s available.
                          Rating values: 0 indicates no rating. 1 indicates
                          a rating of BBB- or better. 2, 3, 4, etc. indicate
                          ratings of BB+, BB, BB-, etc. Ratings of CCC+
                          or worse have a value of 8.

 Yield spread             Loans: Interest rate spread over LIBOR for the LCD, Mergent FISD, St.
                          first lien institutional tranche.                Louis FRED
                          Bonds: Bond yield minus linearly interpolated
                          cost to swap fixed rate interest payment into 3-
                          month LIBOR.

 Coupon spread            Loans: Interest rate spread over LIBOR for the LCD, Mergent FISD, St.
                          first lien institutional tranche.              Louis FRED
                          Bonds: Bond coupon rate minus linearly
                          interpolated cost to swap fixed rate interest
                          payment into 3-month LIBOR.

 Loan characteristics (not available for/applicable to bonds)
 Rated                    Indicator equals one if the issuer has a rating, LCD
                          zero otherwise

 Traded on secondary Indicator equals one if the issue has a break LCD
 market              price

 Time-to-break            Days elapsed between break date and loan LCD
                          launch date

 Break price              Price at which loan breaks into trading on the LCD
                          secondary loan market




                                                       39
Break below 99         Indicator equals one if the break price is less LCD
                       than 99 cents on the dollar, zero otherwise

Initial # LP Funds     Number of loan participation funds that report CRSP Mutual Funds
                       holding shares of a loan within one month of database
                       the break date. Set to zero if no loan
                       participation funds report holding shares.

Average % principal Average monthly percentage of the loan’s CRSP Mutual Funds
traded              principal traded by loan participation mutual database
                    funds.

% months with trade    Percentage of months in which at least one loan CRSP Mutual Funds
                       participation mutual fund reports a change in database
                       the number of loan shares it holds

Bid-ask spread         Average over a given period of the difference Thomson Reuters/LSTA
                       between the secondary market ask quote and Mark-to-Market pricing
                       bid quote for a loan divided by the ask quote service
                       and multiplied by 100

Number of quotes       Average over a given period of the number of Thomson Reuters/LSTA
                       brokers providing quotes for a loan in the Mark-to-Market pricing
                       secondary market                             service

Sponsored              Indicator equals one if the loan is sponsored by LCD
                       a private equity firm. Includes initial LBO
                       loans and refinancings.

LBO                    Indicator equals one if the purpose of the loan LCD
                       is to finance a leveraged buyout. LBO loans are
                       a subset of sponsored loans.

Bond refinancing       Indicator equals one if the purpose of the loan LCD
                       is to refinance a bond.

Revolver               Indicator equals one if the loan contains a LCD
                       revolving line of credit.

Term loan A            Indicator equals one if the loan contains a term LCD
                       loan A.

Second lien facility   Indicator equals one if the loan contains a LCD
                       second lien facility

Asset based loan       Indicator equals one if the loan is flagged as an LCD
                       asset based loan by LCD.

Middle market          Indicator equals one if LCD identifies the loan LCD
                       as a middle market loan. LCD states that loans




                                                   40
                          are considered part of the middle market if the
                          issuer has less than $50 million in EBITDA.

 Firm characteristics
 Unregistered firm        No asset data available for the fiscal year prior Compustat, Capital IQ
                          to debt issuance in either Compustat or Capital
                          IQ. In the case of bond issuance, asset data also
                          cannot be available three years prior to the last
                          fiscal year since availability of such data is
                          likely to be caused by the registration of the
                          bonds themselves.

 Deregistering firm       Asset data is available for the fiscal year prior Compustat, Capital IQ
                          to debt issuance, but ceases to be available
                          within three years after debt issuance.

 Firm age                 Year of debt issuance minus year the firm was Capital IQ, Google searches
                          founded. In the case of new legal entities
                          created as a result of a spin-off, asset sale, or
                          merger, the year the predecessor was founded
                          is used.

 Assets                   Total book assets in $ millions expressed in Compustat, Capital IQ,
                          2014 US dollars.                             Bureau of Labor Statistics

 Leverage                 Long-term debt plus debt in current liabilities Compustat, Capital IQ
                          divided by total assets.

 Current ratio            Current assets divided by current liabilities.    Compustat, Capital IQ

 Tangibility              Net property, plant and equipment divided by Compustat, Capital IQ
                          total assets.


The following variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile: maturity, leverage, current ratio,
coverage ratio, and tangibility.




                                                        41
References
Ayotte, Kenneth, and Patrick Bolton, 2011, Covenant lite lending, liquidity, and standardization of financial
        contracts, in: Research Handbook on the Economics of Property Law, Kenneth Ayotte and Henry
        E. Smith (eds.), Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK.

Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2014, Cyclicality of credit supply: Firm level evidence, Journal of
       Monetary Economics 62, 76-93.

Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2017, Covenant-light contracts and creditor coordination, unpublished
        working paper.

Benmelech, Efraim, Nitish Kumar, and Raghuram Rajan, 2020, The decline of secured debt, unpublished
      working paper.

Berlin, Mitchell, and Jan Loeys, 1988, Bond covenants and delegated monitoring, Journal of Finance 43,
        397-412.

Berlin, Mitchell, and Loretta J. Mester, 1992, Debt covenants and renegotiation, Journal of Financial
        Intermediation 2, 95-235.

Berlin, Mitchell, Gregory Nini, and Edison G. Yu, 2020, Concentration of control rights in leveraged loan
        syndicates,Journal of Financial Economics 137, 24-271.

Billett, Matthew T., Redouane Elkamhi, Latchezar Popov, and Raunaq S. Pungaliya, 2016. Bank skin in
         the game and loan contract design: Evidence from covenant-lite loans, Journal of Financial and
         Quantitative Analysis 51, 839-873.

Billett, Matthew T., Tao-Hsien Dolly King, and David C. Mauer, 2007, Growth opportunities and the choice
         of leverage, debt maturity, and covenants, Journal of Finance 62, 697-730.

Bolton, Patrick, and Xavier Freixas, 2000, Equity, bonds, and bank debt: Capital structure and financial
        market equilibrium under asymmetric information, Journal of Political Economy 108, 324-351.

Chava, Sudheer, and Michael Roberts, 2008. How does financing impact investment? The role of debt
       covenants, Journal of Finance 63, 2085 - 2121.

Chemmanur, Thomas J., and Paolo Fulghieri, 1994, Reputation, renegotiation, and the choice between bank
     loans and publicly traded debt, Review of Financial Studies 7, 475-506.

Chen, Long, David A. Lesmond, and Jason Wei, 2007, Corporate yield spreads and bond liquidity, Journal
       of Finance 62, 119-149.

Chernenko, Sergey, Isil Erel, and Robert Prilmeier, 2018, Nonbank lending, unpublished working paper.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary B. Gorton, Bengt R. Holmstrom, 2019, The information view of financial crises,Annual
       Review of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

De Fontenay, Elisabeth, 2014, Do the securities laws matter? The rise of the leveraged loan market, Journal
       of Corporation Law 39, 725-768.




                                                         42
Denis, David J., and Vassil T. Mihov, The choice among bank debt, non-bank private debt and public debt:
        evidence from new corporate borrowings, Journal of Financial Economics 70, 3-28.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review of Economic
      Studies 51, 393-414.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans and directly
      placed debt, Journal of Political Economy 99, 689-721.

Diamond, Douglas W., Hunzhi Hu, and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2019, Pledgeability, industry liquidity, and
      financing cycles, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Doidge, Craig, Andrew G. Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2013, The US left behind? Financial globalization
       and the rise of IPOs outside the US, Journal of Financial Economics 110, 546-573.

Doidge, Craig, Andrew G. Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2017, The U.S. listing gap, Journal of Financial
       Economics 123, 464-487.

Erel, Isil, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, Michael S. Weisbach, 2012, Macroeconomic conditions and capital
         raising, Review of Financial Studies 25, 341-376.

Fama, Eugene, 1985, What’s different about banks?, Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 29-39.

Fenn, George W., 2000, Speed of issuance and adequacy of disclosure in the 144A high-yield debt market,
       Journal of Financial Economics 56, 383-405.

Gao, Xiaohui, Jay R. Ritter, and Zhongyan Zhu, 2013. Where have all the IPOs gone?, Journal of Financial
       and Quantitative Analysis 48, 1663-1692.

Glushkov, Denys, Ajay Khorana, P. Raghavendra Rau, and Jingxuan Zhang, 2018, Why do firms go public
       through debt instead of equity?, Critical Finance Review 7, 85-110.

Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi, 1990, Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation, Journal of
        Finance 45, pp. 49-71.

Huang, Rongbing, and Gabriel G. Ramirez, 2010. Speed of issuance, lender specialization, and the rise of
       the 144A debt market, Financial Management 39, 643-673.

IMF, 2020, Global financial stability report, April.

Ivashina, Victoria, and Zheng Sun, 2011, Institutional demand pressure and the cost of corporate loans,
        Journal of Financial Economics 99, 500-522.

Murfin, Justin, 2012, The supply-side determinants of loan contract strictness, Journal of Finance 67, 1565-
        1601.

Nadauld, Taylor D., and Michael S. Weisbach, 2012, Did securitization affect the cost of corporate debt?
       Journal of Financial Economics 105, 332-352.

Nini, Greg, David C. Smith, and Amir Sufi, 2012, Creditor control rights, corporate governance, and firm
        value, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1713-1761.



                                                        43
Ou, Sharon, Sumair Irfan, Yang Liu, Joyce Jiang, and Kumar Kanthan, 2018, Annual Default Study:
       Corporate Default and Recovery Rates, 1920-2017, Moody's Investors Service Data Report.

Parlour, Christine, and Guillaume Plantin, 2008, Loan sales and relationship banking, Journal of Finance
        63, 1291-1314.

Prilmeier, Robert, 2017, Why do loans contain covenants? Evidence from lending relationships, Journal of
        Financial Economics 123, 558-579.

Rajan, Raghuram, 1992, Insiders and outsiders: The choice between informed and arm’s-length debt,
       Journal of Finance 47, 1367-1400.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Andrew Winton, 1995, Covenants and collateral as incentives to monitor, Journal
        of Finance 60, 1113-1146.

Rauh, Joshua D., and Amir Sufi, 2010, Capital structure and debt structure, Review of Financial Studies 23,
        4242-4280.

Roberts, Michael, 2015, The role of dynamic renegotiation and asymmetric information in financial
        contracting, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 61-81.

Roberts, Michael, and Amir Sufi, 2009, Renegotiation of financial contracts: Evidence from the
        introduction of bank loan ratings, Journal of Finance 64, 1657-1695.

Schwert, Michael, 2019, Does borrowing from banks cost more than borrowing from the market?, Journal
       of Finance, forthcoming.

Saveendra, Daniel, 2018. Syndicate size and the choice of covenants in debt contracts, Accounting Review,
       forthcoming.




                                                        44
      400
      300
  $ billion
   200100
      0




              2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                    Public bonds                    Rule 144a bonds
                                    Cov-lite loans                  Cov-heavy loans


Figure 1: Total new money raised by speculative grade borrowers
This figure shows the total amount of new money raised each year by non-financial, non-utility speculative
grade US issuers on the US leveraged loan market and the US public and Rule 144a bond markets. Loan
data are from Capital IQ LCD and bond data are from Mergent FISD. A loan is defined as covenant-lite if
it contains a covenant-lite facility, even if other facilities are present. Because 30% of borrowers on the
leveraged loan market are unrated, issue volume for loans includes unrated issuers. The average loan by an
unrated issuer has a spread of 378 basis points (the median is 350 basis points), comparable to the average
loan of a B+ rated issuer (the mean spread is 387 basis points and the median is 375 basis points). Data for
2015 end on April 30, 2015 and the sample is limited to deals that LCD reported as completed as of May
12, 2015.
Table 1: Univariate differences between borrowers of covenant-lite loans and bond issuers

This table shows summary statistics for covenant-lite loans, public bonds, and Rule 144a bonds, respectively, as well as the results from t-tests for
differences between covenant-lite loans and the two types of bonds. The covenant-lite sample includes covenant-lite loans issued by US issuers on
the US leveraged loan market from January 1, 2005 through April 30, 2015. Loan data are from Capital IQ LCD, and the sample is limited to deals
that LCD reported as completed as of May 12, 2015. A loan is defined as covenant-lite if it contains a covenant-lite facility, even if other facilities
are present. The bond sample includes bonds issued by US corporate issuers from January 1, 2005 through April 30, 2015, taken from Mergent
FISD. The bond sample excludes private placements, foreign currency bonds, global offerings, convertible, putable, and exchangeable bonds.
Because the sample contains almost no covenant-lite loans rated better than BB+, to keep the two samples comparable only debt instruments rated
BB+ or worse from either Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s or Fitch are included. Maturity and all financial ratios have been winsorized at the 1% and
99% levels. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                                 Panel A: Covenant-lite loans vs. public bonds


                                         Covenant-lite                                    Public bond
                            Obs.          Mean              Median             Obs.        Mean             Median          Difference         Difference
                                         (St.dev.)                                        (St.dev.)                           in means         in medians
                                                                                                                            (t-statistic)      (z-statistic)
 Deal size (million)         920         839.443            521.933            2044       529.616           400.296         309.826***         121.636***
                                        (1081.679)                                       (450.679)                               (8.37)             (8.61)
 Maturity                    920           6.257             6.562             2044         7.608            7.526           -1.350***          -0.964***
                                          (0.856)                                          (1.807)                             (-27.60)           (-23.40)
 Secured                     495           0.992             1.000             2044         0.161            0.000            0.830***           1.000***
                                          (0.090)                                          (0.368)                              (91.44)            (35.43)
 Senior                      638           1.000             1.000             2044         0.869            1.000            0.131***           0.000***
                                          (0.000)                                          (0.337)                              (17.52)             (9.62)
 Rating                      920           5.143             5.000             2044         5.541            6.000           -0.398***          -1.000***
                                          (1.201)                                          (1.915)                              (-6.86)            (-7.85)
 Firm age                    913          45.055             30.000            2034        47.565           31.000              -2.511             -1.000
                                         (41.981)                                         (40.748)                              (-1.51)            (-1.50)
 Assets (million)            454        13796.688          2110.098            1992      9432.945          2892.355           4363.743        -782.258***
                                       (120224.618)                                     (48106.525)                              (0.76)            (-4.98)
 Leverage                    454           0.481             0.476             1991         0.533            0.495           -0.052***          -0.020***
                                          (0.302)                                          (0.275)                              (-3.33)            (-3.29)



                                                                          46
Current ratio         450       1.958          1.594          1970       1.826          1.488       0.132*         0.106***
                               (1.373)                                  (1.512)                     (1.81)           (3.62)
Profitability         450       0.124          0.111          1971       0.122          0.114        0.002          -0.003
                               (0.079)                                  (0.078)                     (0.43)          (-0.58)
Tangibility           453       0.241          0.157          1980       0.381          0.351     -0.140***       -0.195***
                               (0.219)                                  (0.275)                    (-11.62)         (-9.83)
Total observations    2964


                                   Panel B: Covenant-lite loans vs. Rule 144a bonds


                              Covenant-lite                           Rule 144a bond
                      Obs.     Mean           Median          Obs.      Mean           Median     Difference      Difference
                              (St.dev.)                                (St.dev.)                    in means      in medians
                                                                                                  (t-statistic)   (z-statistic)
Deal size (million)   920      839.443        521.933         2369      483.904        362.087    355.539***      159.845***
                              (1081.679)                               (416.275)                       (9.69)         (11.28)
Maturity              920        6.257         6.562          2369        7.678         8.016      -1.421***       -1.455***
                                (0.856)                                  (1.698)                     (-31.66)        (-26.10)
Secured               495        0.992         1.000          2369        0.212         0.000       0.780***        1.000***
                                (0.090)                                  (0.409)                      (83.65)         (33.13)
Senior                638        1.000         1.000          2369        0.907         1.000       0.093***        0.000***
                                (0.000)                                  (0.291)                      (15.61)          (8.01)
Rating                920        5.143         5.000          2369        5.808         6.000      -0.664***       -1.000***
                                (1.201)                                  (1.818)                     (-12.20)        (-12.43)
Firm age              913       45.055         30.000         2332       45.822         29.000        -0.767           1.000
                               (41.981)                                 (41.858)                      (-0.47)          (0.35)
Assets (million)      454     13796.688       2110.098        1990     8393.480        2379.143     5403.207      -269.046**
                             (120224.618)                             (45871.131)                      (0.94)         (-2.11)
Leverage              454        0.481         0.476          1989        0.504         0.470         -0.022           0.006
                                (0.302)                                  (0.302)                      (-1.43)         (-0.96)
Current ratio         450        1.958         1.594          1970        1.811         1.485        0.147**        0.109***
                                (1.373)                                  (1.482)                       (2.02)          (3.65)
Profitability         450        0.124         0.111          1966        0.126         0.118         -0.002         -0.007*
                                (0.079)                                  (0.083)                      (-0.44)         (-1.74)



                                                         47
Tangibility          453     0.241    0.157        1982    0.363    0.317   -0.122***   -0.160***
                            (0.219)                       (0.274)            (-10.19)     (-8.59)
Total observations   3289




                                              48
Table 2: Issuer SEC registration status

This table presents issuer SEC registration status for the four types of debt instruments in the sample. Rule
144A bonds are broken out into those never exchanged for another issue and those subsequently exchanged
for another bond, a proxy for the Rule 144a bond being replaced by an SEC registered public bond. An
issuer is considered registered with the SEC if data on total assets at the end of the fiscal year prior to debt
issuance is available in Compustat or in Capital IQ. If assets are available only in Capital IQ, the filing
source reported by Capital IQ must be an SEC filing. In the case of bonds, the issuance of the bond itself
may be the reason for SEC registration. The registration statement generally reports financial information
for the past two years, and several months may pass between filing the registration statement and issuing
the bond. Therefore, newly registered bond issuers with asset data available as of the past fiscal year, but
no asset data available as of three years prior to the past fiscal year and no IPO reported in SDC during
these three years are counted as unregistered prior to bond issuance. Among registered issuers, those that
continue to file financial statements three years after debt issuance are considered to be continuously
registered, while registered issuers that stop filing financial statements within three years after debt issuance
are counted as deregistering. If deregistration is due to a bankruptcy or merger, we do not treat the firm as
deregistered. The sample period ranges from January 1, 2005 through April 30, 2015. Covenant-lite loans
are taken from LCD and bonds are taken from Mergent FISD.


                               Public bond            Rule 144a bond               Cov-lite       Cov-heavy
                                                   Never      Subsequently
                                                exchanged      exchanged
 Unregistered                      315              379            281               467             1,023
                                (15.41%)         (42.73%)       (18.96%)          (50.76%)         (42.17%)

 Registered                       1,729             508             1,201            453             1,403
                                (84.59%)         (57.27%)         (81.04%)        (49.24%)         (57.83%)

 - thereof:
 Continuously registered          1,675             473             1,165            369             1,263
                                (96.88%)         (93.11%)         (97.00%)        (81.46%)         (90.02%)

 Deregistering                      54               35              36              84              140
                                 (3.12%)          (6.89%)         (3.00%)         (18.54%)         (9.98%)

 Total observations               2,044             887             1,482            920             2,426




                                                       49
Table 3: Multinomial logit regressions for the choice between different instrument types
depending on SEC registration status

This table presents results from multinomial logit regressions modeling the choice between public bonds,
Rule 144a bonds, Rule 144a bonds that end up being exchanged, Rule 144a bonds that are never exchanged,
covenant-lite loans, and covenant-heavy loans. Public bonds act as the base group. The sample period
ranges from January 1, 2005 through April 30, 2015. A rating worse than CCC+ perfectly predicts that the
issued instrument is not covenant-lite, thus instruments rated CCC+ or worse are aggregated into one
category. Covenant-lite loans are taken from LCD and bonds are taken from Mergent FISD. Ratings are
denoted by indicator variables, with a BB+ rating acting as the base group in the regressions. Industry fixed
effects are based on the LCD industry classification. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm and
time. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                           Exchanged          Never      Cov-lite    Cov-heavy
                                           Rule 144a        exchanged
                                                            Rule 144a
                                                (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)
           Unregistered                      1.26***         4.34***     7.75***       6.75***
                                              (3.05)         (10.42)      (8.49)        (9.36)

           Deregistering                        0.94         2.20***    11.27***       4.35***
                                              (-0.28)         (2.85)     (7.91)         (5.74)

           Ln(Firm age)                         0.97           0.97      0.84**        0.80***
                                              (-0.82)        (-0.85)     (-2.52)        (-4.18)

           Ln(Maturity)                      5.11***           0.81      0.01***       0.00***
                                              (5.65)         (-0.81)     (-7.90)       (-13.72)

           Ln(Deal size)                     0.79***           0.94      2.07***       1.40***
                                              (-3.87)        (-0.94)      (4.97)        (3.00)

           BB                                  1.17           1.02         1.54          1.33
                                              (0.83)         (0.05)       (0.91)        (1.03)

           BB-                               1.49***          1.42       3.46***       2.01***
                                              (3.30)         (0.83)       (4.40)        (3.78)

           B+                                1.42***          1.17       3.89***         1.53
                                              (2.94)         (0.43)       (4.01)        (1.53)

           B                                  1.55**          1.20       2.73***         0.73
                                              (2.26)         (0.57)       (3.96)       (-1.19)

           B-                                1.67***          1.08       0.30***       0.07***
                                              (2.61)         (0.21)      (-5.68)        (-8.82)

           CCC+ or worse                     1.97***          1.23       0.02***       0.02***



                                                       50
                               (4.67)         (0.75)     (-9.79)   (-11.69)

Year effects                    Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes
Industry effects                Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes
Test unregistered (cov-lite) = unregistered (this instrument)
Chi2                          73.40***        5.29**                  1.86
p-value                         0.000          0.021                 0.173
Test deregistering (cov-lite) = deregistering (this instrument)
Chi2                          43.70***       22.44***              19.33***
p-value                         0.000          0.000                 0.000
Test unregistered (Never exchanged Rule 144a) = unregistered (this
instrument)
Chi2                         122.91***                   5.29**     4.81**
p-value                        0.000                      0.021      0.028
Test deregistering (Never exchanged Rule 144a) = deregistering (this
instrument)
Chi2                          12.21***                  22.44***    5.07**
p-value                         0.001                     0.000      0.024
Observations                    7578




                                        51
Table 4: Differences in spreads across debt instrument types

This table presents results from regressions of spreads on indicators of covenant-lite loans, covenant-heavy loans, and control variables
including firm financials. Junior debt is excluded from this analysis. For loans, this analysis only includes a loan’s first lien institutional
tranche. Debt instruments rated CCC+ or worse are excluded since there are only five cov-lite loans with such a rating. All regressions
include five debt instrument types: cov-lite loans, cov-heavy loans, public bonds, subsequently exchanged Rule 144a bonds, and Rule
144a bonds that were never exchanged. Public bonds to unregistered firms act as the base group. Loan spreads are expressed as spreads
over LIBOR. Columns (1) through (4) define bond spreads as the bond yield minus the linearly interpolated rate for swapping a fixed
rate interest rate into 3-month LIBOR. Columns (5) through (8) augment the usable sample by assuming that all bonds were issued at
par and calculating spreads for such bonds as the coupon rate minus the linearly interpolated rate for swapping a fixed rate interest rate
into 3-month LIBOR. Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) restrict the sample to registered issuers for whom financial data are available.
Covenant-lite loans are taken from LCD and bonds are taken from Mergent FISD. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm
and time levels. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.
                              Panel A: Accounting for exchanged Rule 144a vs. never exchanged Rule 144a


                                             Yield spreads                                              Coupon spreads
                           (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)              (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)
     Covenant lite     -91.169***     -71.894***      -62.479***   -75.593***      -132.233***   -112.190*** -115.257***      -125.625***
     loan                (-5.91)        (-4.68)         (-3.89)      (-4.55)          (-9.45)       (-7.78)        (-7.46)       (-8.19)

     Unregistered x                   -113.417**                                                  -54.829***
     cov-lite                           (-2.15)                                                     (-3.32)

     Covenant heavy    -75.073***     -70.568***     -67.416***    -83.880***      -119.058***   -112.926***   -121.666***    -135.532***
     loan                (-4.11)        (-3.84)        (-3.77)       (-4.28)          (-7.29)       (-6.82)       (-7.19)        (-7.48)

     Unregistered x                    -81.477                                                     -24.876
     cov-heavy                          (-1.56)                                                     (-1.51)

     Never exchanged    86.870***     75.939***      85.685***     81.757***        35.118***      25.839**     28.364***      28.583***
     Rule 144a            (6.74)        (5.56)         (6.34)        (6.08)           (3.71)        (2.57)        (2.71)         (2.82)

     Unregistered x                    -44.371                                                      11.523
     never exchanged                    (-0.75)                                                     (0.68)




                                                                      52
Exchanged         26.596**      25.216**     29.568***      23.919**       -7.479        -9.108        -9.769       -11.573*
Rule 144a          (2.33)        (2.20)        (2.95)        (2.41)        (-1.19)       (-1.37)       (-1.40)       (-1.65)

Unregistered x                   -58.654                                                 3.277
Exchanged                         (-1.15)                                                (0.21)

Unregistered     32.258***     112.382**                                 34.315***     54.352***
                   (5.91)        (2.11)                                    (5.86)        (3.52)

Ln(Firm age)      -4.940**      -4.750**       -2.003        0.846         -1.947        -1.672        2.052         5.487*
                   (-2.16)       (-2.02)       (-0.60)       (0.27)        (-0.79)       (-0.67)       (0.61)        (1.65)

Ln(Maturity)     -176.622***   -170.843***   -164.806***   -168.004***   -208.421***   -202.771***   -217.131***   -216.639***
                    (-7.50)       (-7.10)       (-6.19)       (-6.50)       (-9.33)       (-8.97)       (-8.74)       (-9.15)

Ln(Deal size)     -6.916**      -7.732***      -3.719        5.529        -9.094***    -10.089***      -5.282*      6.166**
                   (-2.53)        (-2.78)      (-1.23)       (1.60)         (-3.65)      (-4.03)        (-1.78)      (1.99)

Ln(Assets)                                                 -15.472***                                              -17.301***
                                                             (-3.97)                                                 (-4.66)

Leverage                                                   -33.029***                                               -25.265**
                                                             (-2.67)                                                  (-2.14)

Current ratio                                                -0.610                                                  -1.042
                                                             (-0.28)                                                 (-0.47)

Ln(1+Coverage                                               -8.602***                                               -9.926***
Ratio)
                                                             (-2.77)                                                 (-2.72)

Tangibility                                                  24.726                                                  20.576
                                                             (1.61)                                                  (1.37)

Constant         540.720***    526.946***    484.219***    585.636***    647.028***    633.312***    647.364***    738.805***
                   (9.17)        (8.73)        (6.79)        (7.23)        (11.26)       (10.82)       (9.56)        (9.60)

Rating effects      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

Year-quarter        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes



                                                              53
effects
Industry effects          Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Test cov-lite = cov-heavy
Chi2                    4.30**            0.02            0.24         0.64          2.73*          0.01          0.36          0.82
p-value                  0.038           0.880           0.626        0.425          0.098         0.934         0.550         0.366
Test unregistered cov-lite = unregistered cov-heavy
Chi2                                   18.08***                                                  15.70***
p-value                                  0.000                                                     0.000
Observations             4842            4842            2922         2922           5917          5917          3802          3802



                                                      Panel B: Pooling all Rule 144a bonds


                                           Yield spreads                                               Coupon spreads
                         (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)          (8)
Covenant lite       -100.024***     -77.257***      -68.826***      -81.976***    -135.975***   -114.452*** -117.782***     -128.211***
loan                   (-6.13)        (-4.75)         (-4.02)         (-4.66)        (-9.54)       (-7.80)        (-7.50)      (-8.21)

Unregistered x                      -112.293**                                                  -54.418***
cov-lite                              (-2.18)                                                     (-3.29)

Covenant heavy      -82.774***      -74.467***         -72.136***   -88.564***    -121.991***   -114.348***   -123.287***   -137.141***
loan                  (-4.37)         (-3.90)            (-3.87)      (-4.36)        (-7.39)       (-6.82)       (-7.22)       (-7.51)

Unregistered x                        -80.790                                                     -24.663
cov-heavy                              (-1.58)                                                     (-1.50)

Rule 144a            46.958***       40.156***         46.371***    41.395***        8.424        1.900         2.385         1.237
                       (4.20)          (3.72)            (4.83)       (4.35)         (1.35)       (0.32)        (0.38)        (0.20)

Unregistered x                        -35.224                                                     18.179
Rule 144a                              (-0.67)                                                    (1.62)

Unregistered         37.131***       111.797**                                     37.309***    54.215***
                       (7.18)          (2.14)                                        (6.53)       (3.50)

Ln(Firm age)          -4.887**        -4.592*           -1.802        0.935         -1.920        -1.602        2.117         5.454
                       (-2.09)         (-1.90)          (-0.53)       (0.29)        (-0.77)       (-0.63)       (0.62)        (1.62)


                                                                       54
Ln(Maturity)        -188.581***     -179.165***       -174.385***   -177.724***   -213.919***   -206.578***   -221.168***   -220.803***
                       (-7.69)         (-7.11)           (-6.15)       (-6.43)       (-9.50)       (-9.01)       (-8.80)       (-9.20)

Ln(Deal size)         -5.485**        -6.888**          -2.588        6.505*       -8.289***     -9.615***      -4.653       6.657**
                       (-2.05)         (-2.49)          (-0.86)       (1.87)         (-3.40)       (-3.88)      (-1.59)       (2.14)

Ln(Assets)                                                          -15.166***                                              -17.057***
                                                                      (-3.87)                                                 (-4.57)

Leverage                                                             -32.091**                                               -24.829**
                                                                       (-2.48)                                                 (-2.05)

Current ratio                                                         -1.172                                                  -1.383
                                                                      (-0.52)                                                 (-0.61)

Ln(1+Coverage                                                        -8.696***                                              -10.003***
Ratio)
                                                                      (-2.78)                                                 (-2.74)

Tangibility                                                           21.739                                                  18.884
                                                                      (1.40)                                                  (1.24)

Constant            555.262***      535.088***        495.142***    597.845***    651.024***    635.439***    650.204***    742.486***
                      (9.31)          (8.73)            (6.83)        (7.17)        (11.37)       (10.83)       (9.64)        (9.64)

Rating effects          Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

Year-quarter              Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
effects
Industry effects          Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Test cov-lite = cov-heavy
Chi2                    4.99**            0.10            0.11          0.42         3.08*          0.00          0.27          0.67
p-value                  0.026           0.749           0.739         0.519         0.079         0.991         0.606         0.413
Test unregistered cov-lite = unregistered cov-heavy
Chi2                                   17.81***                                                  15.63***
p-value                                  0.000                                                     0.000
Observations             4842            4842            2922          2922          5917          5917          3802          3802




                                                                       55
Table 5: Differences in spreads cov-lite vs. cov-heavy – within firm and within deal

Panel A of this table reports the average treatment effect on the treated for the spread paid over
LIBOR for a matching of institutional cov-lite loans with institutional cov-heavy loans issued by
the same firm. Column (1) matches each cov-lite loan with a cov-heavy loan issued by the same
firm within the same year, choosing the nearest neighbor in terms of deal size and maturity using
the Mahalanobis distance. Column (2) performs an exact match on the issuer, and chooses the
nearest neighbor in terms of launch date, requiring that the launch dates of the two loans are in the
same or adjacent calendar year. Column (3) performs the same analysis as Column (2), but adds
an exact match on the firm’s rating to ensure that credit quality has not changed. Panel B presents
regressions explaining the difference between the credit spread paid on a loan’s first lien
institutional tranche and its revolving line of credit on an indicator of whether or not the
institutional loan is cov-lite. Only loans that have both an institutional tranche and a revolving line
of credit are included. The sample period is January 2005 through April 2015. The sample is
restricted to loans rated between BB+ and B- since 93% of cov-lite loans have a rating within this
range. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm and time. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.
                  Panel A: Matching loans within firm at a similar point in time


                              Exact match:          Issuer,           Issuer           Issuer,
                                                 launch year                           rating

                              Nearest             Deal size,          Launch          Launch
                              neighbor:           maturity             date            date

                              Restriction:                           Same or          Same or
                                                                     adjacent         adjacent
                                                                     calendar         calendar
                                                                       year             year

            ATET
            Cov-lite                              -83.55***          -73.43***       -76.20***
            (z-statistic)                           (-2.94)            (-6.99)         (-5.76)

            Observations                               44              300              174


              Panel B: Spread difference between institutional tranche and revolver

                                      All sample firms                              Registered firms
                               (1)           (2)           (3)                     (4)            (5)
    Covenant lite loan       1.800        -9.480**     -13.033***                -7.187         -7.056
                             (0.25)        (-2.38)       (-3.41)                 (-0.91)        (-0.84)

    Cov-lite x                                              5.679
    registered                                              (0.60)



                                                  56
Registered                                         4.001
                                                   (0.79)

Ln(Assets)                                                                  -5.545**
                                                                             (-2.03)

Leverage                                                                   -23.428**
                                                                             (-2.58)

Current ratio                                                                -1.564
                                                                             (-0.55)

Ln(1+Coverage                                                               -7.416**
Ratio)
                                                                             (-2.48)

Tangibility                                                                  -5.126
                                                                             (-0.39)

Ln(Maturity)                      -23.068         -22.534      -32.723      -31.996
                                   (-1.64)         (-1.60)      (-1.57)      (-1.51)

Ln(Deal size)                      -2.470         -3.005*       -0.969       3.368
                                   (-1.54)         (-1.71)      (-0.56)      (1.18)

Sponsored                        -21.642***      -20.798***   -19.406***   -20.083***
                                   (-5.79)         (-5.71)      (-2.98)      (-3.10)

LBO                                -0.900          -0.782       -7.327       -5.617
                                   (-0.33)         (-0.30)      (-1.24)      (-0.99)

Bond refinancing                 -16.815***      -17.906***   -13.664***   -13.557**
                                   (-3.24)         (-3.66)      (-2.64)      (-2.51)

Term loan A                      29.081***       29.242***      8.513        8.489
                                   (5.67)          (5.65)       (1.36)       (1.45)

Asset based loan                 175.661***      175.380***   172.463***   169.997***
                                   (6.29)          (6.34)       (6.29)       (6.29)

Middle market                      -8.408          -8.411       10.892       8.664
                                   (-0.93)         (-0.92)      (0.96)       (0.77)

Second lien facility               -5.558          -4.732      -10.039*     -12.552*
                                   (-1.19)         (-1.15)      (-1.70)      (-1.93)

Ln(Firm age)                       0.965           0.812        0.479        1.091
                                   (0.98)          (0.79)       (0.18)       (0.42)

Constant               -3.354    73.905***       74.844***    80.631***    119.286***
                       (-0.42)     (2.96)          (2.95)       (2.74)       (3.50)


                                            57
Rating effects     Yes    Yes         Yes    Yes   Yes

Industry effects   Yes    Yes         Yes    Yes   Yes

Year effects       Yes    Yes         Yes    Yes   Yes
Observations       2360   2239        2239   958   958




                                 58
Table 6: Comparison of bond and loan liquidity

This table shows average quoted bid-ask spreads (in basis points) for noncallable bonds, covenant-lite loans, and covenant-heavy loans, respectively.
Average quoted spreads for bonds are taken from Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007), Table 1, Panel A. These are average bid-ask spreads for bonds
of maturity between one and seven years from 1995 through 2003 (although the authors write that most quotes are available only from 2000 onwards).
By comparison, the maturity of loans in our sample ranges from one year to seven years and four months. Since Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007)
compute spreads in basis points vis-à-vis the bid-ask midpoint, we recompute our spreads the same way. For loans, spreads are broken down into
average spreads over the first three months, first year, second year and third year after the launch date of the loan. A breakdown of spreads based on
years since issuance is not available for bonds. Notice that Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) use up-to-date bond ratings while our LCD data is
limited to at-issue ratings. To improve comparability, loans that are priced as distressed – and would have likely been downgraded – during the time
period in question are excluded from the analysis. In Panel A, a loan is judged to be distressed if the minimum of the bid-ask midpoint during the
time period is below 90 cents per one dollar of principal. In Panel B, loans are excluded if the minimum of the bid-ask midpoint is below 95 cents
per one dollar of principal. Note that for a loan with five years to maturity, a drop in price to 90 cents represents a change in yield approximately
equivalent to a downgrade from straight BB to B- (priced at LIBOR plus 284 basis points and LIBOR plus 497 basis points, respectively, on average).
A drop in price to 95 cents represents a change in yield about equal to a downgrade from straight BB to B+ (the latter being priced at LIBOR plus
387 basis points on average).

                                                Panel A: Excluding loans priced below 90 cents

                              Bonds                         Covenant-lite loans                                    Covenant-heavy loans

  Rating                                     First three    1st year     2nd year     3rd year       First three    1st year    2nd year    3rd year
                                              months                                                  months


  BB+ through BB-              54.26           57.70        65.37         65.83        64.35           70.15         75.94       77.13       73.88
  B+ through B-                58.76           63.08        68.47         76.76        75.48           76.56         85.73       92.56       94.37

  Observations BB rated         178             115          112            96           64             243           249         216         150
  Observations B rated          72              357          343           271          184             431           432         373         239




                                                                         59
                                   Panel B: Excluding loans priced below 95 cents

                        Bonds                 Covenant-lite loans                             Covenant-heavy loans

Rating                          First three   1st year    2nd year   3rd year   First three    1st year   2nd year   3rd year
                                 months                                          months


BB+ through BB-         54.26     56.69       63.15        61.05      60.84         68.18       73.20      73.44      69.36
B+ through B-           58.76     61.83       66.16        70.81      66.62         75.76       81.44      87.13      87.04

Observations BB rated    178       113         104           87         59          234          224        200        134
Observations B rated     72        351         314          231        150          419          383        324        213




                                                          60
Table 7: Univariate Tests


This table shows summary statistics for covenant-lite and covenant-heavy loans, respectively, as well as the results from t-tests and Wilcoxon rank-
sum tests for differences between the two groups. The sample includes loans issued by non-financial, non-utility US issuers on the US leveraged
loan market from January 1, 2005 through April 30, 2015. Loan data are from Capital IQ LCD and the sample is limited to deals that LCD reported
as completed as of May 12, 2015. A loan is defined as covenant-lite if it contains a covenant-lite facility, even if other facilities are present. Maturity
and all financial ratios have been winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                           Covenant-lite                                   Covenant-heavy
                             Obs.           Mean              Median             Obs.        Mean              Median          Difference         Difference
                                           (St.dev.)                                        (St.dev.)                            in means         in medians
                                                                                                                               (t-statistic)      (z-statistic)
 Deal size (million)         986           858.678            520.251            4574        548.375           301.849         310.304***         218.401***
                                          (1113.305)                                        (895.656)                              (8.199)           (15.129)
 Maturity                    986             6.235             6.546             4346          5.481            5.650            0.755***           0.896***
                                            (0.889)                                           (1.113)                             (22.896)           (21.780)
 Secured                     525             0.992             1.000             2228          0.962            1.000            0.031***           0.000***
                                            (0.087)                                           (0.192)                              (5.492)            (3.558)
 Rating                      946             5.058             5.000             2957          4.568            5.000            0.490***           0.000***
                                            (1.337)                                           (1.622)                              (9.293)            (8.953)
 Rated                       986             0.959             1.000             4574          0.646            1.000            0.313***           0.000***
                                            (0.197)                                           (0.478)                             (33.082)           (19.485)
 Traded on secondary         986             0.901             1.000             4574          0.436            0.000            0.464***           1.000***
 market                                     (0.299)                                           (0.496)                             (38.616)           (26.471)
 Time-to-break               886            13.788            13.000             1987         19.764           19.000           -5.977***          -6.000***
                                            (7.153)                                          (10.819)                            (-17.499)          (-16.429)
 Break price                 886             1.000             1.002             1989          0.999            1.002             0.001**              0.000
                                            (0.010)                                           (0.013)                              (2.476)           (-0.689)
 Break below 99              886             0.058             0.000             1989          0.127            0.000           -0.070***           0.000***
                                            (0.233)                                           (0.333)                             (-6.434)           (-5.606)
 Initial # LP Funds          851             5.046             3.000             2065          1.969            0.000            3.076***           3.000***
                                            (5.681)                                           (3.343)                             (14.777)           (18.569)
 Average %                   767             1.392             0.995             1124          0.854            0.486            0.538***           0.509***
 principal traded                           (1.686)                                           (1.188)                              (7.641)           (11.052)



                                                                            61
% months with          767    60.273    65.517        1124    40.507    35.714   19.766***    29.803***
trade                        (28.125)                        (26.958)              (15.260)     (14.310)
Bid-ask spread         509     0.625    0.561         844      0.809    0.702    -0.184***    -0.141***
(3 month average)             (0.263)                         (1.174)              (-4.384)     (-9.620)
Bid-ask spread         516     0.729    0.630         906      0.932    0.793    -0.204***    -0.163***
(1st year average)            (0.410)                         (1.190)              (-4.689)    (-10.515)
Bid-ask spread         470     1.008    0.727         840      1.127    0.832       -0.119    -0.105***
(2nd year average)            (1.111)                         (2.253)              (-1.278)     (-4.518)
Bid-ask spread         350     1.307    0.758         583      1.494    0.847       -0.186      -0.089*
(3rd year average)            (1.670)                         (4.520)              (-0.899)     (-1.760)
Number of quotes       509     3.000    2.490         844      2.128    1.640     0.872***     0.850***
(3 month average)             (1.901)                         (1.547)               (8.749)     (10.264)
Number of quotes       516     3.225    2.665         906      2.232    1.756     0.993***     0.909***
(1st year average)            (1.962)                         (1.551)               (9.875)     (11.597)
Number of quotes       470     3.085    2.532         840      2.193    1.755     0.891***     0.777***
(2nd year average)            (1.915)                         (1.476)               (8.744)     (10.323)
Number of quotes       350     2.955    2.432         583      2.044    1.698     0.911***     0.733***
(3rd year average)            (1.951)                         (1.386)               (7.656)      (8.801)
Sponsored              986     0.746    1.000         4574     0.539    1.000     0.208***     0.000***
                              (0.435)                         (0.499)              (13.219)     (11.958)
LBO                    986     0.244    0.000         4574     0.168    0.000     0.076***     0.000***
                              (0.430)                         (0.374)               (5.167)      (5.635)
Bond refinancing       986     0.051    0.000         4574     0.025    0.000     0.025***     0.000***
                              (0.220)                         (0.157)               (3.441)      (4.242)
Revolver               986     0.574    1.000         4574     0.761    1.000    -0.187***     0.000***
                              (0.495)                         (0.427)             (-11.006)    (-11.950)
Term loan A            986     0.026    0.000         4574     0.190    0.000    -0.163***     0.000***
                              (0.160)                         (0.392)             (-21.127)    (-12.656)
Second lien facility   986     0.210    0.000         4574     0.158    0.000     0.052***     0.000***
                              (0.407)                         (0.365)               (3.675)      (3.940)
Asset based loan       986     0.128    0.000         4574     0.102    0.000      0.026**      0.000**
                              (0.334)                         (0.303)               (2.245)      (2.392)
Middle market          986     0.097    0.000         4574     0.159    0.000    -0.062***     0.000***
                              (0.297)                         (0.366)              (-5.677)     (-4.953)
Unregistered firm      986     0.510    1.000         4574     0.464    0.000     0.046***     1.000***
                              (0.500)                         (0.499)               (2.645)      (2.649)



                                                 62
Deregistering firm   986        0.086       0.000          4574       0.051       0.000      0.035***     0.000***
                               (0.281)                               (0.220)                  (3.706)       (4.325)
Firm age             978       45.064       30.500         4462      40.415       26.000     4.650***     4.500***
                              (41.812)                              (39.238)                  (3.184)       (4.246)
Assets (million)     474     13146.794     2184.023        2400     9999.111     1286.036    3147.683   897.986***
                            (117604.779)                          (104071.607)                (0.542)       (7.579)
Leverage             474        0.466       0.462          2395       0.423       0.394      0.043***     0.069***
                               (0.288)                               (0.290)                  (2.964)       (3.649)
Current ratio        480        1.989       1.614          2420       1.824       1.520      0.165**      0.094***
                               (1.408)                               (1.368)                  (2.356)       (3.144)
Profitability        469        0.123       0.110          2383       0.127       0.118       -0.005      -0.008**
                               (0.079)                               (0.081)                 (-1.128)      (-2.213)
Tangibility          473        0.248       0.163          2390       0.293       0.217     -0.045***    -0.054***
                               (0.223)                               (0.249)                 (-3.919)      (-3.338)
Total observations   5560




                                                      63
Table 8: Covenant-lite loans and SEC registration

This table reports average marginal effects from probit regressions examining the relation between
covenant-lite loans and SEC registration and deregistration for the leveraged loan sample. We proxy for
SEC registration by checking whether the borrower has data on total assets available in either Compustat
or Capital IQ. If the data source is Capital IQ, we check that the data come from an SEC filing and not a
non-SEC report. Columns (1) through (3) assess whether issuers of cov-lite loans are more likely to
deregister subsequent to loan origination. Only firms that have asset data available at the end of the fiscal
year prior to loan origination are included in these regressions. Deregisteredt+1 equals one if asset data are
unavailable at the end of the fiscal year during which the loan is originated and zero if asset data continue
to be available. Firms that disappear due to bankruptcy or a merger are coded as zero. Column (4) includes
all loans and assesses whether unregistered firms and firms that are about to deregister are more likely to
issue covenant-lite loans. In column (4) firms are classified as deregistering if they deregister within three
years after loan origination. The sample period is January 2005 through April 2015. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering by firm and time. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                                     Deregistration                   Cov-lite vs.
                                                                                      cov-heavy

                                            (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
                                         Dereg-         Dereg-         Dereg-           Cov-lite
                                        isteredt+1     isteredt+2     isteredt+3
           Covenant lite loan           0.049***       0.046***       0.058***
                                          (4.21)         (2.91)         (3.19)

           LBO x cov-lite                -0.032**         -0.017       -0.004
                                          (-2.18)         (-0.73)      (-0.20)

           Unregistered firm                                                            0.026**
                                                                                         (2.30)

           Deregistering firm                                                          0.057***
                                                                                         (3.38)

           Ln(Maturity)                   0.005           -0.017      -0.022*          0.247***
                                          (0.56)          (-1.07)      (-1.68)          (10.55)

           Ln(Deal size)                  -0.006        -0.011*       -0.012*          0.052***
                                          (-1.09)        (-1.72)       (-1.81)           (6.88)

           Sponsored                    0.043***       0.071***       0.073***         0.048***
                                          (3.47)         (5.46)         (5.39)           (2.91)

           LBO                          0.107***       0.106***       0.109***         0.048***
                                          (6.63)         (4.96)         (4.17)           (3.12)

           Bond refinancing              0.035**       0.051***       0.062**           0.043**
                                          (2.23)         (2.69)        (1.98)            (2.53)




                                                     64
Revolver                  0.017      0.026**        0.002     -0.107***
                          (1.49)      (2.45)        (0.13)      (-8.31)

Term loan A               -0.012         -0.019     -0.020    -0.141***
                          (-0.76)        (-0.98)    (-0.88)     (-8.01)

Asset based loan          0.009          0.013     0.033***    0.047*
                          (0.91)         (0.99)      (2.92)    (1.85)

Middle market             0.012      0.045***      0.064***   -0.102***
                          (1.11)       (2.80)        (3.17)     (-5.90)

Second lien facility     0.072***    0.091***      0.103***   -0.052***
                           (6.26)      (5.95)        (5.94)     (-5.75)

Ln(Firm age)              -0.005         -0.002     -0.005     0.006
                          (-1.11)        (-0.54)    (-0.84)    (1.07)

Prevailing % cov- lite                                        0.685***
                                                               (18.76)

Fed net %                                                      0.000
tightening                                                     (0.42)

Rating effects             Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes

Industry effects           Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes

Year effects              Yes            Yes        Yes          No
Observations              2809           2809       2809        5204




                                    65
Table 9: Are covenant-lite loans more likely to trade?

This table reports average marginal effects from probit regressions predicting whether a loan trades on the
secondary market. The dependent variable equals one if LCD records a break price for the loan, indicating
that the loan broke into secondary market trading. The sample period is January 2005 through April 2015.
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm and time. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at 1%, 5%, and 10%.



                                    All firms                Rated              Registered firms
                                                             firms

                                 (1)           (2)              (3)              (4)          (5)
        Covenant lite        0.159***      0.102***         0.171***         0.236***     0.232***
        loan                   (6.46)        (6.43)           (6.36)           (5.39)       (5.61)

        Covenant lite                      0.116***
        x Registered                         (3.21)

        Registered                        -0.078***
                                            (-7.16)

        Ln(Assets)                                                                        -0.037***
                                                                                            (-2.88)

        Leverage                                                                            0.001
                                                                                            (0.04)

        Current ratio                                                                       -0.003
                                                                                            (-0.50)

        Ln(1+Coverage                                                                       0.004
        Ratio)                                                                              (0.28)

        Tangibility                                                                        -0.078*
                                                                                            (-1.90)

        Ln(Maturity)         0.169***      0.159***         0.243***         0.160***     0.128***
                               (4.79)        (4.45)           (4.77)           (3.31)       (2.79)

        Ln(Deal size)        0.171***      0.175***         0.180***         0.161***     0.185***
                              (16.25)       (17.06)          (16.87)          (16.78)      (12.91)

        Sponsored            0.083***      0.066***         0.057***         0.044***      0.039**
                               (7.52)        (5.76)           (4.35)           (3.01)       (2.25)

        LBO                    0.021         0.020           0.034            0.018         0.016
                               (1.13)        (1.07)          (1.17)           (0.94)        (0.73)




                                                      66
Bond                0.045       0.054*           0.049       0.053      0.061**
refinancing         (1.38)      (1.65)           (1.62)      (1.62)      (1.97)

Revolver           -0.106***   -0.112***        -0.111***   -0.136***   -0.164***
                    (-17.30)    (-23.22)         (-16.40)     (-7.35)     (-7.85)

Term loan A        -0.250***   -0.242***        -0.239***   -0.220***   -0.229***
                    (-11.90)    (-11.29)         (-10.26)    (-11.24)    (-11.95)

Asset based loan   -0.120***   -0.114***        -0.130***   -0.122***   -0.116***
                     (-4.12)     (-4.09)          (-5.06)     (-3.35)     (-3.38)

Middle market       0.006       -0.004           0.031      0.094***    0.069***
                    (0.30)      (-0.18)          (1.59)       (5.11)      (3.23)

Second lien        -0.043***   -0.052***        -0.068***   -0.063**    -0.072**
facility             (-3.16)     (-4.00)          (-3.22)    (-2.33)     (-2.52)

Ln(Firm age)        -0.007      -0.004           -0.009      -0.010      -0.004
                    (-0.71)     (-0.43)          (-0.86)     (-0.60)     (-0.27)

Rating effects       Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes

Year effects         Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes

Industry effects     Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations         5205        5205             3800        2558        2558




                                           67
Table 10: Do covenant-lite loans break into secondary market trading more quickly?

The dependent variable is time-to-break, the number of days between the launch date of the loan and the
first day on which the loan is traded in the loan trading market. The average is 17 days. The sample period
is January 2005 through April 2015. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm and time. ***, **,
and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                 All firms               Rated firms           Registered firms

                            (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)            (5)
    Covenant lite       -1.2707***     -1.9987***        -1.3860***         -0.6723        -0.6397
    loan                  (-3.60)        (-4.25)           (-3.97)          (-1.30)        (-1.11)

    Covenant lite                        1.4540
    x Registered                         (1.64)

    Registered                         -1.9065**
                                         (-2.52)

    Ln(Assets)                                                                           -1.5049***
                                                                                           (-3.94)

    Leverage                                                                             -3.5636***
                                                                                           (-4.46)

    Current ratio                                                                          -0.0939
                                                                                            (-0.42)

    Ln(1+Coverage                                                                          0.0322
    Ratio)                                                                                 (0.12)

    Tangibility                                                                            1.4118
                                                                                           (1.17)

    Ln(Maturity)         1.2756*        1.1702*            0.5757          2.6337***       1.4148
                          (1.89)         (1.76)            (1.02)            (2.94)        (1.58)

    Ln(Deal size)       -0.8337**      -0.6701**         -0.8111**         -0.8252**       0.3268
                          (-2.44)        (-2.04)           (-2.45)           (-2.26)       (0.90)

    Sponsored           -1.7040***     -2.0534***        -1.5538***       -1.9749***      -1.5589**
                          (-2.98)        (-3.69)           (-3.12)          (-3.27)         (-2.48)

    LBO                 -1.2287**      -1.2380**         -1.2681**          -1.3714       -2.1725**
                          (-2.26)        (-2.15)           (-2.28)           (-1.41)        (-2.36)

    Bond                -2.3254***     -2.1291***        -1.9581***        -2.1911**      -1.8450**
    refinancing           (-2.93)        (-2.71)           (-3.00)           (-2.05)        (-2.05)




                                                    68
Revolver           4.6006***    4.3732***         5.1098***    3.6367***    2.2905***
                     (7.91)       (7.54)            (10.24)      (7.11)       (3.56)

Term loan A        3.1981***    3.2931***         2.5944***    3.0586***    2.8839***
                     (3.10)       (3.09)            (2.66)       (3.32)       (3.00)

Asset based loan    2.3840**     2.4777**          1.9625**     3.7607**     3.4367**
                      (1.98)       (2.03)            (2.06)       (2.31)       (2.26)

Middle market      4.6844***    4.5397***         4.4691***    4.6854***    3.5745***
                     (9.49)       (8.98)            (7.43)       (7.82)       (4.14)

Second lien        2.3514***    2.0933***         2.6415***    2.0701***     1.6985**
facility             (3.45)       (3.29)            (4.04)       (2.62)        (1.97)

Ln(Firm age)       -0.4622**    -0.4010**         -0.4368**     -0.2272      -0.0392
                     (-2.43)      (-2.04)           (-2.11)      (-1.13)      (-0.22)

Constant           28.5964***   28.7426***        25.5092***   32.2186***   40.4436***
                     (10.47)      (10.98)            (5.97)       (6.57)       (8.28)

Rating effects        Yes          Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes

Year effects          Yes          Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes

Industry effects     Yes          Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations         2823         2823              2572         1367         1367




                                             69
 Table 11: Are break prices different for covenant-lite loans?

 Break price is the price at which the loan starts trading in the secondary market, as reported by LCD. Break below 99 indicates that the loan’s break
 price is lower than 99 cents on the dollar, which is the 10th percentile of the break price distribution. Columns (1) through (5) report results from
 OLS regressions and columns (6) through (10) report average marginal effects from probit regressions. The sample period is January 2005 through
 April 2015. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm and time. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.

Dep. variable:                                Break price                                                           Break below 99

                            All firms         Rated firms      Registered firms                   All firms            Rated firms       Registered firms
                      (1)               (2)       (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)               (7)          (8)          (9)            (10)
Covenant lite     0.0024***       0.0033***   0.0024***     0.0021*       0.0022*       -0.0819***      -0.0926***     -0.0791***    -0.0515***   -0.0528***
loan                (3.05)          (5.18)      (2.81)       (1.92)        (1.87)         (-6.28)         (-8.23)        (-6.01)       (-3.64)      (-4.03)

Covenant lite                      -0.0017*                                                              0.0221**
x Registered                        (-1.86)                                                                (2.16)

Registered                          0.0001                                                                0.0007
                                    (0.09)                                                                (0.05)

Ln(Assets)                                                                -0.0000                                                                   0.0094*
                                                                           (-0.21)                                                                   (1.70)

Leverage                                                                  0.0017                                                                    -0.0365
                                                                          (1.52)                                                                     (-1.24)

Current ratio                                                             -0.0002                                                                    0.0038
                                                                           (-0.66)                                                                   (0.68)

Ln(1+Coverage                                                             0.0001                                                                    -0.0016
Ratio)                                                                    (0.26)                                                                     (-0.18)

Tangibility                                                               -0.0012                                                                  0.0542**
                                                                           (-0.78)                                                                   (2.49)

Ln(Maturity)       -0.0007         -0.0007     -0.0000      -0.0009       -0.0008         -0.0257        -0.0245       -0.0680***     -0.0303       -0.0265
                    (-0.35)         (-0.39)     (-0.02)      (-0.50)       (-0.50)         (-0.86)        (-0.82)        (-2.92)       (-0.97)       (-0.92)

Ln(Deal size)       0.0002          0.0003      0.0002      -0.0002       -0.0002         -0.0091        -0.0098         -0.0076      -0.0004       -0.0062


                                                                           70
                     (0.60)       (0.73)       (0.41)       (-0.52)      (-0.55)     (-0.70)      (-0.77)     (-0.61)     (-0.03)     (-0.58)

Sponsored            0.0006       0.0006       0.0006       0.0006       0.0004      -0.0119     -0.0114      -0.0026     -0.0053     -0.0002
                     (0.70)       (0.71)       (0.68)       (0.71)       (0.44)       (-0.62)     (-0.59)      (-0.13)     (-0.29)     (-0.01)

LBO                 -0.0021      -0.0021      -0.0018*     -0.0023      -0.0021     0.0564***   0.0568***    0.0543***   0.0599***   0.0541**
                     (-1.52)      (-1.56)      (-1.66)      (-1.57)      (-1.51)      (3.15)      (3.22)       (3.38)      (2.61)      (2.26)

Bond                -0.0016      -0.0014      -0.0015      -0.0022      -0.0023      0.0287       0.0256      0.0322      0.0383      0.0356*
refinancing          (-1.16)      (-1.01)      (-1.12)      (-1.25)      (-1.36)     (1.38)       (1.30)      (1.54)      (1.64)       (1.91)

Revolver            -0.0001      -0.0001      -0.0003      -0.0004      -0.0004      -0.0134     -0.0126      -0.0091     -0.0222     -0.0132
                     (-0.13)      (-0.17)      (-0.45)      (-0.39)      (-0.39)      (-0.82)     (-0.80)      (-0.56)     (-1.51)     (-1.04)

Term loan A         0.0018*      0.0018*     0.0020**     0.0022***    0.0021**      -0.0265     -0.0260      -0.0281     -0.0334     -0.0285
                     (1.89)       (1.79)       (2.11)       (2.62)       (2.45)       (-0.77)     (-0.75)      (-0.72)     (-1.34)     (-1.19)

Asset based        -0.0030***   -0.0030***   -0.0029***   -0.0032**    -0.0031**    0.0519***   0.0518***    0.0512***   0.0561***   0.0542***
loan                 (-3.01)      (-2.95)      (-2.80)      (-2.20)      (-2.11)      (5.11)      (5.09)       (6.70)      (4.74)      (4.50)

Middle market      -0.0018**    -0.0017**     -0.0020*    -0.0041***   -0.0039***    0.0194       0.0181      0.0165     0.0871***   0.0895***
                     (-2.23)      (-2.15)      (-1.95)      (-3.11)      (-2.96)     (1.15)       (1.09)      (0.81)       (7.15)      (6.69)

Second lien          0.0002       0.0000       0.0001       0.0012       0.0010      0.0099       0.0121      0.0150      -0.0310     -0.0268
facility             (0.45)       (0.09)       (0.14)       (1.02)       (0.89)      (0.55)       (0.67)      (0.78)       (-1.22)     (-1.07)

Ln(Firm age)        0.0005*     0.0005**       0.0003       0.0002       0.0002     -0.0125**   -0.0127***    -0.0081     -0.0047     -0.0078
                     (1.95)       (2.03)       (1.58)       (1.01)       (1.18)       (-2.57)     (-2.60)      (-1.23)     (-1.05)     (-1.59)

Constant           1.0089***    1.0087***    1.0068***    1.0177***    1.0181***
                    (217.99)     (217.35)     (199.17)     (181.20)     (194.00)

Rating effects        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          No          No           No          No          No

Industry effects      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          No          No           No          No          No

Year effects          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          No          No           No          No          No
Observations         2825         2825         2574         1369         1369         2825        2825         2574        1369        1369




                                                                         71
 Table 12: Do covenant-lite loans trade more frequently?

 The dependent variables are the average percentage of a loan’s principal that is traded monthly and the percentage of months in which at least one
 loan participation fund trades the loan. Only trades by loan participation funds are tracked. The sample period is June 30, 2010 through April 30,
 2015 with loan trading tracked until August 31, 2016. Loans were matched to the CRSP mutual fund database based on the security name indicated
 in CRSP. Initial # LP Funds indicates the number of loan participation funds that hold shares in the loan after its first month of trading. If a loan is
 tracked by LSTA, but no loan participation fund reports holding the loan in CRSP, Initial # LP Funds is set to zero for that loan. Standard errors are
 adjusted for clustering by firm and time. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                                                   Panel A: All trades


Dep. variable:                      Monthly average % principal traded                                                 % months with trade

                            All firms          Rated firms        Registered firms                  All firms                Rated firms        Registered firms
                      (1)               (2)        (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)                (7)             (8)           (9)            (10)
Covenant lite      0.297***        0.376***     0.294***      0.215**        0.195**       5.391***        7.302***           5.000***        2.951         3.077
loan                 (6.67)          (6.71)       (7.00)       (2.17)         (2.56)         (5.55)          (6.99)             (4.96)        (1.34)        (1.46)

Covenant lite                     -0.164***                                                                -3.833**
x Registered                        (-2.73)                                                                 (-2.05)

Registered                         0.222***                                                                     0.420
                                     (3.50)                                                                     (0.22)

# LP Funds         0.078***        0.077***     0.078***      0.058***      0.055***       1.916***        1.924***           1.839***       1.782***      1.768***
                     (5.32)          (5.20)       (5.36)        (3.62)        (4.00)        (11.47)         (11.70)            (10.26)         (8.80)        (8.72)

Ln(Assets)                                                                   0.339**                                                                        1.094
                                                                              (2.10)                                                                        (0.83)

Leverage                                                                      0.442                                                                        4.947**
                                                                              (1.34)                                                                        (2.52)

Current ratio                                                                 0.016                                                                         -0.220
                                                                              (1.28)                                                                        (-0.46)




                                                                              72
Ln(1+Coverage                                                       0.034                                                       -0.261
Ratio)                                                              (0.58)                                                      (-0.27)

Tangibility                                                         -0.161                                                      2.451
                                                                    (-0.67)                                                     (0.45)

Ln(Maturity)        0.336*      0.341*      0.346*      -0.035      0.424      15.177**    14.955**    19.225***    13.307      15.532
                    (1.85)      (1.92)      (1.66)      (-0.15)     (1.52)      (2.44)      (2.41)       (3.04)     (1.33)      (1.48)

Ln(Deal size)      -0.446***   -0.460***   -0.463***   -0.445***   -0.664***   4.784***    4.916***    4.937***    3.920***     3.054*
                     (-4.51)     (-4.65)     (-4.39)     (-4.20)     (-3.79)     (7.79)      (8.16)      (7.71)      (3.73)     (1.78)

Sponsored           -0.012      0.032       -0.008      0.110       0.084       -1.081      -1.105      -0.706      -0.549      -0.923
                    (-0.11)     (0.29)      (-0.07)     (1.15)      (0.89)      (-1.10)     (-1.41)     (-0.68)     (-0.27)     (-0.41)

LBO                 -0.026      -0.028      -0.014      -0.086      0.019       2.711       2.414       2.241      8.232**     9.633**
                    (-0.29)     (-0.29)     (-0.14)     (-0.92)     (0.11)      (1.38)      (1.22)      (1.14)      (2.16)      (2.10)

Bond refinancing    0.091       0.065       0.063       -0.027      -0.059      -1.001      -0.507      -1.261      -2.223      -2.804
                    (0.46)      (0.33)      (0.32)      (-0.32)     (-0.57)     (-0.43)     (-0.23)     (-0.52)     (-0.64)     (-0.80)

Revolver           -0.369***   -0.342***   -0.396***    -0.092      0.173       -2.426*    -2.469**    -2.737**     -0.925      0.113
                     (-4.30)     (-3.94)     (-4.29)    (-0.50)     (0.79)       (-1.95)    (-2.07)     (-2.03)     (-0.48)     (0.05)

Term loan A         0.005       -0.020      0.009       -0.217      -0.177     -8.427***   -8.717***   -8.331***   -9.999***   -9.654***
                    (0.03)      (-0.12)     (0.05)      (-1.31)     (-1.19)      (-3.98)     (-3.97)     (-3.46)     (-4.06)     (-3.37)

Asset based         0.129       0.113       0.115       -0.069      -0.077      1.087       0.988       1.172       -3.021      -2.796
loan                (1.56)      (1.33)      (1.29)      (-0.41)     (-0.38)     (0.92)      (0.87)      (1.09)      (-1.06)     (-0.95)

Middle market      -0.619***   -0.594***   -0.708***   -0.638***   -0.384**    -9.573***   -9.285***   -9.797***    -5.598      -4.072
                     (-6.94)     (-7.29)     (-7.48)     (-6.94)    (-2.07)     (-10.26)    (-11.87)     (-8.93)    (-1.57)     (-1.51)

Second lien        -0.109**     -0.089*    -0.122**    -0.226**     -0.156      -2.616      -3.037*     -2.347      -5.668      -5.706
facility            (-2.32)      (-1.89)    (-2.37)     (-2.43)     (-1.63)     (-1.54)      (-1.85)    (-1.54)     (-0.97)     (-0.98)

Ln(Firm age)        0.068*      0.059       0.062       0.065       0.013       0.791       0.864       0.772       -0.431      -0.389
                    (1.65)      (1.37)      (1.51)      (1.23)      (0.23)      (1.07)      (1.21)      (1.30)      (-0.35)     (-0.37)




                                                                    73
Constant           2.449***       2.432***     2.681***      2.726***        0.745        -6.842          -7.455          -25.069*        -20.081        -27.707
                     (4.75)         (4.76)       (4.12)        (3.57)        (0.90)       (-0.44)         (-0.47)          (-1.92)         (-1.47)        (-1.44)

Rating effects       Yes               Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes                 Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes

Industry effects     Yes               Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes                 Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes

Year effects         Yes               Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes                 Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
Observations        1875               1875      1757          821            821         1875                1875          1757            821            821



                                                               Panel B: Purchases only

Dep. variable:                     Monthly average % principal bought                                            % months with purchase

                           All firms          Rated firms        Registered firms                 All firms              Rated firms         Registered firms
                     (1)               (2)        (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)                (7)           (8)            (9)            (10)
Covenant lite      0.177***       0.224***     0.177***      0.125**       0.118***      3.108***        4.272***         2.907***         1.793         1.809
loan                 (5.48)         (5.10)       (5.65)       (2.33)         (2.77)        (2.94)          (3.31)           (2.73)         (0.96)        (1.10)

Covenant lite                    -0.097***                                                                -2.347*
x Registered                       (-2.66)                                                                 (-1.69)

Registered                        0.106***                                                                    0.833
                                    (3.33)                                                                    (0.51)

# LP Funds         0.031***       0.031***     0.031***      0.022***      0.020***      2.064***        2.066***         2.001***        1.758***      1.739***
                     (4.88)         (4.78)       (4.95)        (2.87)        (3.18)       (12.64)         (13.10)          (11.25)         (11.39)       (10.62)

Ln(Assets)                                                                  0.165**                                                                      1.890*
                                                                             (2.15)                                                                      (1.67)

Leverage                                                                     0.201                                                                       5.670*
                                                                             (1.19)                                                                      (1.80)

Current ratio                                                              0.014***                                                                      0.397
                                                                             (3.34)                                                                      (0.65)



                                                                             74
Ln(1+Coverage                                                       0.014                                                       -0.584
Ratio)                                                              (0.46)                                                      (-1.02)

Tangibility                                                         -0.010                                                      0.203
                                                                    (-0.08)                                                     (0.06)

Ln(Maturity)       0.218**     0.219**     0.230**      0.033       0.249*      7.124*      7.029*     9.739**      6.975       10.137
                    (2.41)      (2.48)      (2.25)      (0.37)      (1.84)      (1.84)      (1.84)      (2.42)      (1.05)      (1.35)

Ln(Deal size)      -0.210***   -0.216***   -0.219***   -0.206***   -0.312***   5.249***    5.274***    5.491***    5.552***    4.231***
                     (-3.94)     (-4.01)     (-3.91)     (-3.58)     (-3.49)    (11.23)     (10.06)     (10.59)      (8.14)      (3.55)

Sponsored           0.011       0.031       0.012       0.069       0.061       1.010       1.122       1.494*      1.717       1.134
                    (0.17)      (0.51)      (0.19)      (1.56)      (1.43)      (1.25)      (1.45)      (1.74)      (1.24)      (0.79)

LBO                 -0.015      -0.017      -0.007      -0.043      0.005       2.203       2.053       2.151      6.359***    8.409***
                    (-0.28)     (-0.31)     (-0.11)     (-0.87)     (0.06)      (1.52)      (1.45)      (1.49)       (3.88)      (4.23)

Bond refinancing    -0.016      -0.026      -0.032      -0.066*     -0.085*     -1.922      -1.753      -2.036      -3.168      -3.881
                    (-0.17)     (-0.27)     (-0.34)      (-1.73)     (-1.69)    (-0.98)     (-0.90)     (-1.02)     (-1.30)     (-1.58)

Revolver           -0.211***   -0.198***   -0.226***    -0.050      0.077      -4.453***   -4.398***   -4.844***   -2.654***    -1.062
                     (-3.89)     (-3.68)     (-4.03)    (-0.55)     (0.73)       (-4.00)     (-3.99)     (-4.70)     (-4.00)    (-0.85)

Term loan A         0.005       -0.008      0.010       -0.101      -0.078     -7.030***   -7.244***   -7.056***   -9.444***   -9.004***
                    (0.06)      (-0.10)     (0.12)      (-1.17)     (-0.97)      (-3.68)     (-3.73)     (-3.22)     (-3.69)     (-3.11)

Asset based         0.061       0.053       0.056       -0.040      -0.044      0.309       0.215       0.483       -3.483*     -3.289
loan                (1.34)      (1.14)      (1.14)      (-0.46)     (-0.42)     (0.34)      (0.23)      (0.57)       (-1.81)    (-1.48)

Middle market      -0.321***   -0.308***   -0.369***   -0.366***   -0.242***   -7.086***   -6.874***   -7.691***   -6.592**    -4.754**
                     (-5.57)     (-5.86)     (-5.78)     (-7.57)     (-3.20)     (-5.84)     (-5.98)     (-6.53)    (-2.20)     (-2.29)

Second lien         -0.052*     -0.044      -0.054*    -0.126***    -0.092*     -2.298*     -2.447*     -2.321*     -4.408      -4.211
facility             (-1.79)    (-1.54)      (-1.75)     (-2.71)     (-1.87)     (-1.67)     (-1.83)     (-1.71)    (-0.85)     (-0.84)

Ln(Firm age)       0.041**      0.038*      0.038*     0.052**      0.026       0.374       0.386       0.244       -0.198      -0.307
                    (2.00)      (1.78)      (1.92)      (2.22)      (1.15)      (0.86)      (0.83)      (0.59)      (-0.21)     (-0.36)




                                                                    75
Constant           1.049***   1.038***   1.152***   1.175***   0.193    -26.247***   -26.595***   -42.242***   -33.667***   -47.116***
                     (4.65)     (4.69)     (3.81)     (3.29)   (0.43)     (-3.10)      (-3.06)      (-4.38)      (-3.91)      (-3.00)

Rating effects       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

Industry effects     Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

Year effects         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations        1875       1875       1757        821       821       1875         1875         1757          821          821




                                                               76
Table 13: Do secondary market quotes indicate more liquidity for covenant-lite loans?

In Panel A, the dependent variable is the average of the difference between the average bid quote and the average ask quote for a loan divided by
the average ask quote multiplied by 100. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the average number of brokers that supply a quote to the Thomson
Reuters/LSTA Mark-to-Market pricing service. Four time periods are examined: the first three months after the loan’s launch date, the first year, the
second year, and the third year. The sample includes only those loans that were originated between January 2010 and April 2015 and are tracked by
the Thomson Reuters/LSTA Mark-to-Market pricing service. If more than one of a loan’s tranches is traded, we use the bid-ask spread of the largest
tranche. Initial # LP Funds indicates the number of loan participation funds that hold shares in the loan after its first month of trading. If a loan is
tracked by LSTA, but no loan participation fund reports holding the loan in CRSP, Initial # LP Funds is set to zero for that loan. Average bid-ask
midpoint denotes the average of the bid-ask midpoint in cents on the dollar. Revolver, Term Loan A, Term Loan C, Term Loan D or other, and
Second Lien are indicator variables capturing the type of the loan tranche that is tracked in LSTA. Term Loans B act as the base group. Columns (1)
through (4) include all loans, columns (5) through (8) exclude loans whose bid-ask midpoint is below 90 cents on the dollar at some point during
the respective period as well as debtor-in-possession loans. All bid-ask spreads are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering by firm and time. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                                                  Panel A: Bid-ask spreads


                                                      All loans                                             Non-distressed loans

                           3 months        Year 1            Year 2          Year 3          3 months      Year 1          Year 2         Year 3
                              (1)            (2)                  (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)
      Covenant lite       -0.0375**      -0.0408**           -0.0073         -0.1391     -0.0407**       -0.0499**       -0.0464**      -0.0512**
      loan                  (-1.98)        (-2.37)            (-0.20)         (-1.31)      (-2.35)         (-2.34)         (-2.56)        (-2.36)

      Covenant lite        0.0149*        0.0445**           -0.0492        0.0728***        0.0211**    0.0524***         0.0154         0.0387
      x Registered          (1.92)          (2.56)            (-0.85)         (2.79)           (2.27)      (2.96)          (0.95)         (0.69)

      Registered         -0.0297***      -0.0365***          0.0032          -0.0520     -0.0321***      -0.0404***       -0.0465         -0.0465
                           (-3.72)         (-3.04)           (0.08)           (-1.10)      (-6.81)         (-3.46)         (-1.21)         (-1.06)

      Initial # LP         -0.0022         -0.0003          -0.0032*       -0.0115***        -0.0021       -0.0009      -0.0025***      -0.0034***
      Funds                 (-1.05)         (-0.15)          (-1.95)         (-2.80)          (-1.22)       (-0.59)       (-3.62)         (-3.44)



                                                                            77
Average bid-    -0.0895***   -0.1032***   -0.1085***   -0.1207***   -0.1012***   -0.1110***   -0.1432***   -0.1555***
ask midpoint      (-6.03)      (-8.77)      (-13.10)     (-26.31)     (-6.01)      (-6.53)      (-4.98)      (-9.10)

Ln(Maturity)     -0.0861*     -0.0405      -0.0962       0.0432      -0.0630      -0.0606     -0.1240**     -0.1468*
                  (-1.84)      (-1.03)      (-1.46)      (0.19)       (-1.07)      (-0.99)      (-2.28)      (-1.80)

Ln(Deal size)   -0.0744***   -0.0984***   -0.1325***    -0.1523*    -0.0736***   -0.0800***   -0.0686***   -0.0459***
                  (-5.57)      (-3.71)      (-5.02)      (-1.73)      (-5.57)      (-4.14)      (-6.49)      (-3.05)

Sponsored        -0.0051      -0.0205      -0.0091       0.0352      -0.0030      -0.0216     -0.0651**    -0.0546***
                  (-0.20)      (-1.41)      (-0.35)      (0.78)       (-0.13)      (-1.35)      (-2.12)      (-3.43)

LBO              0.0127*       0.0019       0.0110     -0.0920**    0.0122**      -0.0064       0.0206      -0.0106
                  (1.82)       (0.18)       (0.48)       (-2.02)      (2.06)       (-0.49)      (1.00)       (-0.40)

Bond            -0.0210**    -0.0421**    -0.1443***   -0.2941**    -0.0274**     -0.0403*    -0.0814***   -0.1464***
refinancing       (-1.96)      (-2.42)      (-4.89)      (-2.19)      (-2.31)      (-1.72)      (-5.60)      (-3.48)

Revolver        0.4866***    0.4711***    0.6005***    0.4610**     0.4709***    0.4703***    0.3230***    0.2046**
                  (6.53)       (7.61)       (3.15)       (2.54)       (5.94)       (4.75)       (4.11)       (2.09)

Term Loan A      0.0187        0.0425       0.0180       0.2036      0.0184        0.0302       0.0272       0.0271
                 (0.64)        (0.96)       (0.39)       (0.85)      (0.57)        (0.92)       (0.86)       (0.68)

Asset based      -0.0287       0.0231     0.0484**      0.1249*      -0.0259       0.0031       0.0300       0.0555
loan              (-1.14)      (0.85)       (2.16)       (1.72)       (-1.13)      (0.12)       (0.87)       (1.27)

Middle market    0.0371*     0.0648***      0.0579       0.0933      0.0365*     0.0683***    0.0838***    0.0882***
                  (1.87)       (4.57)       (1.22)       (0.62)       (1.79)       (5.09)       (3.52)       (3.06)

Second lien     0.2416***    0.2608***    0.3156***    0.5746**     0.2369***    0.2775***    0.3777***    0.3315***
                  (5.10)       (7.00)       (2.92)       (2.25)       (5.30)       (7.88)       (8.52)       (8.67)

Ln(Firm age)    -0.0175**     -0.0133     -0.0160**     -0.0024     -0.0186**     -0.0124      -0.0082     -0.0357***
                  (-1.98)      (-1.51)      (-2.13)      (-0.18)      (-2.15)      (-1.62)      (-1.23)      (-3.21)




                                                       78
Constant           10.2841***   11.8125***       12.8498***   14.0008***   11.4106***   12.6505***     15.8533***   17.1462***
                     (6.61)      (9.71)          (13.64)       (64.51)      (6.63)       (7.20)         (5.56)       (9.62)

Rating effects       Yes          Yes                 Yes       Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes

Industry effects     Yes          Yes                 Yes       Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes

Year effects         Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Observations         1275         1336            1236          882           1260        1270          1098         733


                                                  Panel B: Number of quotes


                                          All loans                                       Non-distressed loans

                   3 months      Year 1          Year 2        Year 3      3 months      Year 1         Year 2      Year 3
                      (1)          (2)                (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)
Covenant lite       0.1625*     0.1842***        0.0298        0.0198       0.1903*     0.2215***       0.0681      0.0530
loan                 (1.67)       (2.67)         (0.30)        (0.25)        (1.92)       (3.37)        (0.56)      (0.78)

Covenant lite       0.0853       0.1416        0.3358***      0.2688**        0.0672     0.1690        0.3196*      0.2623
x Registered        (0.59)       (1.30)          (2.60)         (2.08)        (0.46)     (1.60)         (1.65)      (1.39)

Registered         0.4003***    0.3725***      0.3205***      0.1782**     0.4238***    0.3814***     0.2869**      0.1580
                     (3.54)       (5.45)         (2.94)         (2.27)       (3.64)       (5.37)        (2.37)      (1.46)

Initial # LP        0.0217*     0.0344***      0.0356***      0.0358**      0.0218*     0.0368***     0.0366***     0.0349*
Funds                (1.70)       (4.55)         (5.39)         (2.20)       (1.76)       (5.02)        (3.54)       (1.93)

Average bid-        0.0878*      0.0116          0.0061       0.0104**        0.1128     -0.0115        0.0087      0.0394
ask midpoint         (1.82)      (1.37)          (1.52)         (2.33)        (1.48)      (-0.26)       (0.18)      (0.86)

Ln(Maturity)        0.1745       0.1697          0.1628        0.0339       -0.0528      -0.0155        0.2164      -0.1180
                    (0.40)       (0.39)          (0.81)        (0.12)        (-0.13)      (-0.03)       (0.70)       (-0.36)


                                                              79
Ln(Deal size)    1.2247***     1.2462***     1.0877***     1.0630***     1.2250***     1.2271***    1.0863***    1.0759***
                   (9.17)        (9.66)        (11.55)       (6.43)        (9.24)        (8.83)       (10.43)      (6.14)

Sponsored        0.2071**      0.2195**       0.2258*      0.2593**      0.1935**      0.2292**     0.2580**     0.2955**
                   (2.12)        (2.17)        (1.91)        (2.23)        (2.22)        (2.28)       (2.16)       (2.22)

LBO                0.1394        0.0267       -0.0073       -0.0453       0.1597         0.0578      -0.0346      -0.0131
                   (1.10)        (0.23)        (-0.08)       (-0.38)      (1.21)         (0.53)       (-0.30)      (-0.09)

Bond               0.1257       -0.0176        0.1413      0.6066**       0.1431        -0.0287       0.0667     0.7753***
refinancing        (1.19)        (-0.22)       (0.99)        (2.44)       (1.57)         (-0.38)      (0.55)       (5.87)

Revolver         -2.2222***    -2.7151***    -2.7026***    -2.4230***    -2.2867***    -2.7307***   -2.6582***   -2.2731***
                   (-5.24)       (-6.85)       (-11.39)      (-6.98)       (-4.69)       (-6.06)      (-9.17)      (-8.55)

Term Loan A      -1.4079***    -1.4642***    -1.3347***    -0.9319***    -1.4352***    -1.4770***   -1.2761***   -0.9232***
                   (-2.89)       (-3.22)       (-3.90)       (-3.10)       (-2.91)       (-3.14)      (-3.61)      (-3.18)

Asset based      -0.2403***    -0.3216***    -0.4484***     -0.3914      -0.2275***    -0.3162***   -0.4334***   -0.4053***
loan               (-3.16)       (-2.93)       (-7.20)      (-12.03)       (-3.13)       (-2.97)      (-4.73)      (-9.90)

Middle market     -0.0096        0.0083       -0.0583       -0.0568       -0.0140        0.0099      -0.0838      -0.0405
                   (-0.06)       (0.07)        (-0.84)       (-0.70)       (-0.09)       (0.09)       (-0.80)      (-0.40)

Second lien      -0.4619**     -0.6126**      -0.4888*      -0.3256      -0.4498**     -0.6445***   -0.6604***    -0.4284*
                   (-2.08)       (-2.34)       (-1.70)       (-1.17)       (-2.13)       (-2.82)      (-3.13)      (-1.73)

Ln(Firm age)       0.0365        0.0484        0.0354       -0.0049       0.0426         0.0409       0.0524       0.0044
                   (0.65)        (1.21)        (0.92)        (-0.11)      (0.76)         (1.02)       (1.10)       (0.09)

Constant         -15.1022***    -7.2416***    -5.4377***    -5.3794***    -17.1944**      -4.2987      -5.8612      -7.9784*
                   (-2.64)       (-5.65)      (-9.08)        (-5.64)       (-2.10)       (-0.96)      (-1.30)      (-1.81)

Rating effects      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes




                                                           80
Industry effects   Yes    Yes    Yes     Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes    Yes

Year effects       Yes    Yes    Yes     Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes    Yes
Observations       1275   1336   1236    882   1260   1270   1098   733




                                        81
