NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBAL WEALTH INEQUALITY
Gabriel Zucman
Working Paper 25462
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25462

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019

I gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Norwegian Research Council. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Gabriel Zucman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Global Wealth Inequality
Gabriel Zucman
NBER Working Paper No. 25462
January 2019
JEL No. D31,H26
ABSTRACT
This article reviews the recent literature on the dynamics of global wealth inequality. I first
reconcile available estimates of wealth inequality in the United States. Both surveys and tax data
show that wealth inequality has increased dramatically since the 1980s, with a top 1% wealth
share around 40% in 2016 vs. 25–30% in the 1980s. Second, I discuss the fast growing literature
on wealth inequality across the world. Evidence points towards a rise in global wealth
concentration: for China, Europe, and the United States combined, the top 1% wealth share has
increased from 28% in 1980 to 33% today, while the bottom 75% share hovered around 10%.
Recent studies, however, may under-estimate the level and rise of inequality, as financial
globalization makes it increasingly hard to measure wealth at the top. I discuss how new data
sources (leaks from financial institutions, tax amnesties, and macroeconomic statistics of tax
havens) can be leveraged to better capture the wealth of the rich.

Gabriel Zucman
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
zucman@berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

Over the last few years, there has been an explosion of research on wealth inequality. Following the publication of Piketty’s (2014) book, a number of studies have attempted to produce
new estimates of long-run trends in wealth concentration. This literature has developed new
techniques to better capture the distribution of wealth by combining different data sources in a
consistent manner. In the United States, Saez and Zucman (2016) have combined income tax
returns with survey data and macroeconomic balance sheets to estimate wealth inequality back
to 1913. This method has subsequently been used in several countries to provide comparable
estimates of wealth concentration. The evidence collected so far suggests that wealth inequality
has increased in many countries over the last decades, although at different speeds, highlighting
the critical role played by domestic institutions (Alvaredo et al., 2018). These findings have received attention among academics, policy-makers, and the broader public, and have contributed
to a renewal of interest for theories of the wealth distribution, surveyed in Benhabib and Bisin
(2018).
Despite the growing attention for wealth inequality, however, we still face significant limitations in our ability to measure it. Because few countries have a wealth tax, there is typically
little administrative data on wealth. One has to use either survey data or indirect methods (such
as capitalizing incomes) and both of these approaches raise difficulties. As a result, a robust
discussion has emerged about the reliability of the various techniques used to measure the concentration, in particular in the United States (Kopczuk, 2015; Bricker et al., 2016). Moreover,
measuring the wealth of rich households is getting increasingly hard in a globalized world. Since
the 1980s, a large offshore wealth management industry has developed which makes some forms
wealth (namely, financial portfolios) harder to capture. Zucman (2013) estimates that 8% of the
world’s household financial wealth is held offshore. Last, as the world becomes more integrated
it is becoming increasingly important to measure wealth not only at the country level but also
at the global level. Yet although there is a large literature on global income inequality (e.g.,
Lakner and Milanovic, 2016), relatively little is currently known about the level and trends in
global wealth concentration. It is unclear, in particular, whether global wealth inequality is
rising or falling.
This paper summarizes the methodological and substantive advances of the recent literature
that attempts to measure wealth inequality, discusses the current uncertainties and controversies, and attempts to piece together and reconcile the existing evidence about the evolution
of wealth inequality in the United States and globally. By doing so it contributes to pushing
1

forward knowledge on the dynamic of global wealth concentration. I also discuss how, looking
forward, new data sources such as leaks from financial institutions, tax amnesties, and macroeconomic statistics of tax havens could be leveraged to better capture the wealth of the rich.1
I start in Section 2 by defining wealth and reviewing the various methods used to measure
its distribution. Following Saez and Zucman (2016), a number of papers have implemented the
capitalization method to estimate wealth inequality, conducted tests for its reliability, and compare the results to alternative methodologies. I survey what has been learned methodologically
and substantively from this literature and discuss the areas where more research is needed.
Section 3 focuses on the case of the United States. I show that the three sources of data
available in the United States today paint a consistent picture. Survey data (the Survey of
Consumer Finances), capitalized income data, and Forbes rankings of the 400 richest Americans
all show that wealth concentration is high and has increased sharply since the 1980s. The most
up-to-date versions of the SCF and capitalized income estimates have the exact same level for
the top 1% wealth share in 2016 (40%) and show similarly rising trends since the late 1980s.
There are slight differences of timing: the SCF shows a relatively modest increase in wealth
concentration in the 2000s and a large rise since 2010; while capitalized incomes find a large
increase between 2000 and 2010 and a stabilization since then. But the medium-term evolutions
in both datasets are strikingly similar: in both data sources the top 1% share has increased more
than 10 points since the beginning of the 1990s. This finding is confirmed by Forbes rankings
which show that the share of national wealth owned by the top 0.00025% (roughly the 400
richest Americans) has been multiplied by 4 since the early 1980s, in line with the rise in the
very top wealth shares recorded in capitalized income statistics. In sum, a body of independent
data sources paint the same picture of sharply rising concentration at the top end.
Section 4 discusses the fast growing literature on wealth inequality across the world. Over the
last years, a number of papers have attempted to produce “distributional national accounts,” i.e.,
estimates of wealth (and income) inequality that are comprehensive, internationally-comparable,
and cover the entire distribution from the bottom groups up to the very top.2 New estimates
for China, Russia, a number of European countries (France, the United Kingdom, Scandinavian countries) reveal a diversity of national trajectories. In Russia, wealth concentration
boomed after the transition to capitalism, and inequality appears to be extremely high, on par
1

This paper is focused on the empirics of wealth inequality. It complements Benhabib and Bisin (2018) that
surveys the economic theories of wealth inequality (see also Davies and Shorrocks, 1999). I do not discuss the
large literature on the relative role of inheritance vs. self-made wealth (surveyed in Piketty and Zucman, 2015).
2
The series made available online on the World Inequality Database (http://WID.world) follow this methodology.

2

or even higher than in the United States. In China—and a number of European ex-communist
countries—wealth inequality has also increased, but in a more gradual manner than in Russia,
reflecting the different privatization strategies followed in the different ex-communist countries. In Continental Europe, wealth concentration is rising, but less than in the United States,
China, or Russia. At the global level, there are two conflicting forces: in a number of emerging economies (most prominently China), aggregate private wealth is booming (it’s rising even
faster than aggregate income), pushing global wealth inequality down. But within each country,
wealth concentration is on the rise, pushing wealth concentration up. Overall, evidence points
towards a mild increase in global wealth concentration since the 1980s: for China, Europe, and
the United States combined, the top 1% wealth share has increased from 28% in 1980 to 33%
today, while the bottom 75% share hovered around 10%. But the recent history of global wealth
is more complicated than that: global wealth growth rates vary a lot across the distribution.
The bottom has been growing fast (about 5% per year since 1987), while the global wealth
middle class was squeezed (with growth of around 2.5% a year on average) and the top boomed
(with growth rates as high as 7%–8% a year for Forbes billionaires).
Recent studies may under-estimate the level and rise of inequality, however, because financial globalization makes it increasingly hard to measure wealth at the top. Statistics recently
released by the central banks of a number of prominent tax havens suggest that the equivalent
of 10% of world GDP is held in tax havens globally, and that this average masks a great deal of
heterogeneity–from a few percent of GDP in Scandinavia, to about 15% in Continental Europe,
and 60% in Gulf countries and some Latin American economies (Alstadsæter, Johannesen and
Zucman, 2018). Further, recent leaks from offshore financial institutions (such as the Panama
Papers in 2016, or the “Swiss Leaks” from HSBC Switzerland) and data from tax amnesties suggest that offshore wealth is highly concentrated among the rich (Alstadsæter, Johannesen and
Zucman, 2017). I discuss in Section 5 how combining this new type of evidence with existing estimates of the distribution of observable wealth can improve knowledge about wealth inequality.
Accounting for the wealth held in tax havens increases the top 0.01% wealth share substantially
in Europe, even in countries that do not use tax havens extensively. It has considerable effects
in Russia, where the vast majority of wealth at the top is held offshore.
In sum, it is not enough to study wealth concentration using self-reported survey data or tax
return data. Because the wealthy have access to many opportunities for tax avoidance and tax
evasion—and because the available evidence suggests that the tax planning industry has grown
since the 1980s as it became globalized—traditional data sources are likely to under-estimate

3

the level and rise of wealth concentration. To capture the true wealth of the rich in today’s
world, it is key to look beyond administrative tax and survey micro-data and to take instead a
global perspective that attempts to capture all forms of wealth, domestic and foreign.
Before starting the discussion of these various issues, let us a pause for a second and ask:
Why should we care about wealth inequality? To the extent that wealth is accumulated out of
past earnings, studying its distribution is a way of getting at the distribution of life-time income,
which is typically hard to study with available income data (most of which are cross-sectional
only). Moreover, wealth itself generates income (interest, dividends, capital gains, rents), and
hence the distribution of wealth shapes the distribution of current income (and therefore of
current consumption). More broadly, wealth serves two purposes. For everybody except the
rich, its main function is to provide security. It enables individuals to smooth shocks (what
is known as the precautionary saving motive) and to maintain consumption during retirement
(the life-cycle saving saving motive). For the rich, wealth begets power. A large political science
literature stresses the role played by the wealthy in the political process.3 A body of recent work
examines the hypothesis that wealth concentration may help explain the lack of redistributive
responses to the rise of inequality observed since the 1980s (e.g., Bonica et al., 2013). This can
rationalize why the public seems to care strongly about the distribution of wealth in democratic
societies (as illustrated, for instance, by the commercial success of a lengthy academic tome such
as Piketty’s 2014 book). In that context, I stress the need for better democratic transparency on
wealth and how better access to data sources could contribute to improving the public discussion
and the design of tax policies.

2

What is Wealth? Definition and Measurement

2.1

What is Wealth?

To make meaningful comparisons of wealth inequality across countries and over time, it is critical
to adopt a common, consistent, and comprehensive definition of wealth. In this article I follow
the definition codified in the System of National Accounts (2009), Piketty and Zucman (2014),
and Alvaredo et al. (2016): household net wealth includes all the non-financial assets—real
estate, land, buildings, etc.—and financial assets—equities, bonds, bank deposits, life insurance,
pensions funds, etc.—over which households can enforce ownership rights and that provide
3

See Hacker and Pierson (2010), Gilens (2012), Gilens and Page (2014), Kuhner (2014), Bonica et al. (2013);
Bertrand et al. (2018); see also Scheve and Stasavage (2017) for a critical survey of the evidence on the interplay
between wealth and democracy.

4

economic benefits to their owners, net of any debts. As a general rule, all assets and liabilities
are valued at their prevailing market prices. This definition of wealth includes all funded pension
wealth—whether held in individual retirement accounts, or through pension funds and life
insurance companies. This is the definition followed by all the wealth inequality series published
on the World Inequality Database at http://WID.world.
This definition is comprehensive in the sense that it includes all forms of marketable wealth.
However, it excludes a number of components that are sometimes thought as being part of
wealth. First, it excludes durable goods and valuables, such as cars and furniture. Durables
and valuables are small compare to the forms of wealth I consider, and measuring their distribution raises practical difficulties—in particular because there is no information about them in
income tax returns (as they do not generate taxable income). In practice, including them would
affect the level of wealth concentration only modestly and would not alter any of the trends
significantly.4 Second, the definition of wealth used in this paper excludes the present value of
future Social Security benefits and more broadly all future government transfer payments.
Should Social Security wealth be counted as wealth? Feldstein (1974) argues it should,
as does more recently Weil (2015). Social insurance programs—such as pay-as-you-go Social
Security systems—provide security to their beneficiaries and from that perspective are analogous
to wealth. Social Security might interact with private saving decisions (e.g., more generous payas-you-go Social Security systems may depress private wealth accumulation), and hence one may
want to analyze them altogether. Feldstein (1974) finds that including Social Security makes
wealth significantly more equally distributed. However, there are a number of major conceptual
and empirical reasons for excluding Social Security from wealth. First, although Social Security
certainly matters for saving decisions, the same is true for all promises of future government
transfers. Including Social Security in wealth would thus call for including the present value
of future health benefits (such as Medicare benefits in the United States), future government
education spending for one’s children, etc., net of future taxes. It is not clear where to stop,
and such computations are inherently fragile because of the lack of observable market prices for
these types of assets. Second, in contrast to marketable wealth, Social Security (and other future
government transfers) cannot be used to finance consumption today and absorb shocks. This
is the key difference with the forms of pension wealth we include in our computations, namely
4

The macroeconomic series of Piketty and Zucman (2014) show the value of durable goods has been relatively
small and stable over time (about 3050% of national income, i.e., the equivalent of about 510% of net household
wealth). In the U.S. Survey of Consumer Finances, cars—which represent the majority of durables—are relatively
equally distributed (Kennickell 2009). Hence adding durables would slightly reduce the level of wealth disparity
but would probably not have much impact on trends.

5

all funded pension accounts such as 401(k) and IRAs in the United States, which (subject to
restrictions and regulations) can be used before retirement.5
Rather than including it into wealth, a more promising way to study how Social Security
(and government taxes and transfers more generally) affects inequality is to contrast income
inequality before vs. after Social Security (and other government taxes and transfers). Because
in many cases the value of social insurance contributions, social insurance benefits, and other
governments taxes and transfers is directly observable, this approach provides a more robust
and transparent way to assess the equalizing effects of government intervention in the economy
than the approach favored by Feldstein (1974) that lumps together marketable wealth with
the present discounted value of future government transfers. Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018)
compute pre-tax-and-transfer vs. post-tax-and-transfer income inequality in the United States.
Unsurprisingly, income is more equally distributed after government intervention than before.
Even after government transfers are taken into account, however, income inequality appears to
have increased significantly since the early 1980s.
The wealth concept used in this article (and in the World Inequality Database) also excludes
human capital, which, contrary to non-human wealth, cannot be sold on markets. Because the
distributions of human and non-human capital are shaped by different economic forces (savings,
inheritance, and rates of returns matter for non-human capital; technology and education,
among others, matter for human capital), it is necessary to start by studying the two of them
separately. We also exclude the wealth of nonprofit institutions, mostly for data availability
reasons. Conceptually, it would be desirable to include at least part of nonprofits’ wealth: it is
somewhat arbitrary to include the assets owned by Bill Gates in his own name, but to exclude
the assets of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation entirely. The problem is that allocating the
wealth of foundations cannot be done easily (especially in the case of foundations created long
ago, like the Ford foundation). In a country like the United States, the wealth of foundations
is growing fast (from 0.8% of total household wealth in 1985 to 1.2% in 2012; see Saez and
Zucman, 2016). Looking forward, designing methods to impute the wealth of foundations (and
certain other non-profits) to specific groups of the distribution would be valuable.
5

The definition of wealth used in this article also excludes unfunded defined benefit pensions, i.e., promises
of future payments that are not backed by actual wealth. In the United States, the vast majority (more than
90%) of unfunded pension entitlements are for government employees (federal and local), thus are conceptually
similar to promises of future government transfers, and just like those are better excluded from wealth.

6

2.2
2.2.1

Measuring Wealth Inequality
Using Wealth Tax Data

The ideal data source to measure wealth inequality is population-wide administrative data on
all forms of wealth at market value. Scandinavian countries come closest to this ideal: because
they have (Norway) or used to have (Denmark, Sweden) broad-based wealth taxes, administrations in these countries collect detailed micro-level data on wealth from third parties (banks,
other financial institutions, real estate registers, etc.).6 These data sources were recently exploited by Jakobsen et al. (2018) and Alstadsæter, Johannesen and Zucman (2017) to construct
comprehensive estimates of the distribution of wealth in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden for
recent decades. A number of countries (such as France and Spain) also have or used to have
wealth taxes covering the top of the distribution; recent research has exploited these data to
shed light on wealth concentration at the top (Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty, 2016;
Martı́nez-Toledano, 2017) .
In practice, wealth tax data never cover all forms of wealth, so these data need to be
combined with other data sources to provide a comprehensive estimate of wealth concentration.
In Denmark, all forms of wealth—with the exception of private funded pension wealth—used
to be taxable, with no or limited valuation discounts, and data on the distribution of private
pension wealth has recently become available, making it possible to compute a particularly
reliable estimate of wealth concentration. More frequently, however, some (sometimes many)
asset classes are legally exempted from the wealth tax, and/or assets are only taxable for a
fraction of their market value, requiring careful adjustments. Another traditional issue with
wealth tax data is the valuation of unlisted businesses, for which regular price information is
lacking. One appealing solution involves valuing unlisted business equity based on valuation
multiples of listed firms in the same industrial sector, as Bach, Calvet and Sodini (2017) do in
Sweden.
2.2.2

Estate Multiplier

The main source traditionally used to study the wealth inequality in countries with no wealth tax
has been inheritance and estate tax returns. By definition, estates and inheritance returns only
provide information about wealth at death. To generate estimates for the distribution of wealth
among the living, one needs to weight wealth-at-death by the inverse of the mortality rate—what
6

Sweden stopped collecting data after its wealth tax was abolished in 2007, while Denmark continued doing
so after its wealth tax was abolished in 1997.

7

is known as the estate multiplier technique. In the United Kingdom, this approach was followed
by Atkinson and Harrison (1978), who exploit inheritance tax data covering the 1922-1976
period, and was recently applied by Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli (2018) to estimate wealth
inequality from 1895 to the present. In the United States, Lampman (1962) uses estate tax
data to study wealth inequality over the 1916-1956 period, and the estate multiplier technique
was subsequently applied by many other researchers—including the official personal wealth
estimates from the Statistics of Income (see Johnson, 2011, for a compendium of these studies)
and Kopczuk and Saez (2004) who produce top wealth shares for the 1916-2000 period. In
France, it was applied by Piketty, Postel-Vinay and Rosenthal (2006) and more recently by
Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty (2016).
A key advantage of the estate multiplier method is that it makes it possible to produce
long-run series of wealth concentration, since many countries have had an estate or inheritance
tax since the beginning of the twentieth century or earlier. In contrast, survey data only cover
post-World War II decades at best, and most of the time only start in the 1980s.
Recent research, however, has highlighted major pitfalls with the estate multiplier technique
in the United States. By matching estate tax returns to income tax returns, Saez and Zucman
(2016) conduct a first direct test of this method. They compute the distribution of capital
income at death and weight each observation by the age × gender inverse mortality rates used
in Kopczuk and Saez (2004), which factor in a correction to take into account that the wealthy
live longer than the average population. If the estate multiplier technique worked well, the
distribution of capital income in the weighted decedent sample should be similar to that in
the living population. However, it is not. According to the estate multiplier method, the
concentration of taxable capital income has barely increased since 1976, while in actual facts it
has surged. A researcher who would only have access to estate tax returns (with information on
taxable income the year before death) and who chose to use this information to study income
inequality would mistakenly conclude that taxable capital income inequality has not increased
in the United States. Unsurprisingly, since the estate multiplier estimates suggest that the
concentration of capital income has been stable, they also suggest that the concentration of
wealth has been stable.
Why does the estate multiplier technique fail in the United States? There are two key issues.
The first is that the approach of death affects behavior. People who will die soon may become
unable to manage their wealth well, consume more, spend large amounts on health care services,
or organize their wealth so as to shelter it from the estate tax, for example by transferring it

8

to foundations or children. Because behavior changes just before death, some people with high
life-time earnings will tend to die with little wealth and taxable income. In the U.S. context,
Kopczuk (2007) finds evidence that the onset of a terminal illness leads to a large reduction in
the value of estates reported on tax returns. Moreover, the way that death affects behavior has
probably varied over time, in particular because of changes in estate tax enforcement. In the
United States, the estate tax has been considerably scaled back since the 1970s. While estate
and gift tax revenue amounted to 0.20% of household net wealth in the early 1970, since 2010
they have amounted to 0.03%–0.04% each year only. While this dramatic fall partly owes to
rate cuts and increases in the exemption level, it may also owe to an increase in tax avoidance
and financial engineering, such a a more widespread use of valuation discounts for closelyheld businesses and more sophisticated estate tax planning. There has always been estate tax
avoidance, but there is no reason to presume that this avoidance has been constant over time:
the incentives for the IRS to enforce the estate tax (and the political will to do so) may well
have declined over the last decades as rates were cut and exemption thresholds increased. More
research on changes in estate tax avoidance would be valuable to correct the estate multiplier
technique and reconcile it with the other data sources on U.S. wealth concentration, which all
show a sharp increase in inequality since the 1980s (see Section 3 below).
The second issue is the following. The estate-multiplier method weights estate tax returns
by the inverse probability of death based on mortality tables by age and gender. Because the
wealthy typically live longer than the rest of population, mortality rates need to be corrected for
differential mortality by wealth group. In Kopczuk and Saez (2004), the same correction factors
is used for all years, thereby assuming that the mortality gradient by wealth has not changed
over time. But a number of recent studies have documented that differential mortality by
socio-economic status has grown (e.g., Waldron, 2007; Chetty et al., 2016). Growing mortality
differentials introduce mechanical biases in the estate-multiplier method. This problem is not
insuperable, however. In the United Kingdom, Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli (2018) do not
assume a constant wealth-mortality gradient over time: their adjustment varies over the years.
They also consider a range of robustness tests showing how varying the mortality gradient
affects the top 1% wealth share. They find that if one reduces the relative mortality of the
richest males aged 65–75 from 60% (as in their benchmark estimates) to 40% in recent years,
then the top 1% wealth share would be as high today as in 1960 (while it is significantly lower
in their benchmark estimate, see Figure 4 below). Looking forward, more research is needed on
the evolution of differential mortality across wealth groups.

9

2.2.3

Income Capitalization

To measure the distribution of wealth, one can capitalize the dividends, interest, rents, and
other forms of capital income declared on income tax returns. This capitalization technique
was pioneered by King (1927), Stewart (1939), Atkinson and Harrison (1978), Wolff (1980), and
Greenwood (1983), who used it to estimate the distribution of wealth in the United Kingdom
and in the United States for some years in isolation.7 Saez and Zucman (2016) use it to estimate
the distribution of U.S. wealth annually since 1913. In recent years, this method has become
more popular and has been applied, alone or in conjunction with other methods, to estimate
the distribution of wealth in Australia (Galiana, 2016), South Africa (Orthofer, 2016), France
(Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret, and Piketty, 2016), and the United Kingdom (Alvaredo, Atkinson
and Morelli, 2018).8
The general idea behind the income capitalization method is to recover the distribution of
wealth from the distribution of capital income flows. In its simplest form, the method relies on
the assumption of fixed rates of return by asset class. In more sophisticated versions, one can
introduce different rates of return within each asset class, e.g., due to idiosyncratic variations
in rates of return, or because the rate of return varies with the level of asset holding. Saez
and Zucman (2016) provide evidence that the simple method with uniform rates of returns
within asset class seems to perform reasonably well in the U.S. context. It works in the Survey
of Consumer Finances (i.e., one finds the same distribution of wealth when capitalizing the
taxable income reported in the SCF and when looking at the self-reported wealth values); it
works in matched estates-income tax data (i.e., rates of returns the year before death do not
seem to vary with wealth within asset class); and it works for U.S. foundations (i.e., one finds
the same distribution of wealth when capitalizing the investment income of foundations and
when looking at their wealth, which they report to the IRS).
However, it is clear that the simple capitalization method has no reason to work universally.
A lot depends on the specificities of the tax system. In the United States, the tax code has
historically been designed such that capital income flows to individual returns for a wide variety
of ownership structures, and hence a large amount of wealth generates taxable income.9 But in
7

Kuznets (1953) pioneered the use of tax data to study income inequality, but he did not attempt to use
these data to study wealth inequality.
8
Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2014) use the capitalization method and ZIP-Code-level income tax statistics to
measure wealth by ZIP Code.
9
In particular, dividends and interest earned through mutual funds, S-corporations, partnerships, holding
companies, and some trusts end up being included in the “interest” and “dividends” lines of the ultimate
individual owner’s tax return, just as income from directly-owned stocks and bonds. A number of provisions in
the tax code prevent individuals from avoiding the income tax through the use of wealth-holding intermediaries,

10

other countries, it can be easier for wealthy individuals to earn non-reportable capital income.
A striking case is in point recently studied is Norway, where following the introduction of a new
tax, dividend distributions collapsed in 2006 and retained earnings surged, leading to extremely
low realized rates of return on equity (Alstadsæter et al., 2016). If the wealthy have access to
more tax avoidance opportunities—i.e., are able to report relatively little taxable capital income
for any dollar of wealth they own—then the capitalization method will tend to under-estimate
wealth concentration. Moreover, if access to such avoidance opportunities change over time, then
the simple capitalization will deliver biased estimates of the trends in wealth concentration.
Another known issue with the capitalization method is that returns are heterogeneous, even
within a given asset class. This problem was first discussed conceptually in Atkinson and Harrison (1978). Recent studies that leverage detailed population-wide Scandinavian administrative
data with information on both income and wealth allow to quantify this issue. In Norway,
Fagereng et al. (2016, 2018) find that returns on banks deposits, for instance, are heterogeneous
across individuals (with a standard deviation of 2.6%), despite the fact that these instruments
entail no risk. Similar findings are obtained by Lundberg and Waldenström (2017) in Sweden.
Such returns heterogeneity implies that capitalized income estimates are biased. But they do
not imply that the bias is economically significant; and in fact both numerical explorations (Saez
and Zucman, 2016, Section IV.A) and the available evidence collected so far suggests that it is
not very large. One simple way to see this is to consider the following fact. When one includes
realized capital gains, the return on equities is dispersed—much more than when one excludes
realized capital gains. Yet as shown in Saez and Zucman (2016), the distribution of U.S. wealth
is similar whether one capitalizes dividends only or dividends plus capital gains.10
Another potential pitfall of the capitalization method noted in the literature is that returns
may be correlated with wealth. Fagereng et al. (2018) and Bach, Calvet and Sodini (2017) find
compelling evidence that rates of return rise with wealth in Norway and Sweden respectively.
Such a correlation does not imply that the capitalization method necessarily delivers significantly
biased results, however. A lot of the correlation between returns and wealth comes from portfolio
composition effects: the wealthy invest more of their wealth in equities, which tend to have
higher rates of returns than bank deposits and houses. For the capitalization method to be
biased, returns must be correlated with wealth within asset class. As the number of asset
such as the accumulated earnings tax—in force since 1921—levied on the undistributed corporate profits deemed
to be retained for tax avoidance purposes. See Saez and Zucman (2016).
10
Top wealth shares are slightly higher when capital gains are capitalized, but only slightly so. For instance,
in the United States, the share of wealth owned by the top 1% richest tax units rises from 38.8% to 40.6% in
2016 when capitalizing realized capital gains.

11

classes used in the analysis grows, this concern is alleviated. If one uses too few asset classes,
however, then the capitalization method may over-estimate wealth concentration. Again, the
specificity of the tax system—whether capital income is broken into many different categories
on tax forms, or lumped together in a few boxes—is key. The series collected in the World
Inequality Database use a minimum of four different asset categories (housing assets, business
assets, financial assets, and debts) and as much as 13 in the United States (8 that are captured by
capitalizing income—corporate equities excluding S-corporations, taxable fixed income claims,
tax-exempt bonds, tenant-occupied housing, mortgages, sole proprietorships, partnerships, and
equities in S-corporations—plus 5 that do not generate taxable income and that are captured
using survey data—owner-occupied housing, non-mortgage debt, non-interest bearing deposits
and currency, pensions, and life insurance).
2.2.4

Combining the Various Data Sources

Neither the capitalization method, nor the estate multiplier method alone can deliver comprehensive estimates of wealth inequality. Estate and income tax data always need to be combined
with other data sources. As a minimum, they need to be combined with macroeconomic household balance sheets that contain estimates of the total amount of wealth. A growing number
of countries publish national balance sheets that report on the market value of all the nonfinancial and financial assets and liabilities held by each sector of the economy, including households. These balance sheets were first exploited by Goldsmith (1985, 1991) and subsequently
by Piketty and Zucman (2014) to study the long-run evolution of wealth-to-income and capitalto-output ratios. Because these balance sheets follow similar, internationally-agreed concepts
and methods, anchoring wealth inequality estimates to the total amount of wealth recorded in
these balance sheets helps improve the comparability of inequality statistics across countries.
Survey data also need to be mobilized to measure the forms of wealth that cannot be captured
by capitalizing incomes or using the estate multiplier method. A number of important asset
categories do not generate taxable capital income flows, in particular owner-occupied housing,
zero-interest bank deposits, and investments held in tax-exempt pension accounts. Similarly,
non-bequeathable forms of wealth are invisible in estate tax returns, including annuitized pensions and life insurances. To capture these forms of wealth, one has to rely on surveys. The
wealth inequality of Saez and Zucman (2016) apply such a “mixed method:” some wealth components are estimated by capitalizing incomes, while others (most prominently housing and
pensions) are estimated using the Survey of Consumer Finances.

12

A symmetric approach involves starting with survey data and supplementing surveys with
estimates of wealth at the top coming from named list of wealthy individuals, as in Blanchet
(2016), Bach, Thiemann and Zucco (2018) and Vermeulen (2018). Because of sampling and
non-sampling errors, surveys are typically not well suited to capturing rich individuals. This
problem is particularly acute for wealth given that wealth is always very concentrated (much
more than labor income, due to the multiplicative and cumulative processes that govern wealth
accumulation). Vermeulen (2018) shows that supplementing surveys with named lists of wealthy
individuals can go a long way towards reducing the bias in top wealth shares estimated from
survey data.
The series published in the World Inequality Database favor the approach that starts from
fiscal sources (income and inheritance tax data) and supplements these sources with surveys
(and sometimes billionaires lists). Starting with tax data seems preferable, because these data
are generally more reliable than surveys at the top and more comprehensive than billionaires
rankings (which by definition only include a limited number of individuals). In countries where
only tabulated tax or survey data are available, such as China (Piketty, Yang and Zucman, 2017),
Russia (Novokmet, Piketty and Zucman, 2018), and Lebanon (Assouad, 2017) the distribution of
income or wealth is interpolated using generalized Pareto curves (Blanchet, Fournier and Piketty,
2017).11 In countries where no fiscal data is available, one cannot do better than starting with
surveys and making a correction for the top using, e.g., lists of rich individuals. Alvaredo et al.
(2016) present guidelines to estimate wealth depending on the raw data available. To improve
the cross-country comparability of inequality statistics, it is necessary to use a common unit of
observation. In the World Inequality Database, the benchmark unit of observation is the adult
individual, and wealth is split equally among married spouses. One advantage of this procedure
is that it does not require to collect data on property regimes, i.e., on how wealth is split among
couples (which in many cases is hard to obtain). One drawback is that it may under-estimate
the rise of inequality if there is a process of individualization of wealth, as found in France by
Frémeaux and Leturcq (2016).
One general conclusion of recent work on estimating wealth concentration is that the available
data sources on wealth are often limited (as stressed for instance by Alvaredo, Atkinson and
Morelli, 2016, in the U.K. context). To approximate wealth inequality, recent research has
focused on trying to combine the available evidence in a pragmatic manner, and reconciling the
results of the different methodologies that can be applied given the available data.
11

That is, instead of estimating a single Pareto coefficient at the top of the wealth distribution, a curve of
Pareto coefficients b(p) varying with the percentile p is estimated.

13

3

Wealth Inequality in the United States

3.1

The Rise of U.S. Wealth Inequality

What do we know about wealth inequality in the United States? Figure 1 shows the evolution of the top 0.1% wealth share obtained by capitalizing income. Compared to the series
in Saez and Zucman (2016), the data are updated to 2016 and the time series is revised to
include methodological improvements. First, the series is updated to reflect the latest version
of the the macroeconomic household balance sheet published in the Financial Accounts of the
United States. The Financial Accounts are regularly improved and the Saez and Zucman (2016)
estimates are by construction benchmarked to these totals. Second, the series shown in Figure 1 includes a better treatment of wealth that does not generate taxable income, based on a
more systematic exploitation of the Survey of Consumer Finances. Third, it fixes an error in the
computation of top wealth shares in the early 1930s; the new estimates show that wealth concentration fell more rapidly in the early 1930s than was originally reported.12 Last, I use the adult
individual as the unit of observation, with wealth equally split between married spouses. This
slightly reduces the level of wealth concentration throughout the period and ensures consistency
with other countries.
As shown by Figure 1, U.S. wealth concentration has followed a marked U-shaped evolution
of the last century. It was high in the 1910s and 1920s, with a particularly fast increase in the
second half of the 1920s. The top 0.1% wealth share peaked at close to 25% in 1929. It then
fell abruptly in the early 1930s (in the context of the Great Depression) and continued to fall
gradually from the late 1930s to the late 1940s (in the context of the New Deal and the war
economy). After a period of remarkable stability in the 1950s and 1960s, the top 0.1% wealth
share reached its low-water mark in the 1970s, and since the early 1980s it has been gradually
rising to close to 20% in recent years. U.S. wealth concentration seems to have returned to
levels last seen during the Roaring Twenties.13
How does capitalized income estimates compare to other data sources? Figure 2 compares
the top 1% wealth share obtained by capitalizing income with the top 1% wealth share recorded
12

The original Saez and Zucman (2016) series showed a gradual decline of top wealth shares in the early 1930s,
with a rapid decline only in the late 1930s. As noted by Kopczuk (2015), this was not consistent with estimates
based on the estate multiplier technique, which show a rapid drop of wealth concentration in the aftermath of
the Great Depression (Kopczuk and Saez, 2004). Once the mistake in the original Saez and Zucman (2016) series
is fixed, the dynamic of top wealth shares in the early 1930s is very similar in both data sources; see Appendix
Figure A.1. The error is also corrected in the series made available online at http://WID.world.
13
Another striking dimension of wealth inequality in America is the disparities across races, studied recently
by Dettling et al. (2017).

14

in the Survey of Consumer Finances (Bricker et al., 2017). The unit of observation in the SCF
is the household; to make the estimates more comparable I report capitalized income estimates
using tax units (instead of equal-split adults) as unit of observation. Moreover, I make one
adjustment to the official SCF results. To make sure that no observation is publicly identifiable,
the SCF excludes the Forbes 400 richest individuals; I add the wealth of the Forbes 400 back.
Two key results emerge from Figure 2.
First, and most importantly, the top 1% wealth share is virtually identical whether one
looks at capitalized incomes or at the Survey of Consumer Finances in 2016. The two sources
currently available to measure wealth inequality in the United States find that the top 1% owns
about 40% of total household wealth.14 To be precise, the share of wealth owned by the top 1%
richest tax units estimated by capitalizing incomes is 38.9% in 2016. The official SCF estimate
for that same year, which excludes the Forbes 400, is 38.8% (Bricker et al., 2017). It reaches
40.8% when including the Forbes 400. Whether one looks at capitalized incomes or at the SCF,
the top 1% richest U.S. tax units (or families) own 40 times the average wealth. In capitalized
income estates the top 1% richest tax units (around 170,000 tax units) own $17.6 million on
average (close to 40 times the average wealth per tax unit of $453,000 at year end). In the
SCF, the top 1% richest families (around 126,000 families) excluding the Forbes 400 own $26.8
million on average (close to 40 times the average wealth per family of $692,000).15 As detailed
below, no country (apart from Russia) for which estimates of wealth inequality are available
has similarly high recorded levels of wealth inequality.
Second, both the SCF capitalized income estimates show a similarly large increase in wealth
concentration since 1989—the first wave of the modern Survey of Consumer Finances. In the
SCF, the share of total wealth owned by the top 1% has increased by 9 points since 1989 and
by 10 points when including the Forbes 400; in capitalized income estimates it has increased by
11 points. The share of wealth owned by the bottom 90% has collapsed in similar proportions
in the two datasets (-10 points in both the SCF and capitalized income data). The official SCF
do not allow one to go before 1989. Surveys were conducted in 1983 and 1986 but are not
14

The estate multiplier method cannot be used to estimate the top 1% wealth share in recent years because
the exemption threshold is too high.
15
Total wealth is sometimes higher in the SCF ($87 trillion) than in the Financial Accounts ($77 trillion) at
the end of 2016. This is due to a number of reasons: the SCF includes durables (most prominently cars) in
wealth, in contrast to the Financial Accounts totals we use; housing values are higher in the SCF than in the
Financial Accounts; on the other hand the SCF excludes defined benefit pensions (in contrast to the Financial
Accounts totals). For the purpose of conducting international comparisons, it seems slightly preferable to use
the Financial Accounts totals, since the Financial Accounts are based on harmonized, internationally-agreed
statistics concepts and methods. But looking forward, it would be valuable for the Federal Reserve to publish a
single harmonized benchmark estimate of total household wealth for both the Financial Accounts and the SCF.

15

directly comparable due to differences in sampling; see Kennickell (2011) for a description and
Wolff (2016) for a recent analysis of the SCF data including the 1983 and 1986 survey waves.
Historical waves of the Survey of Consumer Finances, however, were conducted by the Economic
Behavior Program of the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan from 1948 to
1977; in contrast to the modern SCF, these earlier surveys did not oversample rich households.
Kuhn et al. (2017) harmonize the historical and modern surveys to create a long-run micro-level
dataset spanning nearly 70 years. They find that the top 10% wealth share in this dataset has
followed the same evolution since 1950 as the one obtained by Saez and Zucman (2016).16 In
sum, the SCF and capitalized income series, although based on entirely different data sources
and methodologies, both show that wealth inequality has increased sharply in the United States,
with the top 1% wealth share rising from 25%–30% in the 1980s to about 40% in 2016.
A direct implication of this finding is that overall income inequality must have increased
significantly too. The distribution of income y depends on the distribution of labor income
yL (itself shaped by factors such as education and technology, unions, minimum wage, etc.),
the distribution of capital income yK (itself the product of the distribution of wealth and the
distribution of rates of returns), the relative importance of labor and capital income in the
economy (i.e., the share α = YK /Y and 1 − α of capital and labor in national income Y ), and
the joint distribution of labor and capital income. By Sklar’s theorem, the joint distribution h
of labor and capital income can be expressed as product of the marginal distributions f (yL ) and
g(yK ) of labor and capital income times the copula c (i.e., the joint distribution of percentile
ranks):
h(yL , yK ) = f (yL ) · g(yK ) · c(F (yL ), G(yK ))
All of these components appear to have moved since the 1980s in such a way as to push
towards more income concentration. A large body of evidence (summarized in, e.g., Autor,
2014) shows that labor income inequality has increased since the 1980s, with in particular a
dramatic increase in CEO pay (Gabaix and Landier, 2008). Both the SCF and income tax data
show that wealth inequality is on the rise—suggesting that the inequality of capital income
has increased too.17 National accounts data show that the capital share of national of national
16

At least two other survey data sources exist to study the history of U.S. wealth inequality. In 1962, a
precursor to the SCF—the Survey of Financial Characteristics of Consumers (SFCC)—was conducted by the
Federal Reserve Board of Washington. This was a stratified sample which over-sampled high income households.
In 1969 a synthetic dataset constructed from income tax returns and information provided in the 1970 Census
of Population was assembled in the MESP database; wealth was estimated by capitalizing income flows in the
tax data. See Wolff (2017) for an analysis of these datasets linked with the modern SCF.
17
There are few studies on the distribution of rates of returns. It is possible to imagine that if anything,

16

income has grown, both within the corporate sector (see, e.g., Tørsløv et al., 2018) and in the
entire economy—an un-equalizing force because capital income is more unequally distributed
than labor income. And evidence from tax returns show that the association between labor and
capital income at the top has grown (Atkinson and Lakner, 2017).

3.2

Reconciling SCF and Capitalized Income Tax Data

Despite the similarity in the level and trend in wealth concentration in the SCF and capitalized
incomes estimates, there are slight differences between the two sources. First, and although the
medium-term evolutions are similar, the increase in the top 1% wealth share does not take place
at exactly the same time: the SCF shows a relatively modest increase in wealth concentration
in the 2000s and a large rise since 2010, while capitalized incomes find a large increase between
2000 and 2010 and a stabilization (or more muted increase) since then. Second, the SCF and
capitalized income series diverge when it comes to wealth concentration within the top 1%: the
SCF has less wealth going to the top 0.1% and more going to the next 0.9% then capitalized
income series.
How can we reconcile these differences? As discussed by Bricker et al. (2016), a number
of technical reasons can explain the discrepancies between the SCF and the capitalized income
estimates. First, the SCF is based on a sample of about 6,000 families. As a result, estimates
of top wealth shares come with confidence intervals reflecting the fact although the top is oversampled, relatively few rich families end up being included in the survey. Generally speaking,
surveys—even high-quality surveys like the SCF—are under-powered to study changes at the
very top of the wealth distribution, such as the evolution of the shares of wealth owned by the
top 0.1% or top 0.01%—tiny groups for which only a small number of individuals are sampled
each year. Saez and Zucman (2016) show that after adjusting the SCF to account for the
Forbes 400, changing the unit of observation from families to tax units, and adjusting asset
values such as total wealth in the SCF matches the total amount of household wealth recorded
in the Financial Accounts asset class by asset class, the top 0.1% wealth share in capitalized
financial innovation and globalization may have increased the inequality in rates of returns. One example is
private equity. Wealthy households may be more able to pick the stocks of companies that will grow fast by
investing in non-publicly traded stocks through private equity funds. If private equity funds tend to spot good
investment opportunities such as the future Googles or Facebooks, they will generate large capital gains for their
investors. The broader public can invest in such companies only after they go public, at which time premium price
effects may have run their course. If inequality in rates of returns has increased then capital income inequality
may have increased even more than wealth inequality. In any case, it is a known fact (Saez and Zucman, 2016)
that the inequality of taxable capital income has increased enormously (more than the distribution of wealth).
For instance, the top 0.01% interest income earners had 2.6% of all taxable interest in 1980; in 2012 they had
10 times more, that is, 27.3%.

17

income series is in the confidence interval of the SCF top 0.1% wealth share.
One indication that capitalized income series correctly capture the dynamic of the very
top wealth shares is that they are very consistent with the independent Forbes Magazine data.
Figure 3 compares the evolution of the wealth share of the top 400 richest Americans (normalized
for population growth) to the evolution of the top 0.01% wealth share obtained by capitalizing
incomes. According to Forbes, the share of wealth owned by the top 0.00025% (roughly the
400 richest Americans) has increased from 1% in the early 1980s to over 3% in recent years,
on par with the estimated tripling of the top 0.01%. The year-to-year evolution in these two
series, which are based on fully independent data sources and techniques (as Forbes does not
have access to individual income tax returns), is strikingly similar.
To be sure, capitalized income series also involve uncertainties, as noted in Section 2 above.
Saez and Zucman (2016) apply the simple capitalization method where the same rate of return
is applied for each asset class. This assumption is unlikely to be true for each asset class each
year. In years when the wealthy have higher interest rates on bonds and deposits, for instance,
the capitalization method may tend to over-estimate wealth concentration. Kopczuk (2015)
suggests that the capitalization method may over-estimate wealth concentration in periods of
low interest rates. However, wealth concentration has increased even more in the SCF than
in capitalized income series over the 2010–2016 period, during which interest rates were very
low. Moreover, Bourne et al. (2018, Figure 4) find evidence that interest rates seem to actually
fall with wealth at the very top, so that the capitalization method may actually under-state
wealth inequality in recent years. The marginal differences that exist between the SCF and
capitalized income series should not obscure the fact that both sources reveal the same level of
wealth concentration and strikingly similar medium-run trends. Both sources have limitations,
but together—and with the Forbes data—they paint a consistent picture.

4

Global Wealth Inequality

This Section presents estimates of wealth inequality in countries other than the United States
as well as tentative estimates of global wealth concentration. Generally speaking, the estimates
discussed below are based on series available in the World Inequality Database and they update
earlier results presented in Alvaredo et al. (2017, 2018).18 These series have the advantage of
following a common and consistent methodology: they are constructed by distributing the total
18

For a survey of studies based on survey data only, see Cowell and Van Kerm (2015) who survey the evidence
from European surveys. For a survey of studies based on tax data (instead of distributional national accounts),
see Roine and Waldenström (2015).

18

amount of household wealth recorded in official household balance sheets, using a combination
of survey data and tax data (either capitalized income tax returns or estate tax data), sometimes
supplemented by named lists of wealthy individuals for the very top. Despite this harmonization
effort, it is worth stressing that, given the enormous challenges involved in measuring wealth
in many parts of the world, these series should still be viewed as imperfect, provisional, and
subject to revision.

4.1

Wealth Inequality Across Countries

Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the evolution of the top 1% and top 10% wealth shares in 5 countries:
the United States, the United Kingdom, France, China, and Russia. We observe a large rise
of wealth concentration in the United States, China, and Russia in recent decades, and a more
moderate rise in France and the United Kingdom.
In China and Russia, the available evidence reveals a huge increase in wealth inequality over
the last two decades. The top 1% wealth share almost doubled in both countries, in China from
just over 15% in 1995 to 30% in 2015 (Piketty et al., 2017), and in Russia from below 22%
to around 43% (Piketty, Novokmet and Zucman, 2018). Interestingly, while the top 1% share
is much higher in Russia than in China, the the top 10% share is similar in the two countries
(67% in China and 71% in Russia in 2015), suggesting that Russia’s transition strategy has
favored its most wealthy citizens more than China’s. Wealth inequality appears to be about as
high in Russia as in the United States, while China’s wealth inequality appears to be roughly
in between that of France and of the United States.
Novokmet et al.

(2018) discuss the differences between China, Russia, and other ex-

communist countries. China and Russia followed different strategies for privatizing housing
and state-owned enterprises. In Russia, state-owned businesses were transferred to the private
sector through a quick voucher privatization process. Citizens were given a book of vouchers
that represented potential shares in former state-owned enterprises which could be traded or
sold. This voucher privatization strategy led to a rapid and huge reduction in net public wealth,
from around 300 percent of national income in 1990 to 70 percent in 2000. Privatization occurred more slowly in China. The quicker and more chaotic privatization process in Russia may
have favored a small group of the population (the oligarchs), explaining the larger increase in
wealth concentration there than in other ex-communist countries.
In France and the United Kingdom, wealth inequality seems to have increased more modestly
than in the United States, Russia, and China over the last decades. The literature emphasizes

19

the role that housing and real estate price have had in mitigating inequality (Garbinti, GoupilleLebret and Piketty, 2016; Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli, 2018). In both countries, real estate
prices rose significantly in the 2000s. This has tended to boost the wealth share of the middle
class, since most its wealth is invested in housing, while upper groups mostly own financial
assets. Martı́nez-Toledano (2017) shows that property prices similarly played an equalizing role
in Spain, leading wealth concentration to remain broadly stable (although with large short-run
variations due to the chaotic evolution of real estate prices). High housing prices, however,
have ambiguous effects on wealth inequality: although they tend to increase the wealth share
of the middle class, they also make it harder for the poor to become property owners, thus
exacerbating inequality between the poor (the bottom 50%) and the middle class (the next
40%).
The key difference between Europe and many other parts of the world (including Russia and
the United States) is that wealth inequality is significantly lower in Europe today than it was
a century ago. While wealth inequality appears to have returned to its level of a century ago
in both the United States and Russia, European countries have a more developed patrimonial
middle class which did not exist on the eve of World War 1. The high share of wealth owned by
the middle-class is largely the product of a number of policies adopted in the post-World War
II decades, including nationalizations, rent control, and tax policies which led to a historical
compression of wealth inequality during the mixed-economy regime of the 1950s, 1960s and
1970s.
Recent research also emphasizes the role that private pensions—and automatic enrollment
into such pensions—has played in equalizing the distribution of private wealth in a number of
countries in recent decades. Jakobsen et al. (2018) find that the abolition of the Danish wealth
tax in 1997 significantly boosted wealth accumulation at the top. However this increase was
offset by an increase in private pension wealth owned by the middle-class. On aggregate, private pensions rose from around 50% of national income in the late 1980s to 178% in 2014. Like
housing, pension wealth is relatively equally distributed, and hence rising pension wealth tends
to reduce top wealth shares. As shown by Chetty et al. (2014), automatic employer contributions to retirement accounts increase saving, pension wealth, and total wealth substantially for
middle-class Danish households. Saving encouragement for the middle-class in the form of default options or nudges appear to be a powerful way to boost wealth accumulation and equalize
the distribution of wealth. More broadly, domestic institutional features (such as regulations of
the housing and mortgage markets and pension policies) appear to be an important determi-

20

nant of wealth inequality—albeit one that is typically overlooked in standard models of wealth
accumulation.

4.2

Global Wealth Inequality

Following Alvaredo et al. (2018), I present tentative estimates of global wealth concentration
where the world is proxied by China, the United States, and Europe, and Europe itself is
represented by three countries (France, Spain, and the United Kingdom), which on the basis
of other countries for which wealth inequality data exist (in particular Scandinavian countries
and Germany) appear to be broadly representative. The rational for this is that the data
collected so far in the World Inequality Database do not make it possible yet to construct a
full global wealth distribution. One basic problem is that there are large areas of the world—
particularly in Africa, Latin America, and Asia—where no good measures of aggregate private
wealth currently exist. Fortunately, available research on key regions already provides valuable
insights into global wealth dynamics.19 A number of results are worth noting.
First, At the global level, wealth is highly concentrated: the top 10% owns more than 70% of
the total wealth in China, Europe, and the United States combined; the bottom 50% owns less
than 2%; and the middle 40% (which could be described as the global wealth middle-class) owns
less than 30%. Wealth concentration would probably be even higher if Latin America, Africa,
and the rest of Asia were included in the analysis, as most people in these regions would be in the
poorer parts of the distribution. Wealth is substantially more concentrated than income. This
result comes from both tails of the distribution. In most countries the share of wealth owned by
the bottom 50% is close to 0% (while the share of income earned by the bottom 50% is usually
around 15%–25%). That is, on aggregate, total assets for the bottom 50% are typically about
as large as total debts. At the top end by contrast, the wealthiest individuals own fortunes that
are very large compared to average wealth (within country, the average wealth of the top 0.1%
is typically 100 to 200 times larger than average wealth in the entire population today).
Second, evidence points towards a mild rise in global wealth inequality over the past decades.
For China, Europe, and the United States combined, the top 1% wealth share appears to have
increased from 28% in 1980 to 33% today, while the bottom 75% share hovered around 10%
(Figure 6). Global wealth dynamics are driven by both between- and within-country forces.
The rise of private wealth has been faster in large emerging economies than in rich countries,
19
A complementary approach is followed by Davies et al. (2017) who estimate the level and distribution of
world wealth by combining household balance sheets and survey data, extending the work of Davies et al. (2010).
This data effort underlies the “Global wealth report” published annually by Credit Suisse.

21

a trend driven by high economic growth and large-scale privatization in transition economies.
This has tended to reduce global wealth inequality. This effect was more than offset at the
top, however, by the rise in wealth inequality within countries. Rising wealth inequality within
countries is itself due to a number of factors, including rising income inequality amplified by
inequality of savings rates and of rates of return.
Figure 7 reports estimates of the real growth rate of wealth for each quantile of the world
wealth distribution. The top 1% average wealth in the United States, Europe, and China has
risen at 3.5% per year between 1987 and 2017 (versus 2.8% for per-adult average wealth and
1.9% for average income). The higher we go up in the distribution, the faster the growth: the
top 0.1% average wealth has increased by 4.4% per year, and the top 0.01% average wealth
has increased by 5.6% per year. Starting from 1987, these growth rates can be compared with
the growth rate of wealth in the global Forbes billionaire ranking—which has the advantage of
covering of countries, but the drawback of only covering a tiny part of the population. According
to Forbes, the average wealth of the top 1/20 million has grown 5.3% a year on average since
1987, the average wealth of the top 1/100 million has grown 6.4%.20
Third, the bottom of the distribution has also experienced a significant increase of its wealth,
driven by rapid growth in China. This pattern is reminiscent of the “elephant curve” of global
income growth (Lakner and Milanovic, 2013). That is, the global wealth distribution seems
to have evolved in ways qualitatively similar to income. The bottom three-quarters of the
distribution saw its wealth increase by a sizable amount (at roughly the same pace as global
wealth), although less than wealth at the very top. Between those two groups, wealth growth
was at its lowest for the middle class in developed countries. The global wealth middle class
has been squeezed.
It’s important to stress that currently available statistical information on the distribution of
wealth is highly imperfect in today’s global economy. More transparency and better access to
administrative data sources are sorely needed.
20

These billionaires data have two limitations: first, it is not entirely clear how Forbes estimates the wealth of
billionaires; next, and most importantly, it is not clear at all whether this pattern of very fast growth holds only
for billionaires, or whether it can be extended to multimillionaires. This is critically important because there
are many more individuals who own $5 million, $20 million, or $100 million than there are billionaires, and the
former command a potentially much larger fraction of world wealth than the latter.

22

5

Offshore Wealth

One key limitation of available wealth inequality statistics is that they usually do not include
estimates of offshore wealth. Since the 1980s, a large offshore wealth management industry
has developed in Switzerland, Hong Kong, the Bahamas, and similar offshore financial centers.
Banks located in these countries cater to wealthy individuals from around the world. They
provide a variety of financial services to these individuals, many of which are legal and legitimate,
but most of which make wealth harder to observe in the datasets used to estimate wealth
inequality—national accounts and tax records. Over the last four decades, a growing number of
offshore centers have entered the market for cross-border wealth management, and information
technology and financial innovation have made it simpler to move funds oversees, suggesting
that recent available estimates may under-estimate not only the level but also the rise in global
wealth concentration. What do we know about the magnitude of these biases, and looking
forward how could they be overcome?

5.1

How Much Wealth is Held in Tax Havens?

Let us first start by reviewing the available evidence on the macroeconomic amount of wealth
held in tax havens. By using direct statistics published by the central bank of Switzerland—a key
offshore wealth management center—and systematic anomalies in the international investment
positions of countries, Zucman (2013, 2014) estimates that 8% of the world’s household financial
wealth—the equivalent of 10% of world GDP—is held offshore, or $5.6 trillion on the eve of the
world financial crisis in 2007. A similar estimate is obtained by Pellegrini et al. (2016). This
order of magnitude is at the low-end of the scale of available estimates. The OECD calculates
that households owned a total of $5 to $7 trillion offshore in 2007 (Owens, 2007); based on
interviews with wealth managers, the Boston Consulting Group (2008) finds $7.3 trillion that
same year; Cap Gemini and Merrill Lynch (2002) have a $8.5 trillion estimate for 2002; Palan,
Murphy, and Chavagneux (2010) write that “the global rich held in 2007 approximately $12
trillion of their wealth in tax havens;” and Henry (2012) finds $21 to $32 trillion as of 2010. One
limitation of Zucman’s (2013) methodology is that it only captures financial wealth, disregarding
valuables, works of art, real estate, and other non-financial assets, which may explain part of
the gap with other studies.
Until recently it was difficult to break down these global aggregates of offshore wealth by
country. But in 2016, a number of prominent offshore financial centers—including Switzerland,
Luxembourg, the Channel Islands, and Hong Kong—started disclosing bilateral data on the
23

amount of bank deposits that foreigners own in their banks. These data have been collected for
several decades by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), but until 2016 the BIS only
disclosed statistics aggregated at the country level (such as the total amount of foreign-owned
bank deposits in Hong Kong) rather than at the bilateral level (such as the amount of bank
deposits owned by Indian residents in Hong Kong). In 2016, most offshore centers authorized
the BIS to disseminate bilateral data. These series are retrospective and go back in most cases
to the early 2000s, or even earlier. As a result, we now have access to time series for the value
of the bank deposits owned by, say, Russian residents in Switzerland, or by Germans in Jersey.
Using these data, Alstadsæter et al. (2018) allocate the global amount of offshore wealth
across source countries. They find that the global average of about 10% of world GDP held
offshore masks significant heterogeneity. Scandinavian countries appear to own the equivalent of
only a few percent of GDP in offshore wealth, but this figure rises to about 15% in Continental
Europe, and to as much as 60% in Russia, Gulf countries, and a number of Latin American
countries. The size of offshore wealth is not easily explained by tax or institutional factors.
Among countries with a large stock of offshore assets, one finds autocracies (Saudi Arabia,
Russia), countries with a recent history of autocratic rule (Argentina, Greece), alongside old
democracies (United Kingdom, France). Among those with the lowest stock of offshore assets,
one finds relatively low-tax countries (Korea, Japan) alongside the world’s highest tax countries
(Denmark, Norway). Instead, geography and specific national trajectories seem to matter a
great deal. Proximity to Switzerland—the first country that developed a cross-border wealth
management industry, in the 1920s—is associated with higher offshore wealth, as is the presence
of natural resources, and political and economic instability post-World War II.

5.2

Who Owns the Wealth in Tax Havens?

Until recently, there was very little information about who owns wealth in tax havens. In the
absence of such micro data, none of the macro studies described above was able to assess the
implications of tax havens for the measurement of wealth inequality.
New data now make it possible to shed some light on who owns wealth offshore. These
data come from massive leaks from offshore financial institutions—HSBC Switzerland (“Swiss
Leaks”) and Mossack Fonseca (the “Panama Papers”)—and tax amnesties conducted in the
aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008–2009. In 2007, an HSBC Switzerland employee extracted
the complete internal records of the 30,412 clients of this bank, a large fraction of whom were
evading taxes. In 2016, another leak revealed the identity of some of the shareholders of the

24

shell companies created by the Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca, a prominent provider
of offshore incorporation services. Moreover, in recent years many governments throughout the
world have resorted to tax amnesties to encourage tax evaders to declare unreported assets. In
the United States for example, beginning in 2009 the IRS has established a series of voluntary
disclosure programs under which cooperating tax evaders pay reduced penalties and can avoid
criminal sanctions. Alstadsæter et al. (2017) analyze the leaked HSBC and Panama Papers
data (as well as amnesty micro-data) matched to population-wide administrative income and
wealth records in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. Ávila-Mahecha and Londoño-Vélez (2018)
analyze the Panama Papers data and amnesty data matched to wealth tax records in Colombia.
Johannesen et al. (2018) analyze amnesty data in the United States—what is known as the
offshore voluntary disclosure programs—matched to individual income tax returns.
These sources reveal that offshore wealth is extremely concentrated. In Scandinavia, the top
0.01% of the wealth distribution appears to own about 50% of the wealth hidden at HSBC and of
the wealth disclosed in the tax amnesties conducted since the financial crisis; the top 0.1% owns
about 80% of this wealth. In both Scandinavian countries and Colombia, the probability to hide
wealth offshore rises strongly with wealth. At first sight this is somewhat surprising: according
to the canonical Allingham and Sandmo (1972) model of tax evasion, wealthier evaders should
evade less than less wealthy individuals, because they are more likely to be audited.21 But this
can be explained by a model where there is a supply of tax evasion services that serves wealthy
clients in priority (e.g., because the probability that a leak occurs rises with the numbers of
clients served), as in Alstadsæter et al. (2017).

5.3

Accounting for the Wealth Held Offshore

What are the implications for wealth inequality of accounting for hidden wealth? Roine and
Waldenström (2008, 2009) are the first studies to explicitly investigate this issue. They use an
indirect method—residual flows in the balance of payments and financial accounts—to estimate
21

Note that it is not illegal per se to own shell corporations in Panama or bank accounts in Switzerland:
not all the wealth held offshore evades taxes. The evidence discussed above is for unreported assets only (i.e.,
tax evasion—not tax avoidance), as revealed in tax amnesties and random leaks matched to tax returns. As
discussed in Alstadsæter et al. (2017), in Denmark and Norway, the tax authorities, after detailed investigations,
found that 90% to 95% of all HSBC account-holders had failed to report the income earned on their account
(and the wealth held there in the case of Norway, where a wealth tax exists) and were thus evading taxes. This
result is consistent with a body of evidence suggesting that more than 90% of Swiss accounts were undeclared
around 2007; this includes two US Senate (2008, 2014) reports finding that 85–95% of US-owned accounts at
UBS and Credit Suisse were undeclared in 2007–2008, Roussille (2015) who estimates that more than 90% of
the wealth held by Europeans in Switzerland was undeclared before 2010, and Johannesen and Zucman (2014)
who obtain a similar estimate.

25

the amount of wealth hidden by Swedish residents, and assume that this wealth primarily belongs
to the top. The share of wealth owned by the top one percent rises from about 20 percent in the
2000s to a range of 25–30 percent depending on the methodology. Roine and Waldenström (2008)
conclude that “the quantitative importance suggested by our tentative treatment indicates that
the role of offshore wealth may be something that is worthwhile examining more closely in future
research.”22
Based on the new BIS macro data and leaked data now available, Alstadsæter et al. (2017)
find that 90%–95% of all offshore wealth indeed belongs to the top 1% wealthiest taxpayers
in Scandinavia. Alstadsæter et al. (2018) investigate the implications of hidden wealth for
inequality in ten countries, which account for close to half of world GDP, assuming that offshore
wealth is as concentrated in the other countries as in Scandinavia. In a country like Norway,
factoring in hidden wealth increases the top 0.1% wealth share significantly: from 8.4% to 9.8%
on average over the 2000–2009 period. For the top 0.01%—a group that includes about 300
Norwegian households in 2010—reported wealth increases by more than 25%. That is, these
households own more than 20% of their wealth in tax havens.
In an international perspective, Scandinavians own a relatively small fraction of their wealth
offshore; the effects of accounting for offshore wealth are therefore larger in the U.K., Spain,
and France, where about 30%–40% of all the (hidden plus non-hidden) wealth of the 0.01%
richest households appears concealed abroad (Figure 8). In the United States, offshore wealth
also increases inequality significantly. The effect is more muted than in Europe, because U.S.
top wealth shares are very high even disregarding tax havens. Although more research is needed
to have fully accurate estimates of the size and distribution of the wealth held in tax havens,
these results highlight the importance of looking beyond tax data to study wealth accumulation
among the rich in a globalized world.
It is also informative to estimate how offshore wealth may affect long-run trends in wealth
concentration. In Figure 9, I use Norway—where consistent, long-run time series of top wealth
shares exist—as an illustration. Norway has been levying a wealth tax throughout most of the
twentieth century. Based on published tabulated tax statistics, Roine and Waldenström (2015)
estimate long-run top wealth shares; from 2001 on, Alstadsæter et al. (2017) estimate wealth
inequality by distributing the total amount of household wealth using micro-level estimates
of wealth for each Norwegian individual based on reports by third-parties (Norwegian banks,
mutual funds, depositories, etc.). The overall long-run evolution of observable wealth is pretty
22

Relatedly, Larudee (2016) investigates the extent to which capital flight to Switzerland can explain the
decline in the French top 1% income share between the two world wars.

26

clear. Wealth concentration—as seen from administrative data—was relatively high in the early
twentieth century: the top 0.1% richest households owned around 12–14% of total wealth. It
then declined from the 1940s to the 1970s: over these four decades, the top 0.1% wealth appears
to have been more than halved, reaching a low water-mark of around 6% in the 1980s. Since
then, it seems to have rebounded to about 8%.
To correct Norwegian top wealth share back to the 1930s, I use available estimates of the
macroeconomic evolution of offshore wealth throughout the 20th century. In the 1990s, two
international commissions got access to the archives of Swiss banks. The first—presided over by
Paul Volcker, former chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve—aimed at identifying the dormant
accounts belonging to victims of Nazi persecutions and their heirs; the second—chaired by the
historian Jean-François Bergier—aimed at better understanding the role played by Switzerland
during World War II. Drawing on the work of these commissions, Zucman (2015, chapter 1)
constructs historical series for the amount of foreign wealth managed by Swiss banks back to
the early twentieth century. I assume that Norway’s offshore wealth has followed the same
evolution as the foreign wealth in Swiss banks, and that hidden wealth was as concentrated
in the past as today. Although a sizable margin of error is involved here, the broad patterns
are likely to be robust: all the available evidence suggests that although the wealth held by
foreigners in Switzerland was not insignificant back in the 1930s, it is in the 1980s and 1990s
that it grew the most. As a result, accounting for hidden assets erases almost half of the decline
in the top 0.1% wealth share observed in tax data since the 1930s. The top 0.01% appears
to have now recovered from the decline in wealth concentration caused by World War II and
the policy changes of the post-war decades. This finding suggests that the historical decline of
European inequality over the last century, one of the core findings in the literature on the longrun distribution of income and wealth (e.g., Piketty 2014, chapter 10), may be less spectacular
than suggested by tax data—even in a country like Norway where aggregate offshore wealth
and tax evasion are relatively small.

6

Conclusion

Recent research has made progress in estimating wealth concentration in a growing number of
rich and emerging economies. It has developed techniques to leverage administrative tax data
and combine them with surveys and macroeconomic balance sheets. In many ways, however,
it is not enough to study wealth concentration using self-reported survey data or even tax
return data. Because the wealthy have access to many opportunities for tax avoidance and tax
27

evasion—and because the available evidence suggests that the tax planning industry has grown
since the 1980s as it became globalized—traditional data sources may under-estimate inequality.
To capture the true wealth of the rich in today’s world, it is key to look beyond administrative
tax and survey micro-data and to take instead a global perspective that attempts to capture all
forms of wealth, domestic and foreign.
In a country like Norway, accounting for hidden assets increases the wealth of the top 0.01%
by more than 25%. Because most Latin American, and many Asian and European economies
own much more wealth offshore than Norway, the results found in Norway are likely to be
lower bound for most of the world’s countries. Fortunately, in a growing number of countries,
new data are making it possible to fill in some of the gaps in existing estimates of wealth
concentration. Although the HSBC Switzerland list is not public, it was shared by the French
tax authority with foreign countries’ administrations in 2009. The Panama Papers database is
publicly accessible at https://panamapapers.icij.org. Other leaks have occurred in recent
years from majors providers of offshore financial services. For instance from the Swiss bank
Credit Suisse whose offices in London, Paris, and Amsterdam were searched in March 2017 in
the context of a multi-country criminal investigation on 55,000 suspect Swiss bank accounts.23
Moreover, tax amnesty data are widely available in many countries, and recent research suggests
they can yield valuable insight into the distribution of tax evasion. Looking forward, combining
this type of evidence with existing evidence on wealth concentration would enable to paint a
more accurate picture of the level and dynamic of global wealth inequality.

23

See “Credit Suisse embroiled in major global tax evasion investigation”, The Guardian, March 31, 2017.

References
Allingham, Michael G., and Agnar Sandmo. 1972. “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical
Analysis,” Journal of Public Economics, 1(3–4), 323–338.
Alstadsæter, Annette, Martin Jacob, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Kjetil Telle. 2016.
“Accounting for Business Income in Measuring Top Income Shares: Integrated Accrual Approach Using Individual and Firm Data from Norway”. NBER Working Paper No. 22888
Alstadsæter, Annette, Niels Johannesen, and Gabriel Zucman. 2017. “Tax Evasion
and Inequality,” NBER working paper No. 23772.
Alstadsæter, Annette, Niels Johannesen, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. “Who Owns the
Wealth in Tax Havens? Macro Evidence and Implications for Global Inequality,” Journal of
Public Economics, 162, 89–100.
Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony B. Atkinson, and Salvatore Morelli. 2016. “The Challenge of Measuring UK Wealth Inequality in the 2000s”, Fiscal Studies, 37(1), 13–33.
Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony B. Atkinson, and Salvatore Morelli. 2018. “Top wealth
shares in the UK over more than a century”, Journal of Public Economics, 162, 26–47.
Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony B. Atkinson, Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. “Distributional National Accounts (DINA)
Guidelines: Concepts and Methods used WID.world,” WID.world working paper.
Alvaredo, Facundo, Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel
Zucman. 2017. “Global Inequality Dynamics: New Findings from WID.world,” American
Economic Review, 107(5), 404–409.
Alvaredo, Facundo, Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel
Zucman. 2018. The World Inequality Report 2018, Harvard University Press, http://wir2018.
wid.world.
Assouad, Lydia. 2017. “Rethinking the Lebanese economic miracle: The extreme concentration of income and wealth in Lebanon, 2005-2014,” WID.world working paper 2017/13.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and A. J. Harrison. 1978. The Distribution of Personal Wealth
in Britain, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Atkinson, Anthony B. and Christoph Lakner. 2017. “Capital and Labor: The Factor
Income Composition of Top Incomes in the United States, 1962-2006.” working paper.
Autor, David. 2014. “Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the ‘other
99 percent”’ Science, 344(6186): 843–851.
Ávila-Mahecha, Javier and Juliana Londoño-Vélez. 2018. “Can Wealth Taxation Work
in Developing Countries? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Colombia,” working paper.
Bach, Laurent, Laurent E. Calvet, and Paolo Sodini. 2017. “Rich Pickings? Risk,
Return, and Skill in the Portfolios of the Wealthy”, working paper.
Bach, Stefan, Andreas Thiemann and Aline Zucco. 2018. “Looking for the missing rich:
Tracing the top tail of the wealth distribution”, DIW Berlin discussion paper.
Benhabib, Jess and Alberto Bisin. 2018. “Skewed Wealth Distribution: Theory and
Empirics”, Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Bertrand, Marianne, Matilde Bombardini, Raymond Fisman, and Francesco Trebbi.
2018. “Tax-Exempt Lobbying: Corporate Philanthropy as a Tool for Political Influence”, NBER
29

Working Paper No. 24451.
Blanchet, Thomas. 2016. “Wealth inequality in Europe and in the United States: estimations
from surveys, national accounts and wealth rankings,” Paris School of Economics master thesis.
Blanchet, Thomas, Juliette Fournier, and Thomas Piketty. 2017. “Generalized Pareto
Curves: Theory and Applications”, WID.world Working Paper 2017/03.
Bonica Adam, Nolan McCarthy, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 2013.
“Why Hasn’t Democracy Slowed Rising Inequality,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3),
103–124.
Boston Consulting Group 2008. “Global Wealth Report: A Wealth of Opportunities in
Turbulent Times,” September 2008.
Bourne, Jenny, Eugene Steuerle, Brian Raub, Joseph Newcomb, and Ellen Steele.
2018. “More Than They Realize: The Income of the Wealthy” National Tax Journal, 71(2),
335-356.
Bricker Jesse, Alice Henriques, Jacob Krimmel, and John Sabelhaus. 2016. “Measuring Income and Wealth at the Top Using Administrative and Survey Data,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, Spring, 261–321.
Bricker Jesse, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs,
Kevin B. Moore, Sarah Pack, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A.
Windle. 2017. “Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey
of Consumer Finances,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 103(3), 1–39.
Cap Gemini and Merrill Lynch. 2002. “World Wealth Report”.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Søren Leth-Petersen, Torben Heien Nielsen, and
Tore Olsen. 2014. “Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings
Accounts: Evidence from Denmark,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1141–1219.
Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi,
Nicholas Turner, Augustin Bergeron, David Cutler. 2016. “The Association Between
Income and Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 315(16): 1750–1766.
Cowell, Frank A. and Philippe Van Kerm. 2015. “Wealth Inequality: A Survey,” Journal
of Economic Surveys, 29(4), 671-710.
Davies, James B., and Anthony F. Shorrocks. “The Distribution of Wealth,” Handbook of
Income Distribution, vol. 1, A.B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon (eds), 1999, chap. 11, 605–675.
Davies, James B., Susanna Sandström, Anthony Shorrocks and Edward N. Wolff
“The Level and Distribution of Global Household Wealth,” Economic Journal, 2010, 121: 223–
254.
Davies, James B., Rodrigo Lluberas, and Anthony F. Shorrocks. 2017. “Estimating
the level and distribution of global wealth, 2000-14,” Review of Income and Wealth, 63(4),
731-759.
Dettling, Lisa J., Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, and Jeffrey
P. Thompson. 2017. “Recent Trends in Wealth-Holding by Race and Ethnicity: Evidence
from the Survey of Consumer Finances,” FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2083.

30

Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, Davide Malacrino, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2016. “Heterogeneity in Returns to Wealth and the Measurement of Wealth Inequality.” American Economic Review, 106(5), 651-55.
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, Davide Malacrino, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2018. “Heterogeneity and Persistence in Returns to Wealth.” working paper.
Feldstein, Martin. 1974. “Social Security and the Distribution of Wealth.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 71(356), 800–807.
Frémeaux, Nicolas, and Marion Leturcq. 2016. “The Individualization of Wealth: Evidence from France,” working paper.
Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier. 2007. “Why has CEO pay increased so much?,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1), 49–100.
Galiana, Lino. 2016. “Wealth Distribution in Australia: Evidence from Income Capitalization,” working paper.
Garbinti, Bertrand, Jonathan Goupille-Lebret, and Thomas Piketty. 2016. “Accounting for Wealth Inequality Dynamics: Methods, Estimates and Simulations for France
(1800-2014),” WID Working Paper 2016/05.
Gilens, Martin. 2012. Affluence and Influence: Economic Inequality and Political Power in
America, Princeton University Press.
Gilens, Martin and Benjamin I. Page. 2014. “Testing Theories of American Politics:
Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens,” Perspectives on Politics, 12(3), 564–581.
Goldsmith, Raymond W. 1985. Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty
Countries, 16881978. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goldsmith, Raymond W. 1991. Pre-Modern Financial Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Greenwood, Daphne. 1983. “An Estimation of US Family Wealth and its Distribution from
Microdata, 1973,” Review of Income and Wealth, 29, 23–43.
Hacker, Jacob S. and Paul Pierson. 2010. Winner-Take-All Politics: How Washington
Made the Rich Richer—and Turned Its Back on the Middle Class, Simon & Schuster.
Henry, James S. 2012.“The Price of Offshore Revisited: New Estimates for Missing Global
Private Wealth, Income, Inequality, and Lost Taxes”, Tax Justice Network working paper.
Jakobsen, Katrine, Kristian Jakobsen, Henrik Kleven, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018.
“Wealth Taxation and Wealth Accumulation: Theory and Evidence from Denmark,” NBER
working paper No. 24371.
Johannesen, Niels, Patrick Langetieg, Daniel Reck, Max Risch, and Joel Slemrod.
2018. “Taxing Hidden Wealth: The Consequences of U.S. Enforcement Initiatives for Evasive
Foreign Accounts,” NBER working paper No. 24366.
Johannesen, Niels, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. “The End of Bank Secrecy? An Evaluation
of the G20 Tax Haven Crackdown,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(1), 65–91.
Johnson, Barry W., ed. 2011. Compendium of Federal Estate Tax and Personal Wealth
Studies, Volume 2, Department of Treasury, Internal Revenue Service.
Kennickell, Arthur B. 2009. “Ponds and Streams: Wealth and Income in the US, 1989 to
2007,” FEDS Working Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

31

Kennickell, Arthur. 2011. “Tossed and Turned: Wealth Dynamics of US Households 20072009”, FEDS Working Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
King, Willford I. 1927. “Wealth Distribution in the Continental United States at the Close
of 1921”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 22, 135–153.
Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2007. “Bequest and Tax Planning: Evidence from Estate Tax Returns,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1801-1854.
Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2015. “What Do We Know about the Evolution of Top Wealth Shares
in the United States?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1), 47-66.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Emmanuel Saez. 2004. “Top Wealth Shares in the United States,
19162000: Evidence from Estate Tax Returns.” National Tax Journal, 57(2), 445-87.
Kuhn, Moritz, Moritz Schularick, and Ulrike I. Steins. 2017. “Income and Wealth
Inequality in America, 1949–2013,” CEPR Discussion Paper.
Kuhner, Timothy K. 2014. “Capitalism vs Democracy: Money in Politics and the Free
Market Constitution,” Stanford University Press.
Kuznets, Simon. 1953. Shares of Upper Income Groups in Income and Savings, New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lakner, Christoph and Branko Milanovic. 2017. “Global Income Distribution: From the
Fall of the Berlin Wall to the Great Recession.” World Bank Economic Review, 30(2), 203–232.
Lampman, Robert J. 1962. The Share of Top Wealth-Holders in National Wealth, 1922–56,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Larudee, Mehrene. 2016. “Did capital go away? Capital flight as an explanation for declining
reported wealth inequality during and after World War I,” mimeo, University of Massachusetts.
Lundberg and Daniel Waldenström, 2017. “Wealth Inequality in Sweden: What Can we
Learn from Capitalized Income Tax Data?” Review of Income and Wealth,, https://doi.org/
10.1111/roiw.12294
Martı́nez-Toledano, Clara. 2017. “Housing Bubbles, Offshore Assets and Wealth Inequality
in Spain (1984-2014),” WID Working Paper 2017/19.
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2014. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump”, forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Novokmet, Filip, Thomas Piketty and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. “From Soviets to Oligarchs: Inequality and Property in Russia, 1905–2016,” Journal of Economic Inequality, forthcoming, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10888-018-9383-0
Novokmet, Filip, Thomas Piketty, Li Yang, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. “From
Communism to Capitalism: Private vs. Public Property and Inequality in China and Russia,”
American Economic Association P&P, 108: 109–113.
Orthofer, Anna. 2016. “Wealth Inequality in South Africa: Evidence from Survey and Tax
Data,” working paper.
Owens, Jeffrey. 2007. “Offshore Tax Evasion: The Role of Exchange of Information,” written
testimony before the Senate Finance Committee on Offshore Tax evasion, May 3, 2007.
Palan, Ronen, Richard Murphy, and Christian Chavagneux. 2010. Tax Havens: How
Globalization Really Works, Cornell Studies in Money, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Pellegrini, Valeria, Alessandra Sanelli, and Enrico Tosti. 2016. “What do External
Statistics tell us About Undeclared Assets held Abroad and Tax Evasion?,” Bank of Italy
32

Occasional Paper 367.
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the 21st Century. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in
Rich Countries, 1700–2010,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1255–1310.
Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2015. “Wealth and Inheritance in the Long
Run,” in Handbook of Income Distribution, vol. 2, A. B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon (eds),
1303–1368.
Piketty, Thomas, Gilles Postel-Vinay and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2006. “Wealth
Concentration in a Developing Economy: Paris and France, 18071994”, American Economic
Review, 96(1), 236–256.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. “Distributional National
Accounts: Methods and Estimates for the United States,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
133(2), 553–609.
Piketty, Thomas, Li Yang, and Gabriel Zucman. 2017. “Capital Accumulation, Private
Property, and Rising Inequality in China, 1978–2015,” NBER Working Paper 23368.
Roine, Jesper, and Daniel Waldenström. 2008. “The evolution of top incomes in an
egalitarian society: Sweden, 1903–2004.” Journal of Public Economics, 92, 366–387.
Roine, Jesper, and Daniel Waldenström. 2009. “Wealth Concentration over the Path of
Development: Sweden, 1873–2006.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 111(1), 151–187.
Roine, Jesper, and Daniel Waldenström. 2015. “Long-run Trends in the Distribution of
Income and Wealth.” In Handbook of Income Distribution. Vol. 2, ed. Anthony B. Atkinson
and Francois Bourguignon, Chapter 7, 469–592. Elsevier/North Holland.
Roussille, Nina. 2015. “Tax Evasion and the ‘Swiss Cheese’ Regulation,” mimeo.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. “Wealth Inequality in the United States
since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
131(2), 519–578.
Scheve, Kenneth, and Stasavage, David. 2017. “Wealth Inequality and Democracy,”
Annual Review of Political Science, 20, 451–468.
Stewart, Charles. 1939. “Income Capitalization as a Method of Estimating the Distribution
of Wealth by Size Group,” in Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 3, (New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research).
Tørsløv, L., Wier, L. and Zucman, G., 2018. “The Missing Profits of Nations”, NBER
working paper No 24701.
United Nations. 2009. “System of National Accounts 2008,” European Communities, International Monetary Fund, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, United
Nations and World Bank.
U.S. Senate. 2008. “Tax Haven Banks and U.S. Tax compliance.” Staff Report of the
Permanent Subcommittee on investigations.
U.S. Senate. 2014. “Offshore Tax Evasion: The Effort to Collect Unpaid Taxes on Billions in
Hidden Offshore Accounts.” Staff Report of the Permanent Subcommittee on investigations.
Vermeulen, Philip. 2014. “How Fat Is the Top Tail of the Wealth Distribution?” Review of
Income and Wealth, 64(2), 357–387.

33

Waldron, Hilary. 2007. “Trends in Mortality Differentials and Life Expectancy for Male Social
Security Covered Workers, by Average Relative Earnings”, ORES Working Paper No. 108,
Social Security Administration, Office of Policy, Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics,
Washington, DC (May).
Weil, David N. 2015. “Capital and Wealth in the Twenty-First Century,” American Economic
Review: Papers & Proceedings, 105(5): 34-37.
Wolff, Edward. 1980. “Estimates of the 1969 Size Distribution of Household Wealth in
the U.S. from a Synthetic Data Base,” in Modeling the Distribution and Intergenerational
Transmission of Wealth., James D. Smith, ed., University of Chicago Press.
Wolff, Edward. 2016. “Deconstructing Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1983–
2013”, NBER No. 22703 working paper
Wolff, Edward. 2017. “Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1962 to 2016: Has
Middle Class Wealth Recovered?”, NBER No. 24085 working paper
Zucman, Gabriel. 2013. “The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the US net
Debtors or net Creditors?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3), 1321–1364.
Zucman, Gabriel. 2014. “Taxing across borders: tracking personal wealth and corporate
profits,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(4), 121–148.
Zucman, Gabriel. 2015. The Hidden Wealth of Nations: The Scourge of Tax Havens, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

34

2010

2000

1990

1980

1970

1960

1950

1940

1930

1920

1910

Notes: This figure shows the share of total household wealth owned by the top 0.1% richest adults (individuals aged 20 and above) in the United States,
with wealth equally split between married spouses. Source: Saez and Zucman (2016), updated.

0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

Figure 1: Top 0.1% wealth share in the United States
(Capitalized incomes, equal-split adults)

2020

SCF (incl.
Forbes 400)

2010

2000

1980

1970

1960

1950

1910

Notes: This figure compares the U.S. top 1% wealth share obtained by capitalizing incomes vs. obtained in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). The
wealth of the Forbes 400 (which by design are excluded from the SCF) is added to the wealth of the top 1% in the SCF. The unit of observation is tax units
for capitalized incomes and households for the SCF. Source: Saez and Zucman (2016), updated, and Bricker et al. (2017).

20%

25%

30%

Capitalized incomes

1920

35%

1930

40%

1940

45%

1990

50%

Figure 2: Top 1% wealth share in the United States
(Capitalized incomes vs. SCF)

2020

2010

2000

1960

1950

1940

1930

1920

1910

0%

1%

2%

3%

4%

Notes: This figure compares the U.S. top 0.01% wealth share obtained by capitalizing incomes vs. the share of wealth owned by the top 0.00025% as estimed
from the Forbes 400 list of the richest Americans. The unit of observation is tax units for capitalized incomes. Source: Saez and Zucman (2016), updated.

0%

2%

4%

6%

Top 0.00025% (right)
(Forbes 400)

1970

8%

Top 0.01% (left)
(capitalized incomes)

1980

10%

1990

12%

Figure 3: Very top wealth shares in the United States
(Capitalized incomes vs. Forbes)

2020

USA

France

Russia

2010

1990

1980

1960

1950

1940

1930

1910

China

Notes: This figure compares the top 1% wealth share across countries. Estimates are obtained by combining tax data, survey data, and household balance
sheets. The unit of observation is the adult individual with wealth equally split among married couples. Source: World Inequality Database (Alvaredo et
al., 2018).

10%

20%

30%

40%

1920

50%

UK

1970

60%

2000

70%

Figure 4: Top 1% wealth share in emerging and rich countries

2020

France

USA

Russia

2000

1970

1950

1940

1930

1920

1910

China

Notes: This figure compares the top 10% wealth share across countries. Estimates are obtained by combining tax data, survey data, and household balance
sheets. The unit of observation is the adult individual with wealth equally split among married couples. Source: World Inequality Database (Alvaredo et
al., 2018).

40%

50%

60%

70%

1960

80%

1980

90%

UK

1990

100%

Figure 5: Top 10% wealth share in emerging and rich countries

2010

Top 1%
wealth share

2010

2005

2000

1995

1985

1980

Bottom 75%
wealth share

Notes: This figures shows the evolution of global wealth inequality, proxied by wealth inequality in China plus Europe plus the United States. The wealth
threshold for an individual to be part of the Top 1% richest in China plus Europe plus the United States is 1,125,000 euros. Source: World Inequality
Database (Alvaredo et al., 2018).

0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

1990

35%

2015

Figure 6: The world distribution of wealth
(China + Europe + United States)

2020

0%

50%

100%

150%

200%

250%

300%

350%

90

80

70

60

Wealth group (percentile)

99,99

99,9
99

50

40

30

20

10

Notes: This figures shows the growth of wealth per adult by quantile of the global wealth distribution over the period 1987–2017. Global wealth inequality
is proxied by wealth inequality in China plus Europe plus the United States. Source: World Inequality Database (Alvaredo et al., 2018).

Real wealth growth per adult (%)

400%

Figure 7: Global wealth growth by percentile, 1987–2017
(China + Europe + United States)

99,999

Spain

UK

Scandinavia

All wealth excluding offshore

Offshore wealth

France

USA

Figure 8: The top 0.01% wealth share and its composition

Russia

Notes: This figure plots the level and composition of the top 0.01% wealth share on average over the 20002009 period. Source: Alstadsæter, Johannesen
and Zucman (2018).

0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

% of total household wealth

Figure 9: Top wealth share in Norway including hidden wealth
Top 0.1% wealth share in Norway
14%
12%
Including hidden wealth
10%
8%
Excluding hidden wealth

6%
4%
2%
0%
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Top 0.01% wealth share in Norway
5%

Including hidden wealth

4%

3%

Excluding hidden wealth

2%

1%

0%
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Notes: This graph compares the top 0.1% wealth share (top panel) and top 0.01% wealth share (bottom panel)
as estimated from administrative data vs. corrected by including offshore wealth. In both cases, top shares
are expressed as a percentage of total household wealth. For series excluding hidden wealth, total household
wealth is the total recorded in the national accounts. For corrected series, total household wealth is the total
recorded in the national accounts plus the estimated total offshore wealth of Norwegians. Source: Alstadsæter,
Johannesen and Zucman (2017).

