                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             CHINA VS. U.S.: IMS MEETS IPS

                                       Emmanuel Farhi
                                       Matteo Maggiori

                                     Working Paper 25469
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25469


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




In Preparation for AEA Papers and Proceedings. We are grateful to the chair of the AEA session,
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and our discussant, Arvind Krishnamurthy. We acknowledge the
support of the NSF (1653917) and Weatherhead Center. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Emmanuel Farhi and Matteo Maggiori. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
China vs. U.S.: IMS Meets IPS
Emmanuel Farhi and Matteo Maggiori
NBER Working Paper No. 25469
January 2019
JEL No. D42,E12,E42,E44,F3,F55,G15,G28

                                           ABSTRACT

Currently both the International Monetary System (IMS) and the International Price Systems
(IPS) are dominated by the U.S. The emergence of China, both as reserve currency and as a
currency of invoicing, is likely to disrupt this status quo. We provide a framework to understand
the forces that will shape this transition and identify sources of instability. We highlight the risk
of an abrupt shift triggered by a run on the dollar.


Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
emmanuel.farhi@gmail.com

Matteo Maggiori
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer building
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA, 02138
and NBER
maggiori@fas.harvard.edu
    The international monetary system is currently dominated by an established Hegemon, the U.S.
However, it does not take much imagination to realize that in the not-too-distant future, the emer-
gence of China is likely to challenge this status quo. The resulting confrontation could be a significant
source of instability. Our goal is to outline some of the economic forces that will shape the China vs.
U.S. international currency power struggle.
    In Farhi and Maggiori (2017) we developed a model of the international monetary system.1 We
emphasized two key attributes of dominant currencies: their widespread use as safe reserve assets
in the International Monetary System (IMS); and their widespread use as a currency of pricing and
invoicing in the International Price System (IPS). We showed that pervasive pricing and invoicing in
a currency helps cement a leadership position of its issuer in the safe asset market. In this paper, we
adapt this model to analyze the upcoming competition between China and the U.S. along these two
complementary dimensions.
    Currently, the U.S. dominates both the IMS and the IPS (Gopinath, 2015; Farhi and Maggiori,
2017), but this hegemony is likely to be challenged by China in the coming decades. Indeed, China
has taken rapid proactive steps to internationalize the role of its currency. For example, Ito and
Chinn (2015) and Ito and Kawai (2016) document a rapid increase in the use of the renminbi for trade
invoicing. IMF data show that central banks have even started holding renminbi in their official
reserves, with the amount doubling from 90 to 193 dollar billions between 2016 and 2018.2 The rise
of the renminbi might also be favored by the diminished international role of the euro, the other
potential competitor to the dollar. Maggiori, Neiman and Schreger (2018a,b), indeed, document a
decreased role of the euro starting with the global financial crises and extended by the European
sovereign debt crisis. The further rise of the dollar, the diminished role of the euro, and the start of the
internationalization of the renminbi are broad asset market phenomena occurring in both sovereign
and private debt markets.
    The expansion of China’s role in the international monetary sphere is still in its infancy, but its
fast and predictable growth makes it one of the most important long-term disrupting forces for the
IMS and the IPS.
    We take a first step towards an economic analysis of this phenomenon. We show that the emer-
gence of China as a key player in the IMS and in the IPS is likely to significantly erode the U.S. ex-
orbitant privilege. It will also act as a powerful destabilizing force on the fiscal front, by confronting
the U.S. with an acute version of the new Triffin dilemma: reduce its debt or risk a confidence crisis.
This situation is reminiscent of an momentous historical precedent: the end of the Bretton Woods
gold exchange standard following the devaluation of the dollar (the Nixon shock), foretold a decade
earlier in Triffin (1961).
    Of course, a lot will ultimately depend on the reaction of the U.S. The deterioration of its fiscal
situation and the weakening of its institutions raise new questions. Would the U.S. exert enough fiscal
discipline in the face of increasing interest rates and a reduced tolerance of international investors?
Or could we witness a U.S. debt crisis? If we did, would the U.S. uphold its strong dollar policy
  1 Other   recent models include He et al. (2018); Chahrour and Valchev (2017); Gopinath and Stein (2018).
  2 Source:   IMF COFER database.



                                                             1
or would it succumb to fiscal dominance, let the dollar depreciate, and trigger a new Triffin event?
Would this Triffin event put an end to the dollar dominance? It is hard to answer these questions with
confidence, but it is important to work out their economic determinants and to trace out possible
scenarios.


                           I    A M ODEL OF THE IMS AND OF THE IPS
In this section, we briefly summarize our model of the IMS. Most of the set-up follows Farhi and
Maggiori (2017) and we direct the reader to that paper for a full description. We extend our treatment
of the IPS by allowing for different intermediate fractions of prices denominated in U.S. dollars and
Chinese renminbi.3
      In a world order dominated by the U.S„ we think of China as a new entrant with two important
characteristics: it issues a small but growing amount of safe assets; and a small but growing share of
world traded goods are invoiced in its currency.
      There are two periods 0 and 1 and three classes of agents: the Hegemon country which we think
of as the U.S., en emerging competitor, which we think of as China, and the rest of the world (RoW),
where the latter is composed of a competitive fringe of international investors and consumers. For
simplicity, there is no home bias in consumption, so all countries consume the same basket. There
is a single final composite good, but a continuum of intermediate goods. At t = 0, the U.S. and the
RoW are endowed respectively with w and w∗ units of the composite good.
      There are three assets: a risky real asset in perfectly elastic supply, a dollar nominal bond issued
by the U.S., and a renminbi nominal bond issued by China. There are two states of the world at t = 1,
indexed by H and L. The L state, which we refer to as a disaster, occurs with probability λ ∈ (0, 1).
The expected return on the risky asset is given by R̄r .
      At time t = 1, if a disaster has occurred, the U.S. may devalue its currency vis à vis China and
the RoW. The bilateral exchange rate between the dollar and the renminbi is normalized at 1 at t = 0,
and can take one of two values at t = 1: e ∈ {1, e L }, where e is the renminbi price of a dollar, so that
e L < 1 corresponds to a depreciation of the dollar. If the dollar is devalued, the U.S. pays a fixed cost
τ. We abstract away from active monetary policy decisions by China and the RoW.
      The preferences of the U.S. representative agent are given by: C0 + δE(C1 ). In period 0, the U.S.
chooses how many bonds to issue. RoW demand for U.S. bonds depends on whether these bonds are
expected to be safe or risky, i.e. on whether the dollar is expected to depreciate in a disaster or not. If
U.S. bonds are expected to be safe, then the demand is finitely elastic and given by:

(1)                                      Rs (bUS ) = R̄r − γ(w∗ − bCN − b),

where b is the dollar value of bonds issued by the U.S., and bCN is the dollar value of safe China
bonds, which we take to be exogenous. These bonds include both public and private safe debt issued
by institutions in the respective countries.4 If U.S. bonds are expected to be risky, then the demand is
  3 Farhi  and Maggiori (2017) modeled the extreme case of a 0 or 100 percent fraction.
  4 See   Farhi and Maggiori (2017) for a discussion, and related modeling, of the aggregation of both public and private


                                                            2
infinitely elastic and the rate of return on the bonds is the same as that of the risky asset.5
     The production sector in each country consists of a continuum of measure one of firms that
produce intermediate varieties, denoted by Yt ( j), and a retail sector that bundles these varieties into
the final consumption good
                                                       Z       1             σ −1         σ−σ 1
                                                Yt =                Yt ( j)     σ    dj             .
                                                            0

Consequently, the demand function for firm j’s variety is given by

                                                                     Pt ( j) −σ
                                                   Yt ( j) =                      Yt ,
                                                                       Pt

where Pt ( j) is the price set by firm j and

                                                       Z       1                          1−1 σ
                                                Pt =                Pt ( j)1−σ di
                                                            0

is the aggregate price index, where without loss of generality, we use the dollar as the numéraire.
Since there is no home bias and the law of one price holds, Pt can be thought of as the world dollar
price of the consumption bundle.
     Firms produce intermediate goods with a linear production technology: Yt ( j) = Lt ( j), where
Lt ( j) is firm j’s demand for labor. Labor is inelastically supplied in each country, with total labor
given by L. We order firms in the interval [0, 1] so that the prices of firms i ∈ [0, x ] are sticky in
dollars and those of firms i ∈ ( x, 1] are sticky in renminbi. Labor market clearing implies
                                       Z 1
                                             Yt ( j)dj = (1 − x )YtRMB + xYtUSD
                                         0
                                                                Z 1
                                                       =                Lt ( j)dj = L,
                                                                    0


where YtUSD is the output produced by the set of dollar-sticky firms and YtRMD is analogously out-
put produced by renminbi-sticky firms. For simplicity, we assume that these firms are uniformly
distributed across the world.
     At date 1 in state H, there is no dollar depreciation. All prices are kept at 1, the normalized level
from period 0, since prices are sticky, and so PH = 1.
     Now consider state L in which there might be a dollar depreciation. If the dollar is depreciated,
the prices of all firms remain sticky in their respective currencies. That is, the price charged by dollar-
sticky firms is PLUSD = 1. The dollar price of goods produced by renminbi-sticky firms, however,
changes to PLRMB = 1/e L > 1. The aggregate dollar price of the consumption bundle after a dollar
debt. We set the constant in the demand curve in equation (1) to be R̄r for tractability, and a more general treatment is
offered in our earlier work.
   5 In which case, the yield on the bond is set at: R = R̄r −λRe L . We further assume that δ = R̄r , where R̄r is the expected
                                                      H      1− λ
real return on the risky asset.




                                                                        3
depreciation can thus be written as

                                                                                     1
                                   PL = [ x ( PLUSD )1−σ + (1 − x )( PLRMB )1−σ ] 1−σ
                                                                 1
                                       = [ x + (1 − x )eσL−1 ] 1−σ .

     A dollar depreciation, e L < 1, leads to a higher world dollar price level PL > 1 = PH . World
dollar price inflation PL is inversely proportional to the fraction of world prices that are sticky in
dollars. Intuitively, if all prices are sticky in dollars (x = 1), then the real value of the dollar is constant
despite its nominal depreciation. If all prices are sticky in renminbi (x = 0), the dollar depreciates in
real terms as much as in nominal terms. As China’s importance in world trade increases, which we
capture here by a fall in x, the pass-through of nominal to real dollar depreciations increases.


Dollar Devaluation          At date 1 in state L, the U.S. must choose whether or not to let the dollar
depreciate. This decision is taken with the objective of maximizing real U.S. income. The dollar is
devalued if:
                                                              bR Π L
                                            −bR + L ≤ −          +    − τ,
                                                              PL   PL
where the left- and right-hand sides are respectively real income under no devaluation and under a
devaluation. If there is no devaluation, the real value of output is L and debt repayment costs bR,
where b is the dollar value of U.S. bonds and R is the rate on these bonds. If there is a devaluation,
real debt repayment is lower at bR/PL , but the fixed cost τ is incurred. The term Π L /PL is the real
value of output, which, given the misallocation from the dispersion in prices resulting from the dollar
depreciation, is given by:6

                                     ΠL     PUSD                       P RMB
                                        = x L YLUSD + (1 − x ) L YLRMB
                                     PL       PL                         PL
                                                           σ −1 σ −
                                                                  σ
                                          [ x + (1 − x ) e L ] 1
                                        =                           L.
                                               x + (1 − x )eσL

                                                                                                                        bR
In what follows, we focus on the effect of price stickiness on real debt repayment via the term                         PL .
We assume that the change in real income due to the misallocation effect is small in comparison.
Formally, we take the limit of small L.
     Of course, this simple static model does not do justice to the dynamic adjustment of prices. In
practice, prices adjust over time, although that adjustment can take a long time in the presence of
sticky wages, real rigidities and other institutional frictions. In any case, what really matters for the
fiscal relief from devaluation is the maturity of the debt in relation to the rigidity of prices. The longer
the maturity of the debt, and the shorter the time that prices take to adjust, the bigger the effect.
     The determination of the exchange rate captures the realistic idea that in bad-enough fiscal sit-
uations, there is a regime shift from monetary to fiscal dominance. Monetary policy is then de facto
    6 The devaluation increases the relative demand for dollar goods compared to renminbi goods. Given our assumption

of inelastic labor supply and flexible wages, the only equilibrium is such that the overall level of demand ensures that all
labor is employed.


                                                             4
                                  Figure I: Equilibrium with US Safe Debt
 Depicts an equilibrium in which the U.S. optimally chooses to issue at the boundary of the Safety zone (b). This level of
                            debt is no longer safe once China’s economic weight increases.




(not de jure) determined by fiscal considerations. Of course, ex-post U.S. misbehavior is anticipated
by investors ex ante, and the latter are completely compensated in the form of higher yields. The
U.S. is left worse off because of the devaluation costs. The U.S. would be better off if it could commit
ex-ante not to misbehave ex post, but institutional weakness makes it hard to commit.
    In Farhi and Maggiori (2017), we show that the set of possible equilibria given an amount of
U.S. debt b depends on which of the three following zones the debt falls into: a Safety zone, an
Instability zone, and a Collapse zone. If b ≤ b only the safe equilibrium exists. If b ≥ b̄ only the
risky equilibrium exists. If b ∈ (b, b̄], both the safe and the risky equilibria exist, and we assume
that the risky equilibrium is selected with probability α. When debt is in the Instability zone, the
model therefore features the possibility of self-fulfilling confidence crises: if investors expect the debt
to be safe, the interest rate on U.S. debt is low, and then indeed, the U.S. does not devalue in case
of a disaster; if investors expect the debt to be risky, the interest rate on U.S. debt is high, and then
indeed the U.S. devalues in case of a disaster. Following Farhi and Maggiori (2017), we refer to such
a confidence crisis as a “Triffin event”, in reference to the famous Triffin dilemma. We make clear that
the underlying mechanism is fiscal.
    The U.S. issues debt to maximizes the expected utility of its representative agent given a downward-
sloping demand curve for the debt. The corresponding monopoly rents are the much-discussed “ex-
orbitant privilege”. For the purposes of illustration, we consider an equilibrium in which the prob-
ability α of a confidence crisis is sufficiently high that the U.S. finds it optimal to issue at the upper
boundary of the Safety zone (b). This equilibrium is illustrated in Figure I. The U.S. faces a new Triffin
dilemma: it could issue more debt and collect more exorbitant-privilege rents with some probability,



                                                            5
but it would then also risk losing all of its privilege if a confidence crisis materialized. Under the
chosen parametrization, the U.S. displays relative fiscal discipline by issuing at the boundary of the
Safety zone. In the following subsections we work through three separate effects through which the
emergence of China could disrupt this world order.


I.A    Increased World Trade Denomination in RMB

Starting from the equilibrium in Figure I, imagine that China’s economic weight increases, in the
sense that the fraction 1 − x of goods denominated in renminbi rises and the fraction x of goods
priced in dollars falls. This development implies that the original level of U.S. debt b is no longer in
the Safety zone. Instead, it now falls in the Instability zone.
      To understand this effect, note that

                                                 1          1−λ
                                     b=τ                              ,
                                             1 − 1/PL R̄r (1 − λ/PL )
                                 1
where PL = [ x + (1 − x )eσL−1 ] 1−σ . The first term on the right-hand side has an immediate interpreta-
tion: the Safety zone is larger, the larger the cost τ of a devaluation. The interpretation of the second
term is as follows: the lower x, the higher PL , the more a dollar devaluation reduces U.S. real debt
repayment, the higher the ex-post benefit of a devaluation, the smaller the Safety zone. The last term
captures a further indirect effect, which compounds the second term: the lower x, the higher PL , the
riskier the debt, the higher its yield, the higher the ex-post benefits of a devaluation, and the smaller
the Safety zone. It also shows that the higher the rate R̄r , the higher the fiscal burden, the stronger
the incentives to devalue, and the smaller the Safety zone.
      Intuitively, when the dollar hegemony in pricing and invoicing is challenged by the rise of China,
the pass-through of nominal to real dollar devaluations increases.This magnifies the fiscal pressures
on U.S. monetary policy and increases the likelihood of ex-post U.S. misbehavior. Investors antici-
pate the possibility of this misbehavior and, consequently, the Safety zone shrinks. The new Triffin
dilemma reasserts itself: the U.S. must then either reduce its debt or risk a self-fulfilling confidence
crisis (a Triffin event). Furthermore, its “exorbitant privilege” is eroded.
      We can also introduce a small modification to the model to capture the idea that as the fraction
x of goods denominated in dollars decreases, a given amount of nominal dollar volatility now trans-
lates into higher real dollar volatility, which reduces the demand for U.S. assets and increases their
expected return. Suppose that there are two classes of risky assets depending on the variance of their
real returns. Relatively safe assets have an expected return of R̄r as in the baseline model. Relatively-
risky assets have a higher expected return R̄r+ > R̄r . Suppose that in the original equilibrium, before
the decrease in the fraction x of goods denominated in dollars, when investors expect the dollar to
depreciate in a disaster, U.S. bonds still remain relatively-safe and have an expected return R̄r . The
modified model is then the same as the baseline model, and the U.S. issues at the upper boundary
b of the Safety zone. If the decrease in x is large enough, there is an additional destabilizing effect
in the modified model. If the dollar is expected to depreciate in a disaster, U.S. bonds jump in the



                                                     6
relatively-risky category, their expected return increases to R̄r+ . A given amount of nominal dollar
volatility now translates into higher dollar real volatility, which reduces the demand for U.S. assets
and increases their expected return. This effect shrinks the Safety zone further.


I.B    Chinese Net Issuance of Safe Assets

Starting from the equilibrium in Figure I, imagine that China’s economic weight increases along a
different dimension: the net supply of safe Chinese bonds bCN increases. Currently, and certainly for
the next few years, Chinese issuance of safe assets is limited. Given large Chinese holdings of U.S.
Treasuries, China is currently a net buyer of safe assets. This situation might change in the not-too-
distant future. Indeed, China has put a number of initiatives in place to start providing safe assets to
Asian economies. Furthermore, what matters in the model is the Chinese net supply of safe assets,
not its gross supply. Chinese savings rate are likely to decrease in the future as social safety nets and
retirement systems develop.
      This development reduces the U.S. exorbitant privilege. The residual demand for safe assets
faced by the U.S. in equation (1) is decreasing in the amount of safe assets issued by China. The total
revenue loss to the U.S. b γ bCN is proportional to the size of Chinese issuance bCN . However, under
this modeling, the Safety zone is unchanged. The reaction of the U.S. depends on the size of the shift:
if the shift is small enough, U.S. debt remains unchanged; if the shift is large enough, the U.S. starts
reducing its debt.
      Using the modified model introduced at the end of the previous section, it is easy to capture a
further effect of a decrease in Chinese demand for or an increase in Chinese supply of relatively-safe
assets. These developments would lead to an increase in the interest rate R̄r on relatively-safe assets.
This would in turn shrink the Safety zone and confront the U.S. with a renewed Triffin dilemma:
reduce its debt or risk a confidence crisis.


I.C    Future Chinese Net Issuance of Safe Assets

We now consider a slightly different situation to illustrate a dynamic destabilizing effect of an in-
crease in Chinese net issuance of safe assets. We assume that in the initial equilibrium, the probabil-
ity α of a confidence crisis is small enough and the demand for safe assets is high enough (w∗ high
enough) that the U.S. finds it optimal to choose the risky option of the Triffin dilemma and issue
within the Instability zone. To make the point more starkly, we actually assume that the U.S. issues
at the upper-boundary (b̄) of the Instability zone.
      Furthermore, we consider a repeated version of the model. In the dynamic model, the cost of
a devaluation is no longer physical and is instead determined by the selection of the equilibrium in
the continuation game. We assume that following a devaluation, investors anticipate that the U.S.
is more likely to devalue in the future, and so the U.S. is given bad expectations α+ > α = 0 from
then on, which means higher future interest rates on its debt and reduced future U.S. exorbitant-
privilege rents. In reduced form, this means that τ now depends on the net-present-value reduction
of exorbitant-privilege rents when expectations shift from good (α) to bad expectations (α+ ) following


                                                      7
a devaluation (see Farhi and Maggiori (2017) for a full formal treatment).
    Interestingly, future Chinese net issuance of safe assets decreases U.S. commitment today. To see
this, consider the extreme case in which α = 0 and α+ = 1. In this case, the U.S. exorbitant privilege
completely disappears following a dollar devaluation. Since the U.S., after the first devaluation, can
no longer be punished by worse future expectations, it will always devalue in a disaster from that
point onwards. Following a devaluation, the U.S. can therefore only issue risky debt and the net-
present-value of future exorbitant-privilege rents is zero. By contrast, if the U.S. does not devalue,
the net-present-value of U.S. exorbitant-privilege rents is positive, but decreases with the amount of
Chinese competition. As a result, Chinese competition reduces the net-present-value loss of exorbi-
tant privilege rents following a devaluation. The erosion of franchise value by future increases in
Chinese net issuance of safe assets weakens the discipline of the U.S. today. It immediately expands
the Collapse zone. If the U.S. does not cut back its debt, it faces a crisis, is forced to devalue, and from
then on loses its exorbitant privilege.


                                            R EFERENCES
Chahrour, Ryan, and Rosen Valchev. 2017. “International medium of exchange: Privilege and duty.”
  Boston College Department of Economics.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Matteo Maggiori. 2017. “A model of the international monetary system.” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 295–355.

Gopinath, Gita. 2015. “The international price system.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gopinath, Gita, and Jeremy C Stein. 2018. “Banking, Trade, and the making of a Dominant Cur-
  rency.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Konstantin Milbradt, et al. 2018. “A model of the reserve as-
  set.” Forthcoming in American Economic Review.

Ito, Hiro, and Masahiro Kawai. 2016. “Trade invoicing in major currencies in the 1970s–1990s:
  Lessons for renminbi internationalization.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
  42: 123–145.

Ito, Hiro, and Menzie Chinn. 2015. “The rise of the redback: evaluating the prospects for renminbi
  use in invoicing.” Renminbi internationalization: achievements, prospects, and challenges, Brookings In-
  stitution Press and the Asian Development Bank Institute, 111–58.

Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. 2018a. “International Currencies and Capital
  Allocations.” Working Paper.

Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. 2018b. “The Rise of the Dollar and Fall of the
  Euro as International Currencies.” Working Paper.



                                                     8
Triffin, Robert. 1961. Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The future of convertibility. New Haven, Yale University
  Press, Connecticut.




                                                    9
