                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MARKETS FOR FINANCIAL INNOVATION

                                            Ana Babus
                                       Kinda Cheryl Hachem

                                       Working Paper 25477
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25477


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2019




We are grateful to Paul Glasserman, John Kuong, and Pierre-Olivier Weill for thoughtful discussions.
We also thank Doug Diamond, Veronica Guerrieri, Ben Hébert, Anil Kashyap, Stavros Panageas,
Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, Victoria Vanasco, and numerous seminar and conference participants for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ana Babus and Kinda Cheryl Hachem. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Markets for Financial Innovation
Ana Babus and Kinda Cheryl Hachem
NBER Working Paper No. 25477
January 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. D47,D86,G23

                                              ABSTRACT

Financial securities trade in a wide variety of market structures. This paper develops a theory in which
both the market structure of trade and the payoffs of the claims being traded form endogenously. Financial
intermediaries use the cash flows of an underlying asset to design securities for investors. The demand
for securities arises as investors choose markets then trade using strategies represented by quantity-price
schedules. We find that intermediaries create increasingly riskier securities when facing deeper markets
in which investors trade more competitively. In turn, investors elicit safer securities when they choose
to trade in thinner, more fragmented markets. These findings reveal a novel role for market fragmentation
in the creation of safer securities. The model is also informative about which investor classes trade
which securities and how the distributional properties of the underlying asset affect the relationship
between security design and market structure.


Ana Babus
One Brookings Dr.
ST. LOUIS, Miss 63130
USA
anababus@gmail.com

Kinda Cheryl Hachem
University of Virginia
Darden School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard
Charlottesville, VA 22906
and NBER
hachemk@darden.virginia.edu
1        Introduction

It has long been acknowledged that non-…nancial …rms adjust product design in response
to market structure.1 In …nancial markets, persistent empirical regularities to this e¤ect
are lacking. This is especially so when it comes to standardized securities whose payo¤s are
not commissioned by any one investor. Di¤erent standardized securities trade in di¤erent
venues at any point in time, but historically the same claims have also traded in di¤erent
market structures. Do …nancial intermediaries also adjust product design in response to
market structure when creating securities to connect investors with markets? If so, what is
the relationship between types of claims and the markets in which they trade? Insights into
these questions would inform ongoing debates about the desirability of centralized trading
and shed light on whether …nancial regulators can successfully restructure markets and
improve e¢ ciency.
        To study these issues, we build a tractable model in which both security design and
market structure are endogenously determined. We take seriously the fact that standardized
securities trade in a wide variety of market structures and the possibility that a wide variety
of market structures are supported as equilibria. We explore primitives that shape the
relationship between market liquidity and risk and analyze welfare implications of di¤erent
equilibrium market structures.
        Our environment is one where …nancial intermediaries use the cash ‡ows of an underlying
asset to design securities for investors. A security speci…es a payo¤ for every realization of
the underlying asset. As in Ross (1976) and Allen and Gale (1994), we consider that
…nancial innovation arises in response to investors’demand. However, key to our model is
that the demand for securities is itself endogenous. This demand is modeled in two steps.
First, investors choose a market in which to trade. Second, once markets open and investors
can trade, their trading strategies are represented by quantity-price schedules, with each
investor understanding the impact of her trade on the price of the security.
        A distinguishing feature of many investors in …nancial markets is that their valuations
are generally grounded in mean-variance analysis. We capture this most simply with mean-
variance preferences. Investors are ex-ante homogeneous but have di¤erent ex-post val-
    1
        See Johnson and Myatt (2003), Johnson and Myatt (2006), and Bar-Isaac, Caruana, and Cuñat (2012).


                                                     2
uations of a security, which allows them to bene…t from trading with each other. The
idiosyncratic valuations of investors are realized after securities have been designed and an
intermediary cannot commit to making payo¤s contingent on these valuation shocks. The
securities that emerge in equilibrium are thus standardized.
       Financial intermediaries are strategic when designing securities, taking into account de-
mand by investors in the markets in which the securities will be traded. Markets can be
thinner and more fragmented with investors trading more strategically, or deeper and less
fragmented with investors trading more competitively. Investors choose markets under-
standing that their choices will a¤ect the market structure faced by …nancial intermediaries
and thus the design of the securities that will be traded.
       There are two implicit frictions in the environment that are worth making explicit here.
First, investors cannot directly invest in the same assets as …nancial intermediaries. This
is realistic as …nancial intermediaries frequently create asset-backed securities that give
investors exposure to markets that they could not otherwise invest in. Mortgage-backed se-
curities are one such example.2 Second, intermediaries design securities bounded by limited
liability. That is, a security’s payo¤ cannot exceed the payo¤ of the asset that backs it in
any given state of the world. In practice, most securities are implicitly designed to respect
this constraint. In our set-up, limited liability is equivalent to the spanning constraint in the
…nancial innovation literature (Du¢ e and Rahi (1995)) which requires that the securities a
…nancial intermediary issues span the payo¤ of the asset that backs them.
       We obtain two major sets of results. The …rst set of results characterizes the security
that an intermediary …nds optimal to o¤er taking as given the market structure. We show
that this security depends monotonically on the depth of the intermediary’s market. In
particular, we show (i) that the optimal security belongs to the family of debt contracts,
paying the lesser of a ‡at payo¤ and the full value of the underlying asset in every state of
the world, and (ii) that the state in which the security starts paying the ‡at payo¤ is higher
in markets with more investors. In other words, …nancial intermediaries design progressively
riskier asset-backed securities when facing investors that trade more competitively. In the
   2
    Naturally, there are derivative securities, such as equity options, for which the investors can acquire both
the underlying asset (the equity security) and the derivative security (the equity option). These securities
are therefore not subject to the …rst friction in our environment.



                                                       3
limit, the security approaches the payo¤ of the underlying asset in all states, which we refer
to as equity in the spirit of the literature on security design.
   The intuition for this …rst set of results is as follows. When choosing how to design a
security, the intermediary’s main incentive is to obtain a high price for it. The equilibrium
price at which the security is traded is increasing in its mean payo¤ and decreasing in
the variance of its payo¤s across states. The intermediary thus faces a trade-o¤ between
the mean and the variance of the security he designs, making a debt contract optimal as
debt has the least variance among all limited liability securities with the same expected
value. Importantly, though, the equilibrium price decreases less with the variance of the
security in deeper markets where investors have a lower price impact. Thus, the strength of
the mean-variance trade-o¤ faced by the intermediary (and hence where on the spectrum
of debt contracts the security lies) depends on the depth of the market. The deeper the
market, the less pronounced the trade-o¤ and the more equity-like the intermediary makes
his security.
   The second set of results focuses on the equilibrium market structure. This is crucial
to ensure that the securities intermediaries design in a given market structure can indeed
be supported in equilibrium. If no investor bene…ts from trading in a particular market
structure, then we should not expect the corresponding securities to arise in equilibrium.
   When choosing which market to trade in, an investor weighs the gains from trade with
other investors against the ability to in‡uence the security that the intermediary designs.
An investor who trades in a thinner market will have a larger price impact. On one hand,
this ampli…es the mean-variance trade-o¤ in the intermediary’s security design problem and
delivers a less risky security. On the other hand, it also ampli…es the extent to which the
investor will move the price of the security against herself when trading with other investors.
   When investors expect to be relatively homogeneous in their valuations of the same secu-
rity, they anticipate limited bene…ts from trading with each other and are therefore willing
to accept a larger price impact in order to elicit a less variable security from the interme-
diary. In contrast, when investors expect to be relatively heterogeneous, they understand
that they may want to engage in large trades with each other so they seek to limit their
price impact by trading in a large market, albeit with a riskier security. Thus, an important


                                               4
outcome of our model is the following: controlling for the riskiness of the underlying asset,
less variable asset-backed securities are traded in thinner, more fragmented markets while
more variable asset-backed securities are traded in deeper, more concentrated markets.
   To gain further insights into our question, we analyze a simpler version of the model
in which asset returns are uniformly distributed. The welfare implications are di¤erent for
…nancial intermediaries and investors. If heterogeneity among investors is low, then the
symmetric equilibrium that achieves the highest welfare for investors exists in the set of
equilibria where debt is traded in thinner, more fragmented markets. In contrast, inter-
mediaries are always better o¤ designing a security for a large market than for a small
market. Investors thus bene…t at the expense of intermediaries in any equilibrium where
debt is traded. In aggregate, however, the bene…ts to investors in an equilibrium where debt
is traded are outweighed by the losses to intermediaries, such that total welfare is higher
when markets are deeper, even though the security that emerges in these markets has more
variable payo¤s.
   Lastly, we explore the relationship between security design and market structure in
real world markets through the lens of our model. Our …ndings suggest that institutional
investors, who tend to have less dispersion in their preference shocks, are more likely to
trade safer securities in fragmented markets. In contrast, retail investors, who tend to be
more heterogeneous in their preference shocks, participate in larger markets where they
trade riskier securities. We also show that the trading of equity in a centralized market can
co-exist with …nancial intermediaries o¤ering debt securities in fragmented markets, even
when securities are backed by the same underlying asset. Other important implications of
our model are that the origination of better underlying assets can eliminate the creation of
asset-backed securities with less variable payo¤s and that the distributional properties of
the underlying asset can a¤ect the relationship between market liquidity and the riskiness
of asset-backed securities.


Related Literature

This paper relates to several strands of literature. The most relevant studies are those on
security design and endogenous market structure.


                                             5
       The literature on security design has been very proli…c over recent decades. The classic
problem explored in these papers is that of a …rm needing to raise funds from an investor
to …nance an investment project. In exchange, the …rm proposes a security to the investor.
A common result in this literature is that debt is the optimal security in the presence
of asymmetric information or moral hazard (e.g., Gale and Hellwig (1985), Gorton and
Pennacchi (1990), Nachman and Noe (1994), DeMarzo and Du¢ e (1999), Biais and Mariotti
(2005), Yang (2017), Hébert (2018), Asriyan and Vanasco (2018)).3 We explore a variant
of the typical set-up. In particular, …nancial intermediaries issue securities which allow
investors to have exposure to assets in which they cannot directly invest. The family of
debt contracts is optimal even absent informational asymmetries, and, more importantly,
…nancial intermediaries o¤er low-variance debt only when investors trade in a thin market.
As the market gets deeper, the optimal security becomes equity.
       Parallel to the literature on security design, there is a body of work on …nancial inno-
vation that studies the role of security issuances in completing markets. From the seminal
paper of Allen and Gale (1991) to the more recent contribution of Carvajal, Rostek, and
Weretka (2012), the main focus of this line of research is to analyze whether competition
among asset-holders a¤ects their incentives to introduce new securities. Complimentary to
this literature, we study a model in which a …nancial intermediary’s decision to issue secu-
rities is a¤ected by the strategic competition between investors when trading the securities
they are o¤ered.
       There is a young but growing literature on endogenous market structure. Babus and
Parlatore (2018), Cespa and Vives (2018), Dugast, Üslü, and Weill (2019), Lee and Wang
(2018), and Yoon (2018) provide models that seek to explain why trade takes places in a
variety of venues, centralized or decentralized. However, in these papers, the asset traded is
taken to be exogenous. We endogenize both the security design and the market participation
decision, which allows us to study the relationship between the type of security and the
market structure in which it is traded.
       A small number of papers study the e¤ect of market structure on security design. In a
   3
    In Malenko and Tsoy (2018), a mixture of debt and equity can be optimal when the investor faces
Knightian uncertainty about the underlying project’s returns. Other models of endogenous capital structure
instead assume transaction costs of security issuance as in Allen and Gale (1988); see, for example, Corbae
and Quintin (2019) on the cyclical properties of safe debt.


                                                    6
set-up which assumes that investors are better informed about the prospects of the issuer
than the issuer himself, Axelson (2007) shows that debt is optimal if the degree of compe-
tition among investors is low. Rostek and Yoon (2018) analyze the role of market structure
for introducing non-redundant derivatives. In both of these papers, however, the market
structure is taken to be exogenous. In our paper, the market structure is endogenously
determined. This is important, as it ensures that the securities traded in a given market
structure can indeed be supported in equilibrium.
    There is a lack of direct empirical work on the joint determination of security design
and market structure. However, Biais and Green (2018) provide a thorough documentation
of developments in the bond market in the 20th century. They …nd that when institutions
became more important in bond markets, bond markets became thinner. While our model
is inherently static (as it develops over three periods), it builds on ingredients that are
relevant for investigating these issues. For instance, changes in the dispersion in investors’
valuations or in the variance of the underlying asset over time could potentially account for
market structure dynamics.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 introduces the model environment;
Section 3 de…nes and characterizes the equilibrium; Section 4 presents the welfare implica-
tions of our model; Section 5 discusses implications of our model for real world markets;
Section 6 analyzes some extensions of our model; and Section 7 concludes. All proofs are
collected in Appendix A.


2    The Model Set-Up

Our analysis focuses on how …nancial …rms adjust the design of their securities in response
to the demand they face from investors. To capture the interactions between investors and
…nancial intermediaries in a simple setting, we adopt a standard security design framework
in which we allow investors to trade the security that intermediaries design. To this, we add
a market formation stage to capture how investors’ demand arises. This is a key step to
ensure that the securities intermediaries design in response to investors’demand can indeed
be supported in equilibrium.



                                              7
   We consider an economy with three dates, t = 0; 1; 2, and two types of agents, …nancial
intermediaries and investors. There are M           2 risk neutral, impatient …nancial intermedi-
aries indexed by m = 1; :::; M . Each intermediary has access to a risky asset Z. The asset
stands for loans originated to …rms, or mortgages extended to households. We assume that
each unit of the asset Z yields a payo¤ z (s)        0 if the aggregate state s 2 [0; S] is realized
at date t = 2. The cumulative distribution function for states is F (s), with F ( ) continuous
and di¤erentiable, and the probability density function is f (s). Without loss of generality,
we assume z 0 ( ) > 0.
   A market m is associated with each …nancial intermediary m. In each market m, the
intermediary can issue a security Wm that pays wm (s) in state s at date t = 2. For this
reason, we can interchangeably refer to the intermediary as the (security) issuer. As in the
literature on the spanning role of securities (Du¢ e and Rahi (1995)), the security payo¤ is
subject to the feasibility constraint


                                 wm (s)    z (s) ; 8s 2 [0; S] :                                (1)


From (1), each unit of Wm is backed by one and only one unit of the asset Z. This is
consistent with an interpretation in which each intermediary issues an asset-backed security
based on a representative loan that he previously originated. To reduce notation, each
intermediary m supplies one unit per capita of the security Wm in his market. In our main
speci…cation, we give intermediaries access to a su¢ ciently large pool of the asset Z so
that constraint (1) is satis…ed (instead endowing each intermediary with a …xed amount
of the asset Z and restricting him to supply a …xed amount of the security Wm can be
easily accommodated and does not a¤ect the insights). We then consider an extension
where intermediaries optimally choose how many units of Z to acquire, subject to a cost
of procuring Z. This is consistent with an interpretation in which each intermediary buys
loans from a loan originator and then issues an asset-backed security. Section 6.1 discusses
the changes to (1) when intermediaries can choose how many units of Z back each unit of
Wm .
   There are N      3 patient investors, indexed by i = 1; :::; N . Often in …nancial markets



                                                8
investor demand for securities is shaped by a mean-variance analysis. We work with the
simplest and most tractable speci…cation that captures this, which is mean-variance pref-
                                                                         i
erences. Each investor i is also subject to a preference shock               that shifts her marginal
                                                                                            i
utility of consumption, as we describe in detail below. The heterogeneity that                  introduces
across investors can be interpreted as di¤erences in liquidity needs, in the use of securities
as collateral, in technologies to repackage and resell cash ‡ows, or in risk-management con-
                                       i
straints, for example. The shock           is independently distributed across investors according
to a distribution G ( ) with mean          and standard deviation     . The realization of the shock
 i
     is also independent of the realization of the state s.
         Investors do not have access to the asset Z. However, an investor who wants exposure
to Z can choose a market m in which she can trade and acquire some quantity of the
security Wm that intermediary m designs. In line with Ross (1976) and Allen and Gale
(1994), we take the approach that …nancial innovation is driven by investors’demand. For
this, we assume that intermediaries design securities after investors choose markets.4 At
the same time, our focus is on studying the issuance of standardized securities. For this, we
                                                                                      i
consider that intermediaries design securities before the preference shocks,              , are realized.
Thus, a security cannot be customized to address the speci…c requirements of any particular
investor.
         We model how investors’ demand for securities arises in two steps. First, investors’
choices at date t = 0 determine a market structure M. When an investor i chooses a
market m, we say that i 2 m. We denote by nm the number of investors that choose
market m. We consider a market m to be active if and only if nm > 2. In this case, we say
that m 2 M. A market structure M is characterized by the number of active markets, M 0 ,
                                                                0
and by the number of investors in each market, fnm gM
                                                    m=1 . We de…ne a market structure to

be symmetric if each active market m has the same number of investors nm = n.
         Second, when markets open, we model investors’ trading strategies as quantity-price
schedules, as in Kyle (1989) and Vives (2011). In particular, the strategy of an investor is
a map from her information set to the space of demand functions, as follows. The demand
                                                           i
function of an investor i 2 m with preference shock            is a continuous function Qim : R ! R
     4
    In Section 6.2, we discuss the robustness of our …ndings to an alternative timing in which we allow
investors to choose markets after intermediaries design securities.


                                                   9
                                                                        i she wishes to
which maps the price pm of the security Wm in market m into a quantity qm
trade
                                            Qim pm ;   i      i
                                                           = qm :

                          i units of security W in market m at date t = 1 consumes C i
An investor i who trades qm                    m                                    m

at date t = 2, where
                                            cim (s) = qm
                                                       i
                                                         wm (s) ;                                        (2)

for each state s.
         To summarize, the timing of events is as follows. At date t = 0, each investor chooses a
market m in which to trade. An investor can choose at most one market. However, multiple
investors can choose the same market. Next, the intermediary in market m designs the
                                                                                        i
security Wm . At date t = 1, each investor i learns her preference shock                    . After this, all
markets open and investors in each market m trade the security Wm . At date t = 2, the
state s is realized. Investors receive payo¤s according their …nal holdings of the security.
Each intermediary m pays wm (s) and receives z(s) per capita. Consumption takes place.
         That investors can choose at most one market and that the intermediaries can each
design only one security are assumptions we make to ensure tractability. While in reality
investors have the opportunity to trade in several markets and intermediaries can o¤er
multiple securities, our set-up is a …rst step to identify which forces are relevant in the
interaction between market structure and security design. Once these forces are understood,
many extensions, including but not limited to those in Section 6, are possible.5
         Given a market structure M and a security Wm that intermediary m designs at date
t = 0, the expected payo¤ of an investor i in market m at date t = 1 as she engages in trade
is
                               Vmi =   i       i
                                           E1 Cm               i
                                                           V1 Cm          i
                                                                     p m qm ;                            (3)
                                                       2

where V ( ) is the variance operator. We use E1 ( ) and V1 ( ) to denote that expectations
are being taken over the state s, which is the only unknown at date t = 1. The price pm in
     5
    It is worth noting that investors may still choose to trade in one market despite having the opportunity
to trade in many markets. For instance, Boyarchenko, Costello, and Shachar (2018) provide evidence that
the majority of …nancial institutions participate in either the corporate bond market or the CDS market,
even though there exist bonds and CDSs issued on the same entities.



                                                     10
Eq. (3) is the price at which local market m clears, given that intermediary m supplies nm
units of the security Wm . That is, pm is such that

                                        X
                                              Qim pm ;   i
                                                             = nm :                                    (4)
                                        i2m


Substituting Eq. (2) into Eq. (3), we obtain that investor i’s objective function at date
t = 1, before the uncertainty about the state of the world s has been resolved, is

                                                                                 2
                        Vmi =    i
                                     E1 (Wm )         i
                                                 p m qm                     i
                                                                  V1 (Wm ) qm        ;                 (5)
                                                              2
                   RS                                         RS
where E1 (Wm )      0   wm (s) dF (s) and V1 (Wm )                0   [wm (s)   E1 (Wm )]2 dF (s). In this
                                           i
reformulation, the preference shock            captures investor i’s valuation of the payo¤ she ex-
pects to obtain from one unit of the security Wm .
   An intermediary m supplies nm units of the security Wm that he designs in market m,
and he receives the price pm per unit of the security. Aside from designing the security and
supplying it to the market, the intermediary is not directly involved in the trade between
investors at date t = 1. Given a market structure M and a security Wm that the interme-
diary designs in a market m with nm investors at date t = 0, intermediary m’s expected
payo¤ at date t = 1 is
                                Vm = [pm + E1 (Z             Wm )]       nm ;

where    2 [0; 1] is a discount factor that captures the impatience of intermediaries relative
to investors.
   The trading protocol through which investors in market m acquire the security Wm
corresponds to a share auction as described by Wilson (1979). In particular, our set-up is
consistent with the interpretation that each intermediary m places the security Wm with
investors in his market by running the following auction. Each investor i in market m is a
bidder that submits a schedule indicating the quantity of the security she demands at each
price. The supply of the security is perfectly divisible and, in each market m, the security
is allocated at the clearing price, pm , which is the solution to the market clearing condition
                                       i of the security for which she pays p q i .
(4). Each investor i receives a share qm                                     m m




                                                    11
3     Equilibrium

In this section, we de…ne and characterize the equilibrium. We start by solving for the
trading equilibrium in each market m at date t = 1, given a market structure M and the
securities Wm that intermediaries design at date t = 0. We then characterize the security
that each intermediary designs in equilibrium for his market m at date t = 0, given a
market structure M. Lastly, we analyze the market formation game which determines the
equilibrium market structure M at t = 0.

De…nition 1 A subgame perfect equilibrium is a market structure M, a set of securities
fWm gm2M , and a set of demand functions Qim                  i2m
                                                                    for investors in each active market
m such that:

    1. Qim solves each investor i’s problem at date t = 1

                       n                                                                        o
                           i                                                        2
                max            E1 (Wm )   pm Qim pm ;     i
                                                                     Qim pm ;   i
                                                                                        V1 (Wm ) ;   (6)
                 Qim                                            2


    2. Wm solves each …nancial intermediary m’s problem at date t = 0


                                 max fE0 (pm ) +     [E1 (Z)    E1 (Wm )]g      nm ;                 (7)
                                 Wm


       subject to the feasibility constraint (1);

    3. No investor i bene…ts from deviating and joining a di¤ erent local market at date t = 0,
       i.e. the expected payo¤ an investor receives in market m is at least as large as the
       expected payo¤ from deviating to market m0


                           E0 Vmi         E0 Vmi 0   for all i 2 m and all m0 6= m:                  (8)


    Our notion of equilibrium market structure, described in the third bullet of De…nition
1, is related to the concept of pairwise stability introduced in Jackson and Wolinsky (1996),
with the di¤erence that we allow for deviations to be unilateral.



                                                     12
   It is important to note that all agents act strategically. This implies that each investor
i 2 m takes into account her price impact in market m when submitting her demand.
Similarly, an intermediary understands how the security he designs at date t = 0 a¤ects the
price at which investors trade it at date t = 1. At the market formation stage, each investor
also takes into account how her market choice shapes the security that the intermediaries
design, as well as the price at which trade takes place at date t = 1. To streamline the
exposition, we restrict our attention to equilibria in which the market structure is symmetric,
intermediaries design the same security, and agents have linear trading strategies.
   The rest of this section characterizes the equilibrium. As mentioned earlier, we solve
…rst for the trading equilibrium conditional on a market structure and a set of securities
(Section 3.1), then for the equilibrium security conditional on a market structure (Section
3.2), and …nally for the equilibrium market structure (Section 3.3).


3.1   The Trading Equilibrium
                                                                       i
At date t = 1, after each investor i learns her preference shock           , all active markets open
and trade takes place. In each market m, an investor chooses her trading strategy in order
to maximize her expected payo¤, understanding that she has impact on the price pm . As is
standard in similar models, we simplify the optimization problem (6), which is de…ned over a
                                                      i
function space, to …nding the functions Qim pm ;          pointwise. For this, we …x a realization
                                     i N                                                i that
of the set of preference shocks,       i=1
                                           .   Then, we solve for the optimal quantity qm
each investor i 2 m demands in market m when she takes as given the demand functions of
                                                                                      i in
the other investors in market m. Thus, we obtain investor i’s best response quantity qm
market m for each realization of the preference shocks of the other investors in market m.
This gives us a map from prices to quantities, or the investor’s optimal demand function
point by point. We describe the procedure in detail below.
   The …rst order condition for an investor i in market m is

                      i                        @pm; i             i
                          E1 (Wm )   pm           i
                                                      + V1 (Wm ) qm = 0;                         (9)
                                                @qm




                                                 13
where pm;    i   is the residual inverse demand of investor i implied by

                                                  X
                                          i
                                         qm +                 Qjm pm ;    j
                                                                              = nm :                 (10)
                                                j2m;j6=i


                                                  i of the security W
   An investor i 2 m chooses to trade a quantity qm                   m so that her

marginal bene…t equalizes her marginal cost of trading. The …rst term in the …rst order
condition (9) is the marginal bene…t of increasing the …nal holdings of the security Wm
for investor i, which is given by the expected value of the security scaled by the investor’s
                         i
preference shock             . The remaining terms in Eq. (9) represent investor i’s marginal cost
of increasing her demand. The second term represents the price that the investor pays to
acquire one unit of the security Wm . Investors also incur indirect costs, captured in the
last term in Eq. (9). First, since the investors trade strategically, increasing the quantity
demanded has an impact on the market clearing price. Second, investors are risk averse,
which maps into a holding cost of the security that increases proportionally to the variance
of Wm as the quantity demanded increases. The following proposition characterizes the
trading equilibrium in a market m.

Proposition 1 Given a market structure M and a set of securities fWm gm2M , there exists
a unique symmetric linear equilibrium that characterizes investors’trading strategies in each
market m, as follows. The equilibrium demand function of an investor i in market m is

                                                              1
                         Qim pm ;    i
                                         =                                    i
                                                                                  E1 (Wm )    pm ;   (11)
                                             (1 +        m)       V1 (Wm )

         1
where   m        (nm         2) is an index of market depth. The equilibrium price in market m is
                                                     !
                                      1 X        i
                             pm =                        E1 (Wm )        (1 +      m)   V1 (Wm ) :   (12)
                                     nm
                                          i2m


   Proposition 1 shows that investor i buys or sells the security Wm depending on whether
                   i
her valuation          E1 (Wm ) of the security’s expected payo¤ is above or below the price pm
at which she can trade. However, as can be seen from the denominator of Eq. (11), the
investor will restrict the size of her trade for two reasons. First, she is risk averse and the


                                                                  14
security is risky. Thus, the more risk averse the investor is (as proxied by a higher                      ),
the less she will trade. Similarly, the more risky the security is (as re‡ected in a higher
variance of payo¤s across states), the less of it the investor trades, everything else constant.
                                                   i =
Second, the investor has a price impact, @pm; i =@qm                     V1 (Wm ), that decreases with
                                                                     m
                     1
market depth,       m .    In other words, the larger the market is, the more the investor can
trade without moving the price against herself.
       The equilibrium price in market m, characterized by Eq. (12), is the expected payo¤ of
the security Wm , scaled by the average valuation of the investors in market m, minus a risk
premium. The risk premium exists because investors are risk averse and, in expectation,
have to hold one unit of a risky security. Indeed, it is easy to check that the expected traded
                i
quantity is E0 qm = 1 for any i 2 m.
                                                                      i N
       Given a realization of investors’ preference shocks,             i=1
                                                                            ,   it follows from Eq. (12)
that the price of the security Wm is lower in a thinner market. The price of the security
also decreases with the variance of the security, everything else constant. However, the
price decreases less with the variance of the security as the market becomes deeper.6 These
e¤ects arise because investors are strategic and dislike risk. In a smaller market, changes
in the demand of an individual investor have a larger impact on the price of the security.
Furthermore, the riskier the security is, the less of it a risk averse investor will demand. If
an investor demands less of the security, more will be available to other investors. The price
will then have to fall so that, on average, other investors are content with holding more of
the security. As the size of the market increases, the price impact of any one investor falls.
An increase in riskiness is thus met with a smaller decrease in price compared to a smaller
market where a strategic decrease in demand by one investor leads to a bigger price drop.
       The e¤ects of market depth and the variance of the security on the price are typical of
models in which investors strategically trade risky assets in positive net supply by submitting
demand functions. In contrast to standard models, however, in our model both the variance
of the security and the market depth are endogenous. In particular, the security is the choice
of the intermediaries, while the market structure, and implicitly the market depth, is the
   6
    To verify this, consider the cross-partial derivative of the price pm with respect to the variance of the
security Wm and the number of investors in market m, holding everything else constant. This derivative is
given by @n@m @V@p  m
                 1 (Wm )
                                    = @n @ m
                                           m
                                              > 0.
                          E1 (Wm )=cst




                                                     15
outcome of investors’choices. Our paper seeks to understand how these forces interact.


3.2      The Equilibrium Security

At the end of date t = 0, after the market structure is determined, each active intermediary
m designs a security Wm in response to investors’ demand in his market. In particular,
an intermediary chooses the payo¤ wm (s) of the security for each state s to maximize his
expected pro…t in (7), subject to the feasibility constraint (1). The constraint (1) restricts
the intermediary to o¤er investors a security with a payo¤ that does not exceed what the
intermediary realizes on the asset Z in any state s. Alternatively, since the intermediary is
the residual claimant on the payo¤ of the asset Z, he is e¤ectively designing two securities:
one that he o¤ers to investors and one that he keeps for himself. Thus, the constraint (1)
simply requires that the two securities exhaust the returns to intermediary m’s asset, as is
commonly assumed in the …nancial innovation spanning literature.
      Taking the expectation at date t = 0 of the price pm at which investors in market m
trade the security Wm (i.e., the price in Eq. (12)) and substituting it into (7), we obtain
that intermediary m designs the security Wm to maximize the following objective function:


              E0 (Vm ) = [ E1 (Z) + (             ) E1 (Wm )      (1 +   m)   V1 (Wm )]   nm :   (13)


It is transparent that the intermediary bene…ts from o¤ering a security that pays well in
expectation, as the expected price at which investors trade is increasing in E1 (Wm ).7 At
the same time, the intermediary increases his expected pro…t if he o¤ers a security with low
variance, as the expected price at which investors trade is decreasing in V1 (Wm ). In fact,
if he were unconstrained, the intermediary would o¤er a security with in…nite mean and
zero variance. However, because the payo¤ of the security Wm cannot exceed the payo¤ of
the asset Z, the intermediary faces a trade-o¤ between the mean and the variance of the
security he designs. Since the weight on the variance in the intermediary’s expected pro…t
                                             1
in Eq. (13) depends on the depth            m    of the market in which the security is traded, how
exactly this trade-o¤ is resolved will depend on the market structure.

  7
      By the law of iterated expectations, E1 (Wm ) = E0 (Wm ).


                                                     16
Proposition 2 Suppose             >       so that intermediaries …nd it pro…table to design securities
for investors. In any market m with nm investors, intermediary m designs a security Wm
with payo¤ s                       8
                                   < z (s)                             if s < sm
                          wm (s) =                                                                       (14)
                                   : E (W ) +                   nm 2
                                                                       if s      sm
                                       1   m                2   nm 1

where the threshold state sm 2 [0; S] is de…ned by
                              8
                              < z     1   E1 (Wm ) +            nm 2
                                                                       ; 8nm < nS
                                                         2      nm 1
                       sm =                                                                              (15)
                              : S;                                         8nm      nS

with nS …nite if and only if the equation

                                    nS     2      2
                                             =           [z (S)    E1 (Z)]                               (16)
                                    nS     1

has a solution nS       3.

     Proposition 2 shows that intermediary m …nds it optimal to design a security that will
pay the lesser of a ‡at payo¤ and the full value of the asset Z in every state of the world.
The security payo¤ depends on the market structure, the distribution of the underlying
asset Z, and the preferences of investors and intermediaries. We say that the security is
debt if it pays the ‡at payo¤ in at least some states (i.e., the security is debt if sm < S).
The ‡at payo¤ that is paid in states s                sm represents the face value of the security. If
the security replicates the payo¤ of the asset Z in all states, then the intermediary sells
everything to the investors and passes through the payo¤s of the underlying asset Z. For
convenience, we refer to the security that replicates the payo¤ of the asset Z in all states
as equity.8 In our model, equity is the limiting case of a debt security where the threshold
state above which the security pays a ‡at payo¤ is sm = S.
                                                                       2                        1
     We have the following cases from Proposition 2. If                    [z (S)     E1 (Z)]   2,   then the
intermediary …nds it optimal to sell everything and o¤er equity in any market structure. If
 2
      [z (S)    E1 (Z)]      1, then the intermediary …nds it optimal to design a debt security
   8
     Typically, in the literature on security design, an equity security has a payo¤ that yields a fraction of
the underlying asset. We extend this de…nition to accommodate a fraction of 1.



                                                       17
in any market structure, including in markets with in…nitely many investors. These two
cases represent corner solutions of the intermediary’s optimization problem. If instead
 2                          1
      [z (S)   E1 (Z)] 2    2; 1    , then intermediary m o¤ers a debt security if the number of
investors nm in market m is below a threshold nS , otherwise he o¤ers equity.
     We provide the intuition for why debt is the security that the intermediary chooses from
the set of all possible security pro…les. A debt security has the following property: there are
no two states, s0 and s00 , such that wm (s0 ) < z (s0 ) and wm (s0 ) < wm (s00 ). In other words,
if the constraint (1) does not bind in either state s0 or state s00 , then the security yields the
same payo¤ in both states, and, if the constraint (1) binds only in one of the two states,
the payo¤ in that state must be smaller than in the ‡at part of the debt contract. Suppose
intermediary m chooses a security that does not have this property. Then a deviation which
increases the payo¤ of the security in state s0 by "s0 > 0 and decreases the payo¤ of the
                                   f (s0 )
security in state s00 by "s00 =    f (s00 ) "s
                                               0   decreases the variance of the security without changing
its mean. Since the intermediary’s expected pro…t in Eq. (13) is decreasing in the variance
of the security, it follows that such a deviation is pro…table. Therefore, it cannot be optimal
for the intermediary to choose any security other than debt. This argument is similar to
the one Hébert (2018) uses to show that debt is the optimal contract in the presence of
moral hazard. Novel to our framework, however, is how the equilibrium security depends
on the market structure in which it is traded. The following proposition characterizes the
relationship between the market structure and the debt contract that the intermediary
chooses.

Proposition 3 Suppose that Eq. (16) has a …nite solution nS                        3. The threshold state
sm de…ned by (15) is increasing in the number of investors nm in market m as long as
nm     nS .

     Proposition 3 shows that when the intermediary designs a debt security, he will adjust
its payo¤ depending on the market in which the security is traded. In particular, the lowest
state in which a security Wm pays the ‡at payo¤ increases with the number of investors
in market m. In other words, conditional on designing a debt security, the intermediary
o¤ers a higher face value in a larger market. At the same time, the larger the market, the


                                                           18
more variable the security that the intermediary designs. This property of the equilibrium
security extends automatically to the case when Eq. (16) does not have a …nite solution
and the intermediary o¤ers debt in markets of any size.
   To understand Proposition 3, we appeal to the intuition developed at the end of Section
3.1 about the forces that a¤ect the price of a security Wm . To start, consider a state s where
the security that intermediary m designs pays wm (s) < z (s). If the intermediary increases
wm (s) slightly, holding constant the payo¤s in all other states, then he increases both the
mean and the variance of the security Wm . The increase in the mean of the security works
in favor of the intermediary because it increases the price he expects to receive, whereas
the increase in the variance of the security decreases the intermediary’s expected pro…t.
However, as we explained in Section 3.1, a higher variance has a greater impact on the
expected price in a small market than in a large market. In contrast, as we can see from
Eq. (13), the impact of a higher mean on the expected price does not depend on the size of
the market. Therefore, the marginal bene…t to the intermediary of an increase in wm (s) is
independent of nm , while the marginal cost is decreasing in nm . Since a pro…t-maximizing
intermediary sets wm (s) to equate marginal bene…t and marginal cost, it follows that he
will increase wm (s) by more in a large market than in a small market. Given that the
intermediary …nds it optimal to issue a debt security, he can accomplish this by increasing
the threshold state above which the security pays a ‡at payo¤. The next corollary formalizes
this discussion and follows immediately from Proposition 3.

Corollary 1 Suppose that Eq. (16) has a …nite solution nS        3. The security Wm that the
intermediary designs in market m has the following properties:

       @E1 (Wm )
  1.     @nm       > 0 for any nm   nS ;

       @V1 (Wm )
  2.     @nm       > 0 for any nm   nS .

   Two polar securities can be of interest: riskless debt, which is a security that has a ‡at
payo¤ in all states of the world, and equity, which replicates the payo¤ of the asset Z in
every state. Proposition 2 allows us to understand whether these securities can be o¤ered
by intermediaries in equilibrium. The results are collected in the following corollary.


                                              19
Corollary 2 Fix a market structure M.

  1. In any market m 2 M with nm          nS investors, where nS 2 [3; 1) and satis…es Eq.
      (16), the intermediary o¤ ers a security that pays the payo¤ of the asset Z in every
      state.

  2. There is no market m 2 M in which the intermediary o¤ ers a security that pays a
      ‡at payo¤ in all states of the world.

   The …rst part of Corollary 2 is a direct implication of Proposition 2 and the discussion
that follows it. Any intermediary with at least nS investors will …nd it optimal to sell
everything and o¤er equity. The second part of Corollary 2 says that intermediaries will
never o¤er riskless debt. Suppose to the contrary that there is a market size nm      3 for
which an intermediary would …nd it optimal to o¤er riskless debt. The variance of riskless
debt is zero so, from Eq. (13), it must be the case that the intermediary …nds it optimal
to o¤er riskless debt for any market size, including in markets with at least nS investors.
This contradicts the …rst part of Corollary 2, hence the intermediary never …nds it optimal
to o¤er riskless debt.
   The results in this section characterize the security that an intermediary chooses to
design, taking as given the market structure. However, to show that a security can indeed
be supported in equilibrium, we need to verify that the market structure in which it trades
is also supported in equilibrium. We address this question in the next section.


3.3   The Equilibrium Market Structure

The goal in this section is to analyze whether there exist equilibrium market structures in
which the securities that intermediaries design can be traded. We focus on symmetric mar-
ket structures. In particular, we characterize market structures where each active market
m has the same number of investors nm = n and no investor has an incentive to deviate to
a di¤erent market at date t = 0. We discuss asymmetric equilibrium market structures in
Section 6.3.
   To understand the incentives of investor i at date t = 0 when she chooses a market in
which to trade, we need to …rst evaluate her expected payo¤ E0 Vmi from being in market

                                              20
                                                                                                                      i
m, given a market structure M. Substituting the equilibrium demand function Qim pm ;
from Eq. (11) and the equilibrium price pm from Eq. (12) into the expression for Vmi in Eq.
                                                                                         i
(5) then taking expectations at date t = 0, before the realization of                        is known, we obtain
                                              !                                                                   !
                                                                                     2
             2
              nm 1                 1              [E1 (Wm )]2               1                          1
E0 Vmi    =             1                                     +        1+                    1                        V1 (Wm ) :
            2  nm                       1 2        V1 (Wm )     2            1                              1 2
                             1+        m                                    m                     1+       m

                                                            1
If we further substitute the market depth index            m    = nm    2, investor i’s expected payo¤
becomes
                               2
                                nm        2 [E1 (Wm )]2      nm
                  E0 Vmi =                              +        V1 (Wm ) :                                       (17)
                              2 nm        1 V1 (Wm )      2 nm 2

   The expected payo¤ at date t = 0 of an investor who will trade the security Wm at date
t = 1 in a market with nm investors has two components. The …rst term in Eq. (17) is
proportional to the variance of the investors’preference shocks,                2,   and captures the gains
from trade with other investors. The larger           2   is, the more heterogeneous investors are in
how they value the mean payo¤ of the same security, and the more they bene…t from trading
with each other. In fact, when     2   is small, investors are very similar in their valuation of
the security and the equilibrium holdings of each investor approaches 1, which is the per
capita supply o¤ered by the intermediary in market m. In this case, an investor’s payo¤ is
mainly driven by the risk premium that she commands as compensation for holding a risky
security. The second term in Eq. (17) captures the part of the investor’s expected payo¤
that comes from this compensation for risk.
   Both the gains from trade and the compensation for risk depend on the depth of the
market in which the investor trades. For a given security Wm , the gains from trade term
                                                                                                           nm 1 2
in Eq. (17) increases with nm , both because the fundamental gains from trade,                              nm    ,
are increasing in the number of market participants (even though the asset supply scales
up linearly with the size of the market) and because the price impact of an investor is
smaller in a larger market. In contrast, the compensation for risk term is decreasing in
nm , for a given security Wm , because the investor’s price impact falls with the size of the
market. The security that intermediary m …nds optimal to o¤er (see Proposition 2) also
changes with nm , a¤ecting both terms in Eq. (17) through Wm . Investor i in market m
weighs all of these e¤ects at date t = 0 when deciding whether to deviate from market

                                                    21
m, which has (n         1) other investors, to a deeper market m0 , which has n other investors.
The following proposition provides su¢ cient conditions for the existence of an equilibrium
market structure.

                                                            z(k) E1 (Zjs k)  p
Proposition 4 Suppose that the asset Z satis…es               p             < 2; 8k 2 (0; S].         Con-
                                                                V1 (Zjs k)
sider all n 2 [3; N ] such that there exist integers      M1 2 N+ and M2 2 N0 solving


                                    M1     n + M2        (n + 1) = N;                                  (18)


with M1 + M2          M . Then, there exists a scalar       > 0 such that:

     1. For any   2      , any market structure with M1 intermediaries each getting n investors
       and M2 intermediaries each getting n + 1 investors is stable;

     2. For any   2   > , there is at least one stable market structure with one active interme-
       diary and all investors trading in the same market (n = N ).

     As explained above, we focus on equilibria in which the market structure is symmetric.
However, given a total number of investors N , a symmetric market structure in which each
active market contains n investors may not exist for every value of n. To address the non-
divisibility of investors, Proposition 4 extends the de…nition of a symmetric market structure
to allow for a distribution of investors across markets such that there are n investors in some
markets and (n + 1) investors in others. Condition (18) speci…es when such generalized
symmetric market structures exist.9
     Proposition 4 shows that a variety of symmetric market structures can be supported in
equilibrium. This is important, as it informs us that a rich set of securities can be observed
in equilibrium. Using Proposition 2, we can infer that, when                2      , intermediaries o¤er
a debt security if n < nS and sell everything, i.e., o¤er equity, if n              nS . Similarly, when
 2   > , the intermediary in the equilibrium with a single active market o¤ers equity unless
N < nS . We study asymmetric equilibria, and hence the co-existence of di¤erent types of
securities, in Section 6.3.
    9
      Consider N = 100. A market structure in which there are n = 8 investors in each market does not exist,
as it would require a fractional number of intermediaries. However, there exists a market structure in which
there are M1 = 8 markets each with n = 8 investors and M2 = 4 markets each with n = 9 investors.


                                                    22
       The multiplicity of security pro…les that can be sustained in equilibrium when               2


is consistent with the diverse universe of claims that investors can trade in …nancial mar-
kets. In practice, we observe a wide variety of market structures across time and space,
and historically the same claims traded in both centralized and decentralized markets. The
multiplicity of equilibria in our model arises when investors prefer to trade less variable
securities. In this case, if a symmetric market structure with M intermediaries is an equi-
librium, then a symmetric market structure with fewer than M intermediaries is also an
equilibrium. The multiplicity of equilibria would collapse if investors in di¤erent markets
could coordinate to move together to a new market or if each investor had to provide consent
for others to join her market. In either scenario, only the most fragmented market struc-
ture that achieves the global maximum of the investor value function would be supported
in equilibrium. Our assumption about lack of consent is grounded in features of many
real-world …nancial markets. That investors cannot coordinate is also standard, e.g., in the
literature on trade in OTC markets initiated by Du¢ e, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005),
which precludes the possibility that agents can coordinate to alleviate search frictions.
       In words, the results in Proposition 2 and 4 can be synthesized as follows. When in-
vestors’ demand is fragmented, as is the case when investors are relatively homogenous,
…nancial intermediaries respond by designing debt securities. In consequence, debt securi-
ties are traded in a larger number of smaller, less liquid, markets.10 When investors’demand
is instead consolidated, as is the case when investors are relatively heterogeneous, …nancial
intermediaries respond by passing through the payo¤ of the underlying asset. Thus, equity
securities are traded in a smaller number of larger, more liquid, markets. Another, con-
sistent implication is that …nancial intermediaries that issue equity-like securities have a
higher market share than intermediaries that issue debt-like securities backed by the same
underlying asset. Note that in our model, by construction, the equilibrium security is al-
ways backed by the same underlying asset regardless of whether trade occurs in a more
fragmented or a more concentrated market structure.
       Proposition 4 shows that the variance of investor preference shocks,           2,   helps determine
which market structures can be supported in equilibrium. When                     2   is small, investors
  10
    A market is liquid if the security can be traded with little impact on its price. We discuss this more
formally in Section 5.


                                                   23
will not di¤er much in their valuations of the same security. The gains from trade are
therefore low and investors anticipate that they will trade little with each other. Given
this, investors are willing to trade in smaller markets, where they can use their larger
price impact to obtain from intermediaries a less variable security whose remaining risk is
well compensated. While the larger price impact also hurts the investor when she trades
the security with other investors in the same market, this concern is muted because she
anticipates trading little with other investors. In contrast, when         2   is large, the gains from
trade are also large. Investors understand that they may want to make large trades with
each other in order to reap these gains, hence they seek to minimize their price impact by
trading in a large market, albeit with a riskier security.
    It is important to notice that investors’ preferences shape the payo¤s of the security
traded in equilibrium both directly and indirectly. First, because the expected price at
which a security Wm trades is increasing in the mean               of the investor preference shocks,
    directly enters the optimization problem of intermediary m and thus directly a¤ects the
payo¤s of the security that he …nds optimal to design. Second, although the variance of the
investor preference shocks does not appear directly in the payo¤s of the security derived
in Proposition 2,      2   plays an important role in determining which securities are traded
in equilibrium. The payo¤s of the equilibrium security in market m depend directly on
the number of investors nm , and        2   a¤ects an investor’s decision about which market to
trade in. Thus, as we discussed above, when            2   is high, investors value trading in deeper
markets, which induces the intermediary to o¤er riskier securities, while, when               2   is low,
investors prefer trading in thinner markets, which induces the intermediary to o¤er less
variable securities.


4    Welfare and Pro…ts

In this section, our goal is to gain insights into welfare and expected pro…ts by exploring some
simple examples. In particular, we are interested in which equilibrium market structure
yields the highest welfare for investors, which equilibrium yields the highest welfare for
intermediaries, and whether any of the equilibria coincide with the solution to a social



                                                  24
planning problem.
     As in Proposition 4, we consider equilibrium market structures with M1 intermediaries
each getting n investors and M2 intermediaries each getting (n + 1) investors, such that
condition (18) is satis…ed. In each active market, an investor obtains an expected pro…t
E0 Vmi given by Eq. (17), while the intermediary receives an expected pro…t E0 (Vm ) given
by Eq. (13). Aggregate welfare can then be de…ned as


             W = n           M1      E0 Vmi jnm =n + (n + 1)         M2     E0 Vmi jnm =n+1

                      +M1         E0 (Vm jnm =n ) + M2        E0 (Vm jnm =n+1 ) :


To understand which driving forces determine aggregate welfare, it is useful to review the
pro…ts of investors and intermediaries, paying special attention to how they depend on the
depth of the market.
                                                                                          i
     Eq. (5) gives the pro…t of investor i after her preference shock                         is realized but before
                                                                                                       i
the state s is known. Evaluated at the equilibrium demand function Qim pm ;                                derived in
Proposition 1, Eq. (5) simpli…es to

                                                         i                      2
                                        1+2     m            E1 (Wm ) pm
                              Vmi   =             2                                 :                           (19)
                                      2 (1 +    m)             V1 (Wm )

                              1
Given a market depth         m    (in essence, a market size nm ) and a security price pm , Eq. (19)
implies that, among all securities with the same mean payo¤ E1 (Wm ), investor i would
prefer the security with the least variance V1 (Wm ). In other words, investor i would prefer
debt.
     Compare this to Eq. (17), which represents investor i’s expected pro…t when Eq. (5) is
                                                                            i
evaluated at both the equilibrium demand function Qim pm ;                              and the equilibrium price
                                                                   1
pm derived in Proposition 1. Given a market depth                 m ,   Eq. (17) implies that, among all
securities with the same mean payo¤ E1 (Wm ), an investor i who takes into account her
price impact would only prefer the security with the least variance V1 (Wm ) if she expects
investors to have very disperse valuations. In other words, investor i would prefer debt if
 2   is high but equity if    2   is low.



                                                    25
       The endogeneity of market depth and its e¤ect on security design reverses this preference.
A key feature of the equilibrium in our model is that investors take into account not only that
they have a price impact when they trade but also that their market choice a¤ects market
depth and hence the payo¤s of the securities that intermediaries design. Thus, an investor’s
expected pro…t in Eq. (17) depends on the depth of the market both directly and indirectly,
with the indirect e¤ect coming through the equilibrium security Wm derived in Proposition
2. The two terms in Eq. (17) – the gains from trade term and the compensation for risk
term –can move in opposite directions as the market becomes deeper. For any underlying
asset Z satisfying the su¢ cient conditions on z ( ) in Proposition 4, the compensation for
risk term is decreasing in nm when evaluated at the equilibrium security.11 In contrast, the
gains from trade term is potentially increasing in nm , as shown in the next proposition.

Proposition 5 Consider an asset Z with payo¤ s z (s) = z (0) + s , where z (0)                       0 and
                                                                                            1
  > 0. Suppose that the state s is uniformly distributed according to f ( ) =               S.   Evaluating
an investor’s expected pro…t in Eq. (17) at the equilibrium security Wm                    W (nm ) derived
in Proposition 2, an increase in nm :

   1. Increases the gains from trade term,

                                                       2
                                                        nm      2 [E1 (W (nm ))]2
                                        G (nm )                                   ;
                                                      2 nm      1 V1 (W (nm ))

         for all nm      3 if z (0) is not too large;

   2. Decreases the compensation for risk term,

                                                          nm
                                            R (nm )           V1 (W (nm )) ;
                                                       2 nm 2

                                               1
                                   1+         1+       2  1
         for all nm      3 if       4   S          >   1+2 .
  11
    See the proof of Proposition 4. We emphasize that these conditions on z ( ) are su¢ cient but not
necessary. For example, in the class of functions z (s) = z (0) + s with a uniformly distributed aggregate
state f (s) = S1 :
                                        z (k) E1 (Zjs k)      p
                                           p                 = 2 +1
                                             V1 (Zjs k)
                  z(k) E1 (Zjs k)
                                   p
and, therefore,     p             < 2 if and only if < 12 . However, as shown in Proposition 5, the compen-
                      V1 (Zjs k)

sation for risk term is also decreasing in nm if, for example,      = 1 and   S
                                                                                  > 92 .


                                                           26
Consistent with Proposition 4 and the intuition developed at the end of Section 3.3, Propo-
sition 5 implies that investors will prefer equity if    2   is high but debt if    2   is low. This
constitutes a reversal in the types of securities preferred by investors (as a function of the
expected dispersion in their valuations) relative to the case where investors only take into
account the price impact of their trades for a given market depth.

Proposition 6 Consider z ( ) and f ( ) as in the statement of Proposition 5. Also suppose
N > nS with nS 2 [3; 1). It follows that:

  1. An active intermediary’s expected pro…t E0 (Vm ) in Eq. (13) is increasing in nm when
     Wm is the equilibrium security derived in Proposition 2.

  2. If z (0) is not too large, then, for any value of       2,   the equilibrium in which all in-
     vestors trade in a single market and the intermediary sells everything, or o¤ ers equity,
     achieves the highest aggregate welfare.

   The …rst part of Proposition 6 says that an intermediary is always better o¤ designing
a security for a large market than for a small market. Investors have less price impact in
large markets, so the intermediary is able to command a higher price for whatever security
he designs. At the same time, Proposition 5 implies that an investor will be worse o¤
in a large market than in a small market when       2   is su¢ ciently low. Therefore, investors
bene…t at the expense of intermediaries in any equilibrium where debt is traded. Recall from
Proposition 4 that there exist multiple symmetric equilibria when          2   < . If the variance
of investor preference shocks is low enough, the symmetric equilibrium that achieves the
highest welfare for investors exists in the set of equilibria where investors trade in many
small markets in which …nancial intermediaries o¤er debt.
   The second part of Proposition 6 says that the bene…ts to investors of an equilibrium in
which intermediaries o¤er debt are outweighed by the losses to intermediaries, at least in
environments where it is impossible to design a security that has high returns in all states
of the world (i.e., environments where z (0) is low). First, the expected, per-capita pro…t
of an active intermediary increases more quickly with nm than the expected pro…t of an
investor decreases with nm . Second, the non-linear relationship between market size and


                                               27
the price impact of investors means that total welfare across intermediaries is maximized
when there is only one active intermediary.
      The results in the second part of Proposition 6 also characterize the solution to a fully
constrained social planning problem; that is, the problem of a social planner who chooses a
market structure, a set of securities, and a set of demand functions to maximize aggregate
welfare subject to the equilibrium conditions in De…nition 1. However, as an alternative,
we can consider a social planner who: (i) opens M1 markets each with n investors and M2
markets each with n + 1 investors such that condition (18) holds; (ii) designs a security
Wm subject only to the feasibility condition (1); (iii) allocates to investor i in market m a
          i of the security W
quantity qm                   m after the realization of investor preference shocks, where
X
    i = n
   qm      m for each market m; and (iv) allocates to the intermediary in each market m
i2m
a quantity nm of the security (Z      Wm ). The planner in this alternative planning problem
still seeks to maximize the aggregate welfare of intermediaries and investors, but he is no
longer constrained to choose among solutions that arise as a decentralized equilibrium.
      In the alternative planning problem just described, it is straightforward to show that the
social planner opens a single market in which all investors trade a zero-variance security (i.e.,
riskless debt). We omit the proof for brevity, but the intuition is as follows. A security with
zero variance neutralizes the risk aversion of the investors. Maximum aggregate welfare is
                                                            i to investors whose realization
then achieved by allocating unboundedly positive positions qm
of i exceeds the market average and unboundedly negative positions to the rest to satisfy
X
   qmi = N . If the planner is restricted to design a positive-variance security, then he will

i2N
open a single market in which investors take large but …nite positions on the closest possible
security to riskless debt.
      The lesson from the alternative planning problem is that the planner can achieve higher
welfare by decoupling the security design choice from the market structure choice. In
particular, the planner would like to design a debt security for risk averse investors and he
would like all investors to trade this security in the same market in order to maximize the
gains from trade. The problem is that security design cannot be decoupled from market
structure in equilibrium. Intermediaries respond to market-based incentives when designing
a security for investors to trade. These incentives come from the price of the security, which


                                               28
is endogenously less sensitive to investors’risk aversion in a large market because the price
impact of an individual investor is decreasing in market size. Thus, when nS 2 [3; 1), the
decentralized equilibrium supports either a fragmented market structure in which …nancial
intermediaries o¤er debt, or a consolidated, large market, in which a …nancial intermediary
sells the entire payo¤ of the underlying asset Z.


5         Comparative Statics and Real World Markets

In this section we seek to elucidate the relationship between security design and market
structure in real world markets through the lens of our model. We undertake three exercises.
First, we study the relationship between the type of security and the liquidity of the market
in which it is traded. Second, we explore the relationship between di¤erent classes of
investors and the securities they are trading. Third, we look at the role of the underlying
asset in determining the market structure in which a security is traded. Proofs are collected
at the end of Appendix A.


5.1         Liquidity

A natural measure of liquidity in our model is the price impact of an individual investor.
Speci…cally, a market is liquid if the security can be traded with little impact on its price.
                                                                                              i =
         Recall from Section 3.1 that the price impact of investor i in market m is @pm; i =@qm
                                1
 m       V1 (Wm ), where       m      (nm    2) and, in equilibrium, Wm depends on nm as demon-
strated in Proposition 2. Under the conditions stated in Proposition 4, the total derivative
             i with respect to n
of @pm; i =@qm                                  12 In other words, a larger market in our
                                 m is negative.

model is also a more liquid market. Thus, our model suggests that securities with less
variable payo¤s, controlling for the riskiness of the underlying asset Z and for investors’
preferences, trade in less liquid markets.
         Some suggestive evidence in favor of our prediction comes from the work of Friewald,
Jankowitsch, and Subrahmanyam (2017). Within the set of mortgage-backed products,
they …nd that mortgage-backed securities (MBS) are much more liquid than collateralized
    12
         This follows immediately from the proof of Proposition 4.




                                                        29
mortgage obligations (CMO). Both products derive their cash ‡ows from underlying pools of
mortgage loans, but MBS are characterized as “pass-through”securities, meaning that their
payo¤s will be as variable as the payo¤s of the underlying asset. The authors attribute only
part of the liquidity di¤erence between MBS and CMO to di¤erences in government guar-
antees, suggesting an interesting relationship between market liquidity and payo¤ structure
that is consistent with the predictions of our model.
   At this stage it is worth noting that primary and secondary markets are one and the
same in our model. We believe this to be a reasonable simpli…cation. While in practice we
distinguish between trade in primary and secondary markets, these markets are typically
tightly linked. In particular, a more liquid secondary market makes the primary market
more liquid as well. It would follow from our model that an individual investor has limited
price impact against the intermediary in a liquid primary market. Hence, the intermediary
can design a more variable security and investors will accept it (i.e., they will not leave the
primary market) because the security can be re-traded in a liquid secondary market after
the realization of preference shocks. In this way, liquidity of the secondary market supports
liquidity of the primary market.


5.2   Investor Classes

Our model also allows us to think about various types of investor classes.
   The …rst dimension on which investors can be grouped into di¤erent investor classes is
the degree of heterogeneity in their preference shocks. Institutional investors, for example,
are likely to have lower   2   than retail investors. Our model implies that as   2   decreases,
more fragmented market structures become stable and these are precisely the market struc-
tures that support the issuance of securities with less variable payo¤s. Increases in    2   have
the opposite e¤ect, eliminating market structures that deliver less variable securities. Then,
under this interpretation, institutional investors are more likely to trade less variable secu-
rities in fragmented markets, while retail investors participate in larger markets where they
trade riskier securities. These …ndings align with the stylized facts documented by Biais
and Green (2018) about the 20th century corporate bond market.
   Second, we can consider variation in investors’tolerance for risk. Risk aversion in our


                                               30
model is captured by the parameter , which is (proportional to) the investor’s marginal
disutility from variance. A decrease in       increases the importance of the gains from trade
term relative to the compensation for risk term in the investor’s expected pro…t. A decrease
in    also directly a¤ects the payo¤s of the security derived in Proposition 2, increasing the
mean and variance of the equilibrium security for a given market size nm         nS , along with
decreasing the threshold market size nS at which the intermediary o¤ers equity. The same
security will thus trade in smaller markets as risk aversion decreases. In practical terms,
an increase in investors’risk appetite decreases the liquidity of safer securities, consistent
with long-standing practitioner intuition. Whether smaller markets are stable depends on
other parameters, including    2,   as a decrease in   ampli…es both the rate at which the gains
from trade term increases with nm and the rate at which the compensation for risk term
decreases with nm .
     Note that these are predictions based on comparative statics and not an equilibrium
analysis of di¤erent types of investors trading against each other. However, our model
provides a platform to explore such issues, and we leave it for future work.


5.3    The Underlying Asset

One of the main implications of our model is that, controlling for the riskiness of the un-
derlying asset Z, …nancial intermediaries design progressively riskier asset-backed securities
when facing deeper markets. We now explore how equilibrium in our model depends on
the characteristics of the underlying (original) asset, including how changes in the riski-
ness of this asset a¤ect the relationship between market liquidity and the riskiness of the
asset-backed security designed by the intermediary.
     We consider two exercises with respect to the distributional properties of Z. First, we
change only the mean of the distribution from which the payo¤ of the original asset Z is
drawn. Second, we change both the mean and the variance.
     To conduct the …rst exercise, we consider the speci…cation z (s) = z (0) + s for the
payo¤s of the original asset Z, where s 2 [0; 1] is uniformly distributed. The experiment
is to increase z (0), which has the e¤ect of increasing the mean payo¤ of the original asset
without changing its variance. For a given market size nm , the equilibrium security Wm has


                                                 31
the same shape as before (i.e., the mapping from nm to sm does not change). The variance
of Wm also does not change, but the mean payo¤ E1 (Wm ) increases because the payo¤s in
each state are shifted up by the constant z (0). It remains to check whether the set of stable
market structures changes. Consider              such that Eq. (16) has a …nite solution nS                  3,
which is to say there exists a stable market structure that supports equity. The increase
in z (0) has no e¤ect on the compensation for risk term in the investor’s expected pro…t.
However, by increasing E1 (Wm ) relative to V1 (Wm ) for any market size nm 2 [3; nS ], the
increase in z (0) ampli…es the rate at which the gains from trade term increases with nm .
For moderate values of       2,   this can erode the stability of some fragmented market structures
and push towards equilibria where more variable securities are traded. In other words, when
there is moderate dispersion in investor preferences, the origination of a better asset Z by
…nancial intermediaries, as captured by a higher mean for the same variance, can eliminate
the creation of asset-backed securities with less variable payo¤s.13
       For the second exercise, we consider z (s) =            s, where s 2 [0; 1] is still uniformly
distributed and       > 0 is a parameter that a¤ects both the mean and the variance of the
original asset Z. Speci…cally, the higher is , the higher are both the mean and the variance
of the original asset. For a given market structure, it follows that intermediaries will o¤er
less variable securities as        decreases. However, when heterogeneity across investors,             2,   is
low and multiple equilibria are supported, less variable securities can be traded in larger,
more liquid, markets as           changes. In particular, the security designed by an intermediary
whose underlying asset is less risky (as captured by lower ) can be both less variable and
traded in a deeper market than the security designed by an intermediary whose underlying
asset is more risky (as captured by higher ). This is consistent with the observation that
bonds issued for investment-grade …rms are more liquid than those issued for high-yield
…rms.
  13
     For 2 su¢ ciently low, the gains from trade term is of second-order importance in the investor’s market
choice, and, for 2 su¢ ciently high, fragmented market structures are not stable to begin with, i.e., even at
z (0) = 0, before the increase in z (0).




                                                     32
6     Robustness

This section considers alternative formulations of our model. We demonstrate that equilibria
where investors trade in many small markets in which …nancial intermediaries o¤er debt and
equilibria where all investors trade in a single market in which the …nancial intermediary
o¤ers equity can be supported in all of these formulations.


6.1   Costly Supply

Up to this point, we have assumed that each intermediary m backs each unit of the security
Wm with one and only one unit of Z. This assumption allowed us to abstract from me-
chanical e¤ects that arise from having a …xed supply of Z in each market, which would only
reinforce our results. We can relax this assumption and allow the intermediary to choose
how many units of Z back each unit of Wm , subject to a cost of procuring Z. In particular,
intermediary m incurs a cost c (Am ) to acquire Am units of Z which he then uses to back
nm units of Wm . The cost function satis…es the standard conditions c (0) = 0 and c0 ( ) > 0.
The intermediary now chooses Wm and Am subject to the feasibility constraint


                              nm wm (s)      Am z (s) ; 8s 2 [0; S] :

This constraint replaces (1). The rest of the model is as before.
    Appendix B shows that the key insights of Propositions 2, 3, and 4 continue to hold.
The equilibrium security Wm is a debt security with threshold state sm 2 [0; S]. As before,
sm is increasing in nm so that the face value of Wm increases and the security becomes more
equity-like as the market size increases. All investors trading in a single market in which
the …nancial intermediary o¤ers equity is an equilibrium when the total number of investors
N is large. However, for the same N , there also exist equilibria where investors choose to
trade in many small markets in which …nancial intermediaries o¤er debt if heterogeneity in
investor preference shocks,   2,   is low.




                                                33
6.2   Timing

Another assumption in our set-up relates to the timing of events. Speci…cally, we have
assumed that at date t = 0 …nancial intermediaries design securities after investors choose
markets. An alternative is that at date t = 0 investors choose markets after intermediaries
                                                                                     i
design securities. Then, as before, each investor i learns her preference shock          at date
t = 1, after which all markets open and investors in each market trade the security that the
corresponding intermediary has designed.
   Under this alternative timing, investors still make their market choice before the realiza-
tion of preference shocks, and, hence, …nancial intermediaries issue standardized securities.
However, intermediaries can now compete for investors through security design. When
designing the security …rst, the intermediary commits to a particular payo¤ pro…le before
investors choose their markets. In other words, the intermediary designs a security whose
payo¤ pro…le is independent of the number of investors who show up. Nevertheless, the
intermediary is rational so the security design problem will take into account the best re-
sponses of investors.
   We consider two …nancial intermediaries and study the existence of equilibria in which
the market structure is symmetric. As demonstrated in Appendix C, the trading equilibrium
is still characterized by Proposition 1. Moreover, we show that a symmetric market structure
is supported in equilibrium for   2   low and the equilibrium security has the same properties
as in our main speci…cation. That is, the security that prevails in equilibrium is debt, and
the threshold state above which the security delivers a ‡at payo¤ is increasing in the number
of investors in each intermediary’s market.
   Thus, even under the alternative timing considered here, a symmetric equilibrium with
two large markets will involve the trading of a more equity-like security than a symmetric
equilibrium with two small markets, consistent with the results in our main set-up.


6.3   Asymmetric Equilibrium

We conclude this section by discussing the existence of asymmetric equilibria. The trading
equilibrium in Section 3.1 and the intermediary’s security design in Section 3.2 were derived
for an arbitrary market size, but attention was restricted to symmetric equilibria –that is,

                                               34
equilibria where all markets were equally sized –when deriving stable market structures in
Section 3.3.
   We now show that there are equilibria in the class of asymmetric market structures.
The investor’s expected pro…t, E0 V i (nm ) , in a market of size nm is still given by Eq.
(17), with Wm evaluated at the equilibrium security derived in Proposition 2. We write
E0 V i (nm ) rather than just E0 Vmi to make explicit the dependence of the investor’s
expected pro…t on nm , both directly in Eq. (17) and indirectly through the dependence of
Wm on nm in Proposition 2.
   Consider an asymmetric market structure with one market of size nB and (M 0             1)
markets of size nm , where nB > nm + 1 and nB + (M 0            1)   nm = N . This market
structure is stable if and only if


                               E0 V i (nB ) > E0 V i (nm + 1)


and
                E0 V i (nm ) > max E0 V i (nm + 1) ; E0 V i (nB + 1)       :

In words, no investor in the large market nB wants to move to a smaller market (i.e., a
market that has nm other investors as opposed to nB       1 other investors). Similarly, no
investor in a small market nm wants to move to a slightly larger market (i.e., a market that
has nm other investors as opposed to nm 1 other investors) or to a much larger market (i.e.,
a market that has nB other investors). Since there is only one market with nB investors,
it is not possible for one of them to move to an even larger market (i.e., a market that has
nB other investors as opposed to nB       1), hence we do not need E0 V i (nB ) to exceed
E0 V i (nB + 1) .
                                                                                   1
   To …x ideas, consider the following parameterization: z (s) = s and f (s) =     S   for all
s 2 [0; S], with S = 1,        = 1:25, and    = 0:275. This implies nS = 6 in Proposition
2, meaning that a …nancial intermediary o¤ers equity in any market with six or more
investors. It is straightforward to verify that one large market with nB = 75 investors
trading equity and any number of small markets each with nm = 4 investors trading debt




                                             35
is a stable asymmetric equilibrium.14 Our model therefore admits asymmetric equilibria
and, in particular, asymmetric equilibria where some …nancial intermediaries issuing debt
securities and one intermediary issuing equity co-exist, even when securities are backed by
the same underlying asset Z.


7         Conclusion

This paper has developed a tractable model of …nancial innovation to address a critical
question: what is the relationship between the types of securities o¤ered and the market
structures in which they trade? A central …nding of our paper is that …nancial intermediaries
design progressively riskier securities when facing deeper, less fragmented markets in which
investors trade more competitively. Market fragmentation thus plays an important role in
the creation of safer securities.
         The methodological novelty in our paper is that both security design and market struc-
ture are endogenously determined. This is important, as it ensures the securities created
for a given market structure are indeed supported in equilibrium. Financial intermediaries
design asset-backed securities taking into account investors’demand in the markets in which
the securities will be traded. Investors choose markets understanding that their choices will
a¤ect market depth and thus the design of the securities that will be available for trade.
         When choosing how to design a security, an intermediary’s main incentive is to obtain
a high price for it. As usual, the equilibrium price at which the security is traded is
increasing in its mean payo¤ and decreasing in the variance of its payo¤s across states. The
intermediary thus faces a trade-o¤ between the mean and the variance of the security he
designs, making a debt contract the optimal one. Importantly, we show that the equilibrium
price decreases less with the variance of the security in deeper markets where investors
have a lower price impact. Thus, the strength of the mean-variance trade-o¤ faced by
the intermediary depends on the depth of the market. The deeper the market, the less
pronounced the trade-o¤ and the higher the face value of the debt contract o¤ered.
    14
         The relevant expected pro…ts for an investor are: E0 V i (4) = 0:3151669 2 ; E0 V i (5) = 0:3088872 2 ;
E0       V i (75) = 0:3094256 2 ; and E0 V i (76) = 0:3094356 2 . Notice E0 V i (75) > E0 V i (5) and
E0       V i (4) > max E0 V i (5) ; E0 V i (76) , which are the stability conditions outlined above.




                                                         36
   When choosing a market in which to trade, an investor weighs the gains from trade with
other investors against the ability to in‡uence the security that the …nancial intermediary
designs. An investor who trades in a thinner, more fragmented market will have a larger
price impact. On one hand, this ampli…es the mean-variance trade-o¤ in the intermediary’s
security design problem and delivers a less risky security. On the other hand, it also ampli…es
the extent to which the investor will move the price of the security against herself when
trading with other investors.
   As in Dugast, Üslü, and Weill (2019), investors’ types play a key role in determining
the market structure in which trade occurs. However, in our model, investors’preferences
a¤ect directly and indirectly the security that will be traded. When investors expect to be
relatively heterogeneous in their valuations of the same security, they understand that they
may want to engage in large trades with each other so they seek to limit their price impact
by trading in a large market, albeit with a riskier security. In contrast, when investors
expect to be relatively homogeneous in their valuations, they anticipate trading little with
each other and are thus willing to accept a larger price impact in thinner, more fragmented
markets in order to elicit less variable securities from …nancial intermediaries.
   Through the lens of this model, we provide a novel perspective on the relationship
between security design and market structure in real world markets. Our …ndings suggest
that institutional investors, who tend to have less dispersion in their preference shocks,
are more likely to trade less variable securities in fragmented markets. In contrast, retail
investors, who tend to be more heterogeneous in their preference shocks, participate in
larger markets where they trade riskier securities. Other important implications of our
model are that the origination of better underlying assets can eliminate the creation of
asset-backed securities with less variable payo¤s and that the distributional properties of
the underlying asset can a¤ect the relationship between market liquidity and the riskiness
of asset-backed securities. Having developed a parsimonious framework at the intersection
of market structure and security design, our model provides a platform on which many
extensions can be considered and o¤ers fruitful avenues for future work.




                                              37
References

Allen, F. and D. Gale. 1988. “Optimal Security Design.”Review of Financial Studies, 1(3),
  pp. 229-263.

Allen, F. and D. Gale. 1991. “Arbitrage, Short Sales, and Financial Innovation.” Econo-
  metrica, 59(4), pp. 1041-1068.

Allen, F. and D. Gale. 1994. Financial Innovation and Risk Sharing. Cambridge, MA: MIT
  Press.

Asriyan, V. and V. Vanasco. 2018. “Security Design in Non-Exclusive Markets.” Working
  Paper, CREI.

Axelson, U. 2007. “Security Design with Investor Private Information.”Journal of Finance,
  62(6), pp. 2587-2632.

Babus, A. and C. Parlatore. 2018. “Strategic Fragmented Markets.” Working Paper, NYU
  Stern.

Bar-Isaac, H., G. Caruana, and V. Cuñat. 2012. “Search, Design, and Market Structure.”
  American Economic Review, 102(2), pp 1140— 1160.

Biais, B. and R. Green. 2018. “The Microstructure of the Bond Market in the 20th Century.”
  Working Paper, TSE.

Biais, B. and T. Mariotti. 2005. “Strategic Liquidity Supply and Security Design.” Review
  of Economic Studies, 72(3), pp. 615-649.

Boyarchenko, N., A. Costello, and O. Shachar. 2018. “Credit Market Choice.” Federal Re-
  serve Bank of New York, Sta¤ Report No. 863.

Carvajal, A., M. Rostek, and M. Weretka. 2012. “Competition in Financial Innovation.”
  Econometrica, 80(5), pp. 1895-1936.

Cespa, G. and X. Vives. 2018. “Exchange Competition, Entry, and Welfare.” Working
  Paper, IESE.


                                             38
Corbae, D. and E. Quintin. 2019. “Asset Quality Dynamics.”Working Paper, UW-Madison.

DeMarzo, P. and D. Du¢ e. 1999. “A Liquidity-Based Model of Security Design.” Econo-
  metrica, 67(1), pp. 65-99.

Du¢ e, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. Pedersen. 2005. “Over-the-Counter Markets.”Econometrica,
  73(6), pp. 1815-1847.

Du¢ e, D. and R. Rahi. 1995. “Financial Market Innovation and Security Design: An In-
  troduction.” Journal of Economic Theory, 65(1), pp. 1-42.

Dugast, J., S. Üslü, and P. O. Weill. 2019. “Platform Trading with an OTC Market Fringe.”
  Working Paper, UCLA.

Friewald, N., R. Jankowitsch, and M. Subrahmanyam. 2017. “Transparency and Liquidity
  in the Structured Product Market.” Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 7(2), pp. 316-348.

Gale, D. and M. Hellwig. 1985. “Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The One-Period
  Problem.” The Review of Economic Studies, 52(4), pp. 647-663.

Gorton. G. and G. Pennacchi. 1990. “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation.”
  Journal of Finance, 45(1), pp. 49-71.

Hébert, B. 2018. “Moral Hazard and the Optimality of Debt.”Review of Economic Studies,
  85(4), pp. 2214-2252.

Jackson, M. and A. Wolinsky. 1996. “A Strategic Model of Social and Economic Networks.”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 71(1), pp. 44-74.

Johnson, J., and D. P. Myatt. 2003. “Multiproduct Quality Competition: Fighting Brands
  and Product Line Pruning.” American Economic Review, 93(3) pp. 748–774.

Johnson, J., and D. P. Myatt. 2006. “On the Simple Economics of Advertising, Marketing,
  and Product Design.” American Economic Review, 96(3) pp. 756–784.

Kyle, A. 1989. “Informed Speculation with Imperfect Competition.” Review of Economic
  Studies, 56(3), pp. 317-355.


                                           39
Lee, T. and C. Wang. 2018. “Why Trade Over-the-Counter? When Investors Want Price
  Discrimination.” Working Paper, Wharton.

Malenko, A. and A. Tsoy. 2018. “Asymmetric Information and Security Design Under
  Knightian Uncertainty.” Working Paper, MIT.

Nachman, D. and T. Noe. 1994. “Optimal Design of Securities under Asymmetric Informa-
  tion.” Review of Financial Studies, 7(1), pp. 1-44.

Ross, S. 1976. “Options and E¢ ciency.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(1), pp. 75-89.

Rostek, M. and J. H. Yoon. 2018. “Decentralized Markets and Derivatives.”Working Paper,
  University of Wisconsin.

Vives, X. 2011. “Strategic Supply Function Competition with Private Information.”Econo-
  metrica, 79(6), pp. 1919-1966.

Wilson, R. 1979. “Auctions of Shares.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93(4), pp. 675-689.

Yang, M. 2017. “Optimality of Debt under Flexible Information Acquisition.” Working
  Paper, Duke University.

Yoon, J. H. 2018. “Endogenous Market Structure: Over-the-Counter versus Exchange Trad-
  ing.” Working Paper, UCL.




                                            40
Online Appendices

Appendix A –Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1

Rearrange the …rst order condition of investor i in Eq. (9) to isolate:

                                                             i
                                                i                E1 (Wm )        pm
                                               qm =     @pm;
                                                                                                                      (A.1)
                                                                  i
                                                           i
                                                         @qm
                                                                       + V1 (Wm )


for any i 2 m. Use this expression to substitute out Qjm ( ) from Eq. (10) for all investors
j 6= i in market m:
                                               X             j
                                                                 E1 (Wm )         pm
                               i
                              qm +                    @pm;
                                                                                         = nm                         (A.2)
                                                                   j
                                              j2m;j6=i @qm
                                                         j             + V1 (Wm )

                                                                                                   @pm;   j
We focus on symmetric linear equilibria in which the price impact                                     j       does not vary
                                                                                                    @qm
across investors within the same market. This permits rearranging Eq. (A.2) to isolate:
                         X
                                      j
                                                                      i
                                                                 n m qm           @pm;
                       j2m;j6=i                                                          j
               pm =                       E1 (Wm )                                   j
                                                                                             + V1 (Wm )
                        nm        1                               nm 1             @qm

which then implies:
                           @pm;           i         1                 @pm;   j
                              i
                                              =                          j
                                                                                 + V1 (Wm )
                            @qm                   nm 1                 @qm
                       @pm;   i       @pm;        j
Invoking symmetry (       i
                        @qm
                                  =      j            ), we obtain:
                                       @qm


                                                @pm;     i
                                                   i
                                                             =         m   V1 (Wm )                                   (A.3)
                                                 @qm

               1
where   m    nm 2 .   Substituting Eq. (A.3) into Eq. (A.1) delivers the equilibrium demand
function Qim pm ; i in Eq. (11). Substituting Eq. (11) into the market clearing condition
X
   Qim pm ; i = nm then delivers the equilibrium price pm in Eq. (12).
i2m




                                                                   41
Proof of Proposition 2

Intermediary m designs a security Wm to maximize his expected payo¤ in Eq. (7), subject
to the state-by-state feasibility constraint (1).
   Letting    (s)    0 denote the Lagrange multiplier on the feasibility constraint for state
s, we can write the Lagrangian for intermediary m’s optimization problem as:

                                              Z      S
                         Lm = E0 (Vm ) +                 (s) [z (s)             wm (s)] dF (s)
                                                 0


or, equivalently:

                                                         Z     S
         Lm =        E1 (Z) nm + (                ) nm             wm (s) dF (s)
                                                           0
                                        "Z                                           Z                        2
                                                                                                                  #
                                             S                                            S
                       nm (nm 1)                                   2
                                                 (wm (s)) dF (s)                              wm (s) dF (s)
                          nm 2           0                                            0
                      Z S
                    +      (s) [z (s)        wm (s)] dF (s)
                         0


where the intermediary is choosing wm (s) for each state s 2 [0; S] taking as given the market
size nm . We restrict attention to nm             3 so that the trading equilibrium in Proposition 1
involves a well-de…ned equilibrium price for market m.
   The …rst order condition with respect to wm (s) delivers:

                                sign                                       nm    2
                             (s) = E1 (Wm ) +                                        wm (s)                           (A.4)
                                                             2             nm    1

where   (s)    0 and wm (s)       z (s) hold with complementary slackness.
   If   (s) > 0, then:
                                              wm (s) = z (s)

and, invoking (A.4), we need:

                                                                                nm   2
                                z (s) < E1 (Wm ) +
                                                                       2        nm   1

to con…rm     (s) > 0.



                                                         42
   If   (s) = 0, then (A.4) pins down:

                                                                                    nm       2
                                 wm (s) = E1 (Wm ) +
                                                                        2           nm       1

and we need:
                                                                                nm       2
                                     z (s)        E1 (Wm ) +
                                                                       2        nm       1

to con…rm wm (s)      z (s).
   The payo¤s of the equilibrium security are therefore:
                     8
                     < z (s)                                      if z (s) < E1 (Wm ) +                  nm 2
                                                                                                     2   nm 1
            wm (s) =
                     : E (W ) +                         nm 2
                                                                  if z (s)           E1 (Wm ) +          nm 2
                         1   m                    2     nm 1                                         2   nm 1


Suppose there exists an sm 2 (0; S) solving:

                                                                                    nm       2
                                 z (sm )              E1 (Wm ) +                                                (A.5)
                                                                        2           nm       1

Then z 0 ( ) > 0 implies:

                                             Z    sm                        Z   S
                       E1 (Wm ) =                      z (s) dF (s) +               z (sm ) dF (s)              (A.6)
                                              0                             sm


and we can rewrite Eq. (A.5) as:

                            Z   sm
                                                                                         nm      2
                                     [z (sm )          z (s)] dF (s)                                            (A.7)
                            0                                                   2        nm      1

The left-hand side of Eq. (A.7) is increasing in sm so there will be a unique solution
sm 2 (0; S) if and only if:

                                                                                nm       2
                                      z (S)           E1 (Z) >                                                  (A.8)
                                                                    2           nm       1

            nm 2
The ratio      is increasing in nm and asymptotes to 1 as nm ! 1.
            nm 1
                                             h
   If the parameters satisfy z (S) E1 (Z) 2    4   ; 2     , then Eq. (16) has a unique
solution nS 2 [3; 1). For any nm 2 [3; nS ), condition (A.8) holds and the equilibrium



                                                             43
security is given by Eq. (14) with sm as de…ned in Eq. (A.5). For any nm 2 [nS ; 1),
condition (A.8) does not hold, meaning that there is no sm 2 (0; S) solving Eq. (A.5). The
equilibrium security is still given by Eq. (14) but with sm = S instead of Eq. (A.5).
     If the parameters satisfy z (S)          E1 (Z)                2   , then condition (A.8) is true for any
nm 2 [3; 1). The equilibrium security is thus given by Eq. (14) with sm as de…ned in
Eq. (A.5). Condition (A.8) being true for any nm 2 [3; 1) means that there is no solution
nS 2 [3; 1) to Eq. (16). Assigning nS = 1 here recovers Eq. (A.5) from Eq. (15) for any
nm     3.
     If the parameters satisfy z (S)          E1 (Z) <              4   , then condition (A.8) is false for any
nm 2 [3; 1). The equilibrium security is thus given by Eq. (14) with sm = S for all
nm 2 [3; 1). Assigning nS =        1 here recovers sm = S from Eq. (15) for any nm                                        3.
     We have now shown that the solution to the intermediary’s F.O.C.s belongs to the family
of debt securities: Wm pays the entirety of the underlying asset Z up to some threshold
state sm , after which it pays a ‡at amount that does not vary with the state. A perturbation
argument similar to Hébert (2018) can be used to con…rm the optimality of debt securities
in our environment. We sketch this argument in the main text (see the third paragraph
after the statement of Proposition 2) so do not reproduce it here. Instead, we con…rm that
sm as de…ned by Eq. (A.7) satis…es the S.O.C. for a maximum in an auxiliary problem
where the intermediary chooses a threshold state sem to maximize his expected pro…t within
the family of debt securities.
     The objective function for this auxiliary problem is:
                        "          Z                                            #
                                        sem
  L(A)
   m   = (             ) z (e
                            sm )              [z (e
                                                  sm )          z (s)] dF (s)
                                    0
                          2                                                                                           !2 3
                           Z                                                  Z
                  nm    1 4 sem                                                     sem
                                                                                                                           5
                                [z (e
                                    sm )            z (s)]2 dF (s)                        [z (e
                                                                                              sm )      z (s)] dF (s)
                  nm    2 0                                                     0



The …rst derivative with respect to sem is:
                  "                           Z                                           #
            (A)                                    sem
        @Lm                    nm        1
             =               2                           [z (e
                                                             sm )       z (s)] dF (s) [1                sm )] z 0 (e
                                                                                                     F (e          sm )
         @e
          sm                   nm        2     0




                                                           44
If nm < nS , then Eq. (A.7) has a unique interior solution sm 2 (0; S), which is also the
                                          (A)
                                     @Lm
unique interior solution to           @e
                                       sm       = 0. The second derivative evaluated at this solution is:

                         (A)
                  @ 2 Lm                            nm       1 0         2
                                          =     2              z (sm )       F (sm ) [1   F (sm )] < 0
                    @es2m                           nm       2
                               sem =sm


where the inequality follows from sm 2 (0; S). Eq. (A.7) thus de…nes a local maximum and,
since there are no local minima, the local maximum is also the global maximum.
    If nm > nS , then there is no solution sm < S to Eq. (A.7). The only solution to
   (A)
@Lm
 @e
  sm     = 0 is therefore sem = S, in which case the second derivative is:

                    (A)
               @ 2 Lm                                         nm    1
                                     =                   2            [z (S)       E1 (Z)] f (S) z 0 (S)
                 @es2m                                        nm    2
                            sem =S


                                             nm 2        2
This is negative if and only if              nm 1   >          [z (S)    E1 (Z)] or, equivalently, nm > nS .
    Notice that Eq. (A.7) is only de…ned if                         >        . We now demonstrate that         >
is necessary and su¢ cient for the intermediary’s participation constraint to be satis…ed.
The participation constraint requires that the intermediary’s maximized expected pro…t, as
given by E0 (Vm ) in Eq. (7) when evaluated at the equilibrium security, must be at least as
large as E1 (Z)           nm , which is what the intermediary could get by consuming nm units of
Z at date t = 2 instead of using these units to design the security for market m.
    If nm       nS , then the intermediary’s maximization problem yields Wm = Z and the
participation constraint simpli…es to:

                                                                    nm        1
                                         (          ) E1 (Z)                    V1 (Z)                     (A.9)
                                                                    nm        2

Assume        >     so that the left-hand side of (A.9) is positive. The right hand side of (A.9)
is decreasing in nm so (A.9) will hold for all nm                        nS if it holds for nm = nS . Evaluating
(A.9) at the de…nition of nS in Eq. (16), we get:


                                         2z (S) E1 (Z)         E Z 2 + (E1 (Z))2


which is true because Z has the property z 0 ( ) > 0.


                                                               45
   If nm < nS , then sm 2 (0; S) is de…ned by Eq. (A.7). The participation constraint
requires:
                                                                             nm         1
                                   (             ) E1 (Wm )                               V1 (Wm )                              (A.10)
                                                                             nm         2

where E1 (Wm ) is given by Eq. (A.6) and:

                    Z     sm                                                 Z     sm                                2
                                                      2
      V1 (Wm ) =               [z (sm )     z (s)] dF (s)                               [z (sm )   z (s)] dF (s)                (A.11)
                      0                                                        0


Use Eq. (A.7) to rewrite (A.10) as:

                                            Z    sm
                           2E1 (Wm )                  [z (sm )       z (s)] dF (s)             V1 (Wm )
                                             0


then substitute in for E1 (Wm ) and V1 (Wm ) to get:

                       Z sm                                                                                      Z     sm
                  1                              1                                                        1
      2z (sm )               z (s) dF (s) +              1 (z (sm ))2                                                       (z (s))2 dF (s)
               F (sm ) 0                      F (sm )                                                  F (sm )     0
               Z sm                             Z sm               2
         1                                  1
                    (z (s))2 dF (s) +                 z (s) dF (s)
      F (sm ) 0                          F (sm ) 0

which is again true because of z 0 ( ) > 0.


Proof of Proposition 3

For any nm < nS , Eq. (15) simpli…es to Eq. (A.7) from the proof of Proposition 2.
Di¤erentiating Eq. (A.7) yields:

                                dsm                             1               1
                                    =                                    20 (s ) F (s )
                                                                                        >0
                                dnm             2         (nm        1) z     m      m


             dsm                                                                   dsm
Therefore,   dnm   > 0 for any nm 2 [3; nS ) and                         lim       dnm     > 0.
                                                                    nm !nS
   A corollary is that the same properties hold for the mean and variance of the equilibrium
security. To see why, di¤erentiate Eq. (A.6) and (A.11) to get:

                                          dE1 (Wm )
                                                    = z 0 (sm ) [1                      F (sm )]
                                            dsm




                                                                    46
and:
                                                                Z    sm
                  dV1 (Wm )
                            = 2z 0 (sm ) [1          F (sm )]             [z (sm )   z (s)] dF (s)
                    dsm                                          0

Both of these derivatives are strictly positive because nm < nS implies sm 2 (0; S). It then
follows immediately that E1 (Wm ) and V1 (Wm ) increase with nm as sm increases with nm ,
up until the point where nm = nS .


Proof of Proposition 4

A market structure with one active intermediary and all investors trading in the same
market is always stable since there is no other active intermediary to which an investor can
deviate. The rest of this proof will therefore focus on symmetric market structures with
two or more active intermediaries.
      A market structure where each active intermediary gets n investors is stable if and only
if:
                                      E0 V i (n) > E0 V i (n + 1)

From Eq. (17), the expected pro…t of an investor in a market of size n is:

                         i        n    2
                                                 2 [E1 (W (n))]2     n
                   E0   V (n) =                                  +      V1 (W (n))                          (A.12)
                                2 n              1 V1 (W (n))      2n 2

where we write E0 V i (n) to make explicit that we are evaluating the investor’s expected
pro…t at the equilibrium security derived in Proposition 2, denoted here by W (n) to make
explicit its dependence on the market size n.
                                                            2
                                           n 2 [E1 (W (n))]                                                      n 2
      We …rst show that the term           n 1 V1 (W (n))       in Eq. (A.12) is bounded. The ratio              n 1
                                 n 2                                                                 [E1 (W (n))]2
is increasing in n with lim             = 1. Therefore, we only need to show that                     V1 (W (n)) is
                             n!1 n 1
bounded. To do so, take the derivative with respect to n:
                              !
          d   [E1 (W (n))]2           E1 (W (n)) dE1 (W (n))                    E1 (W (n)) dV1 (W (n))
                                  =              2
         dn    V1 (W (n))             V1 (W (n))      dn                        V1 (W (n))      dn

If n     nS , then W (n) = Z and this derivative is zero. If instead n < nS , then we can use




                                                         47
the derivatives in the proof of Proposition 3 to write:
                                                !                                   Z
                       d        [E1 (W (n))]2       sign         E1 (W (n))               s
                                                       = 1                                    [z (s)        z (s)] dF (s)
                      dn         V1 (W (n))                      V1 (W (n))           0


and, with E1 (W (n)) as per Eq. (A.6) and V1 (W (n)) as per Eq. (A.11), we get:
                                                    !             Rs
                            d       [E1 (W (n))]2       sign         0   z (s) [z (s) z (s)] dF (s)
                                                           =                                        <0
                           dn        V1 (W (n))                                 V1 (W (n))

We can now conclude:
                                              [E1 (W (n))]2                  [E1 (W (3))]2
                                               V1 (W (n))                     V1 (W (3))

where n = 3 is the smallest market size for which there can be a well-de…ned equilibrium
price in Eq. (12). If nS > 3, then Eq. (A.7) de…nes s 2 (0; S) and hence E1 (W (3)) 2 (0; 1)
                                                                  [E1 (W (3))]2
and V1 (W (3)) 2 (0; 1). In other words,                           V1 (W (3))      is bounded. If instead nS = 3, then
              2                 2
[E1 (W (3))]          [E1 (Z)]
 V1 (W (3))       =    V1 (Z)       which is also bounded.
                                                   nV1 (W (n))
    Next, we show that the term                       n 2        in Eq. (A.12) is decreasing in n if the payo¤s of
                                 z(k) E1 (Zjs k)       p
the asset Z satisfy                p               <       2; 8k 2 (0; S]. Taking derivatives:
                                     V1 (Zjs k)


                            d        nV1 (W (n))                2V1 (W (n))    n dV1 (W (n))
                                                        =               2   +
                           dn           n 2                      (n 2)        n 2     dn

If n     nS , then W (n) = Z and this derivative is negative. If instead n < nS , then we can
use the derivatives in the proof of Proposition 3 to write:

                                                                                                             Z       s
  d     nV1 (W (n))                 sign                                     n (n 2) 1 F (s)
                                    =      V1 (W (n)) +                                                                  [z (s)   z (s)] dF (s)
 dn        n 2                                                   2           (n 1)2 F (s)                        0


Using Eq. (A.7) and the expression for V1 (W (n)) in Eq. (A.11), we obtain the following
                                                            d    nV1 (W (n))
necessary and su¢ cient condition for                      dn       n 2            < 0 when n < nS :

        Z     s                                                                               Z     s                                    2
                                      2       1                          1    F (s)
                  [z (s)    z (s)] dF (s) >                     1+                                      [z (s)           z (s)] dF (s)
          0                                 F (s)                            n 1                0




                                                                     48
This rearranges to:                                                               s
                                   z (s) E1 (Zjs s)                                        n     1
                                      p             <                                                                                 (A.13)
                                        V1 (Zjs s)                                     1       F (s)

where:
                                                                          Z       s
                                                                   1
                                  E1 (Zjs               s)                            z (s) dF (s)
                                                                 F (s)        0

and:
                                            Z   s                                                  Z   s                  2
                                     1                           2                           1
                 V1 (Zjs    s)                      (z (s)) dF (s)                                         z (s) dF (s)
                                   F (s)    0                                              F (s)   0

Since F (s) 2 (0; 1) and n          3, a su¢ cient condition for (A.13) is:

                                 z (k) E1 (Zjs k) p
                                    p            < 2; 8k 2 (0; S]
                                      V1 (Zjs k)

which is the condition in the statement of Proposition 4.
     Invoking this condition, we can now conclude that there exists a bound                                               > 0 such that
dE0 (V i (n))                           2
     dn         < 0 for all n    3 if               .
     In words, any symmetric market structure is stable when                                                2      . For any integer
                       N                                                                                                          N
n      3 such that     n   is also an integer, the symmetric market structure involves                                            n   active
                                                                                                                              N
intermediaries each getting n investors. For any integer n                                                 3 such that        n   is not an
integer, we can only consider n if there exist positive integers, M1 and M2 , such that
M1      n + M2        (n + 1) = N , in which case the symmetric market structure involves M1
active intermediaries each getting n investors and M2 active intermediaries each getting
n + 1 investors.
     To see what values of n will be consistent with the existence of such integers, consider
an arbitrary total number of active intermediaries M 0 . If each active intermediary gets
n investors, then there are N               M0               n investors left to be allocated to the M 0 active
intermediaries. For a market structure where each of the M 0 active intermediaries gets
either n or n + 1 investors, we need N                           M0       n           0 (so that no active intermediary gets
fewer than n investors) and N               M0
                                            M 0 (so that no active intermediary gets more
                                                             n
                                                     h       i
                                                       N
than n + 1 investors). In other words, we need M 0 2 1+n  ;N                    0
                                                           n . We also need M to be an
                                                       N
integer and hence we need an integer to exist between 1+n and N
                                                              n . This implies that we can
                         j    k
                           N
only consider n such that n+1   < N n , where the notation bXc means X is rounded down



                                                                     49
                                                                    N         N
to the nearest integer. As long as N is not too low,                4    <    3       will be satis…ed, meaning
that there will exist a stable market structure where M1 2 N+ active intermediaries get 3
investors each and M2 2 N0 active intermediaries get 4 investors each.


Proof of Proposition 5

Taking derivatives:

              sign     E1 (W (nm ))    dE1 (W (nm ))                     E1 (W (nm )) dV1 (W (nm ))
       G0 (nm ) =                   +2
                     (nm 1) (nm 2)          dnm                          V1 (W (nm ))      dnm

and:
                              sign      2V1 (W (nm ))               dV1 (W (nm ))
                       R0 (nm ) =
                                         nm (nm 2)                       dnm
                                                dE1 (W (nm ))       dV1 (W (nm ))
If nm > nS , then W (nm ) = Z and thus              dnm         =        dnm          = 0, which further implies
G0 (nm ) > 0 and R0 (nm ) < 0. If instead nm               nS , then Proposition 2 de…nes:

                                                                         nm       2
                           z (sm ) = E1 (W (nm )) +
                                                                2        nm       1

                                       1
With z (s) = z (0) + s and f (s) =     S,   the equilibrium security has:

                                                                              sm
                         E1 (W (nm )) = z (0) + sm 1
                                                                        1+     S

and:
                                            2     s1+2          2             1       sm
                                                   m
                      V1 (W (nm )) =
                                       1+           S          1+2           1+        S

where:
                                        s1+
                                         m                      nm       2
                                            =
                                1+        S                2    nm       1

The total derivatives of E1 (W (nm )) and V1 (W (nm )) with respect to nm are therefore:

                        dE1 (W (nm ))                  sm                      1
                                      =           1
                             dnm                        S       2   sm
                                                                     S   (nm          1)2

and:
                         dV1 (W (nm ))    2                s1+
                                                            m dE1 (Wm (nm ))
                                       =
                              dnm        1+                  S     dnm

                                                      50
Substituting into the expressions for G0 (nm ) and R0 (nm ), we get:
                                                       h                                            i                h                   i
                                                            2         1 4 sm                sm 2                          2         sm
                sign                    1         sm       1+2    +   1+2 S      +   1+      S               z (0)       1+2         S
     G0 (nm ) =            sm                 2
                       2    S     (nm       1)                                sm       2         1 sm
                                                                                     1+2        1+ S


and:                                                                                        1
                                                                      1+           nm 2    1+        2(1+ ) nm
                                sign       2 2 s1+2
                                                m
                                                                           2 S     nm 1                 1+2
                  R0 (nm ) =                  2
                                        (1 + )   S                         nm (nm          1) (nm       2)

To help establish R0 (nm ) < 0, notice that R0 (nm ) < 0 for all nm                                                  3 if and only if
                                                        1
                                       1+              1+             2   1
R0 (3) < 0. Therefore,                  4        S               >    1+2     is su¢ cient for R0 (nm ) < 0. To help
                                                                               2          1 4
establish G0 (nm ) > 0, de…ne the function h (x)                              1+2    +    1+2   x+      1+    x2 , where x 2 [0; 1].
Notice h (0) > 0. Also notice h00 (x) > 0 so any solution to h0 (x) = 0 is a minimum. If
  2 0; 41 , then there is no x0 2 [0; 1] solving h0 (x0 ) = 0, hence h (x) > 0 for all x 2 [0; 1].
                                            (1+ )(4   1)
If instead        > 41 , then x0 =            2 (1+2 )           and h (x0 ) =         7   1
                                                                                     4 (1+2 )2
                                                                                                 > 0, where the inequality
                           1                                                                                                    sm
follows from           >   4.    We again have h (x) > 0 for all x 2 [0; 1]. Notice that h                                       S       > 0
           sm
for all     S   2 (0; 1] implies G0 (nm ) > 0 when z (0) = 0 so, by continuity, G0 (nm ) > 0 for
                                                                                                                                             sm
any z (0) below some positive upperbound. We can exclude sm = 0 when discussing h                                                             S

since nm         3 implies sm > 0.


Proof of Proposition 6
                                                                                                                1
Start with the intermediary’s expected payo¤, E0 (Vm ). Substituting                                           m          (nm       2) into
Eq. (13):

                                                                                     nm     1
           E0 (Vm ) =           E1 (Z) + (                 ) E1 (W (nm ))                     V1 (W (nm ))                     nm
                                                                                     nm     2

This expression for E0 (Vm ) is increasing in nm holding constant the security Wm , implying
that E0 (Vm ) is increasing in nm for nm > nS since the equilibrium security for any nm > nS
is simply Wm = Z. It only remains to check that E0 (Vm ) is also increasing in nm for
nm        nS when evaluated at the equilibrium security W (nm ).
     Using the expressions for E1 (W (nm )), V1 (W (nm )), and sm from the proof of Proposi-




                                                                     51
tion 5, we can write:

                                        z (0)                 sm           1+                    sm
       E0 (Vm ) = S                 +         +(        )                                                       nm
                         1+             S                      S           1+2           2 (1 + ) S

                                                   sm        1+                 sm                              sm
for nm        nS . It is easy to show that          S        1+2          2(1+ ) S       is increasing in        S   for
      sm
any    S    2 [0; 1]. We also know from Proposition 3 that sm is increasing in nm . Therefore,
dE0 (Vm )
  dnm       > 0 for nm       nS .
    Turn now to total welfare. Ignore the integered nature of investors for the moment.
There are N investors, each getting the expected payo¤ E0 Vmi in Eq. (17). There are
       N
also   nm   active intermediaries, each getting the expected payo¤ E0 (Vm ) in Eq. (13). Inactive
intermediaries receive a payo¤ of zero. Total (expected) welfare at date t = 0 is then:

                                                              N
                                    W=N        E0 Vmi +                  E0 (Vm )
                                                              nm

          1
where    nm     E0 (Vm ) is the expected, per-capita payo¤ of an active intermediary.
    Substituting in Eq. (13) and (17):
                                                                                                            !
                                                        2
                                                       nm              2 [E1 (Wm )]2
    W=N           E1 (Z) + (            ) E1 (Wm ) +                                             V1 (Wm )       (A.14)
                                                     2 nm              1 V1 (Wm )            2

Notice that the utility investors receive from the risk premium (i.e., compensation for risk
term) is outweighed by the negative e¤ect of variance on the price that the intermediary
receives.
    The expression for W is increasing in nm holding constant the security Wm . Therefore,
W is increasing in nm for nm > nS and it only remains to check that W is also increasing
in nm for nm         nS when evaluated at the equilibrium security. Using the expressions for
E1 (W (nm )), V1 (W (nm )), and sm from the proof of Proposition 5, we can write:

                                              2                                       z(0)
                                                                                             3
                                                       22 1       x
                        S                          1 b          1+             +     x S
W =            z (0) +              N + z (0) 4b +            2                x
                                                                                             5 S N
                       1+                            b      1+2               1+
              2                                                    2
                                                                                                                 3
                                                              x
              6                 x           1 b2 x 1        1+              2 x1+2            2         x        7 2
            + 4b x       1              +          2          x                                                  5 S N
                              1+              b 1+2          1+
                                                                          2 (1 + )           1+2       1+


                                                       52
                              sm
for nm    nS , where x         S ,   b                  S     , and b              S   . Taking derivatives:

                           2   1                 z(0)              2
         dW          b2   1+ 1+2               x1+ S              1+2        x      S N
                =                                                  2                       z (0)
         dx          b                   2                   x
                                       1+2                  1+
                               2                                                                               3
                                                              x
                                       2           1               h (x)                     x1+
                              1 6b                          1+                                                7
                     + x       4                                             2   + b                  (1    x)5 S 2 N
                                   b           2         2          x                       1+
                                                       1+2         1+


with the function h (x) > 0 as de…ned in the proof of Proposition 5. The expression for sm
from the same proof implies:
                                                       2 x1+    nm                     2
                                                             =b
                                                        1+      nm                     1

and hence:
                                                         x1+      b nm
                                           b                 =          >0
                                                        1+     2 (nm 1)
                                                                             dW
Therefore, the second line in the expression for                             dx    is positive. If z (0) = 0, then it follows
                     dW                                                                                                            dW
immediately that     dx    > 0. If instead z (0) > 0, then the …rst line in the expression for                                     dx

is positive if and only if:

                                        (1 x)                       1                       1
                                                                                 z (0) <
                                       x1+ S                      2x S                     1+

                                                                                                       1
                                z(0)                    1                                  (1+ )b     1+
A su¢ cient condition is      x1+ S
                                               <       1+     evaluated at x =                4            , which is the lowest
                                                                                                                            b S
possible x, speci…cally the x associated with nm = 3. In other words, z (0) <                                                4 2
                                                                                                                                    is
                dW
su¢ cient for   dx   > 0. The fully constrained planner thus chooses nm = N and Wm = Z
when z (0) is not too large.
   Return now to the integered nature of investors. Denote by W (nm ) the right-hand side
of Eq. (A.14), where Wm                    W (nm ) is the equilibrium security. In a market structure
satisfying condition (18), aggregate welfare is:

                            W (n)                                                W (n + 1)
         W=n         M1           + (N                       n     M1 )                            W (n + 1)       W (N )
                             N                                                      N

where the inequalities follow from the fact that W (n) is increasing in n when z (0) is not



                                                                        53
too large. Recalling that W (N ) is welfare when all investors trade in one market completes
the proof.


Proofs for Section 5

1. Higher

From the expression for sm in the proof of Proposition 5, it is straightforward to see that
sm is decreasing in , all else constant. We can also see that E1 (Wm ) and V1 (Wm ) are
increasing in sm , with no direct dependence on . Therefore, E1 (Wm ) and V1 (Wm ) are
decreasing in , for any market size nm                    nS .
     At z (0) = 0 and       = 1:
                                                                              h                           i
                      dG (nm )             sm        2     1         sm
                                                                      2
                                                                                  1
                                                                                  3   + (1       s m )2
                               =                                                             2                <0
                        d                                                 4
                                                                                      sm
                                                                          3


                          dR (nm )    sm     nm         2
                                    =             sm      >0
                             d        2   4 nm 1        3
                               "                                 #
                                                2
              dG0 (nm ) sign          2 3 4          s2m 1 s2m
                         =       sm     +    sm +                  <0
                d                     3 2 3        (1 sm ) 43 sm

                       dR0 (nm )   (                 )2          1                         nm 4
                                 =               2                        3       1+                      >0
                         d           4                    (nm        1)                     6sm
                                                                              2
where the last three inequalities follow from sm                              3,      which is itself implied by Eq. (16)
having a …nite solution nS            3.


2. Higher z (0)

At    = 1, the mean and variance of the original asset are:

                                                                                  1
                                                E1 (Z) = z (0) +
                                                                                  2

                                                                     1
                                                     V1 (Z) =
                                                                     12
        dE1 (Z)             dV1 (Z)
hence    dz(0)    > 0 and    dz(0)    = 0.



                                                            54
   Using the expressions for E1 (Wm ), V1 (Wm ), and sm from the proof of Proposition 5:

                                                                             sm
                               E1 (Wm ) = z (0) + sm 1
                                                                              2

                                                               1        sm
                                    V1 (Wm ) = s3m
                                                               3         4
                                                               nm       2
                                       s2m =
                                                               nm       1
                                 dV1 (Wm )         dsm                      dE1 (Wm )
if nm   nS . It is easy to see     dz(0)     =     dz(0)   = 0 and            dz(0)       > 0 given the market size
nm .
   Using the expressions for G (nm ) and R (nm ) from the statement of Proposition 5:

                                               2     s2m                     2
                           dG0 (nm )   2              3 +      2 sm          3    z (0)
                                     =                                  2
                            dz (0)                 s3m 43          sm       (nm     1)2

                                             dR0 (nm )
                                                       =0
                                              dz (0)

Notice that z (0) has no e¤ect on the compensation for risk. In general, the e¤ect of z (0)
on the slope of the gains from trade term depends on the value of sm and thus the value of
                dG0 (nm )
nm , although    dz(0) z(0)=0 > 0 for the speci…c case              where z (0) is increased from z (0) = 0.
                               0 (n )
A su¢ cient   condition for dGdz(0)m
                                      > 0 regardless of             the starting value of z (0) is sm               2
                                                                                                                    3,
                                                                                   4 nm 1        8
which, from the expression for sm , is equivalent to                               9 nm 2        9,   where the second
inequality follows from nm       3. Eq. (16) having a …nite solution nS                          3 requires       > 1,
                                     dG0 (nm )
hence the su¢ cient condition for     dz(0)        > 0 is satis…ed.


3. Lower

Consider the baseline example (z (0) = 0,             = 1, S = 1) but with z (s) = s, where                       >0
is a parameter to be varied. The equilibrium security is characterized by:

                                      nm         2                                   1
                       s2m =                       ! nm = 1 +
                                      nm         1            1                            s2m

                                                                   sm
                                   E1 (Wm ) =              1                 sm
                                                                    2

                                                      55
                                                                                                      s                            !
                                                                                          2
              2   1       sm                                              nm      2               1             nm       1    1
V1 (Wm ) =                      s3m ! V1 (Wm ) =
                  3        4                                              nm      1               3             nm       2    4

and the investor’s value function, expressed as a function of sm instead of nm , is:
                           0                                             !2                   1
                                                   2                sm
                                            1                 1                                       1   sm
            E0 V i =       @           +                             2
                                                                                      s2m A                     sm
                                            2                  1    sm            2                   3    4
                                                               3     4


where:

                                 sm     1        sm           sm
  dE0 V i             2    1                      2 1                                             nm      1          2
          /                       2     3                      2
                                                                              1       sm +                     sm            s2m
    dsm                                1        sm 2                                              nm      2          3
                                       3         4


The …rst term in this derivative is positive for any sm 2 [0; 1] and thus any nm                                         3. The
second term is positive for any nm               4; it is also positive for nm = 3 if                           > 29 , which is
the same condition as in the second part of Proposition 5 when                                    = 1.
   Take two assets, Z1 and Z2 , with payo¤s z1 (s) = s and z2 (s) = s respectively, where
                                                        dE0 (V i )
  2 (0; 1). Consider       > 29 and 2 low enough that dsm < 0 for all nm          3 when
                                                                           i
                                                                     dE0 (V )
the underlying asset is Z2 . Then, the same 2 is low enough that dsm < 0 for all
nm       3 when the underlying asset is Z1 . Any symmetric market structure is therefore
stable, regardless of whether the underlying asset is Z1 or Z2 . Consider speci…cally n1
investors per market when the underlying asset is Z1 and n1 + ` investors per market when
the underlying asset is Z2 , where `             1. Then V1 (W1 ) > V1 (W2 ) if and only if:

                                            2                                                             32
                                 `
                                       !3                       `                     `               `
                           1+               6    3      (n1    1)(n1 2)    2 + n1         2   +   n1 1    7
                                n1 1
                      <           `         41 +                            2q                            5
                           1+                    4                    `                       n1 1
                                n1 2                           1+   n1 1                      n1 2


For any given values of n1 and `, there exists a                   2 (0; 1) such that this inequality holds.




                                                              56
Appendix B –Costly Supply

Given nm , intermediary m chooses a security Wm to supply in market m. He still supplies
one unit of Wm per capita but now he chooses the number of units Am of the asset Z
that back the nm units of Wm . Previously, we had assumed Am = nm . We now let the
intermediary choose Am at a cost c (Am ), where c (0) = 0 and c0 ( ) > 0. To …x ideas,
consider c (Am ) = 2 A2m .
     Intermediary m’s expected payo¤ at date t = 1 is:


                         Vm = pm nm + E1 (Am Z                           nm Wm )               A2m
                                                                                           2

The equilibrium price pm is still given by Eq. (12) so:

                                                           nm       1
        E0 (Vm ) = (          ) E1 (Wm )                              V1 (Wm ) nm + E1 (Z) Am                      A2m
                                                           nm       2                                          2

The Lagrangian for the intermediary’s problem can then be written as:

                              Z   S
        L = (          ) nm           wm (s) dF (s)                                                                      (B.1)
                              0
                                      "Z                                        Z                        2
                                                                                                           #
                                              S                                      S
                   nm (nm 1)                                    2
                                                  (wm (s)) dF (s)                        wm (s) dF (s)
                    nm 2                  0                                      0
                                                       Z   S
                + E1 (Z) Am               A2m      +            (s) [Am z (s)        nm wm (s)] dF (s) +       A Am
                                      2                0


where     (s)    0 is the Lagrange multiplier on the feasibility constraint for state s, and

 A     0 is the multiplier on Am              0.
     The …rst order condition for wm (s) is:

                                                               nm    1
                         (s) =                         2               [wm (s)           E1 (Wm )]                       (B.2)
                                                               nm    2

where    (s)    0 and Am z (s)         nm wm (s) hold with complementary slackness. This implies




                                                                57
that the equilibrium security, conditional on nm , has payo¤s:
                                         8
                                         <    Am
                                              nm z (s)                  if   s < sm
                            wm (s) =
                                         :    Am
                                              nm z (sm )                if   s     sm

where:
                                              nm                                          nm         2
                 sm = arg min z (k)                        E1 (Wm ) +                                                 (B.3)
                           k2[0;S]            Am                                   2      nm         1

and:
                                                       Z       sm
                              Am
                   E1 (Wm ) =            z (sm )                    [z (sm )      z (s)] dF (s)                       (B.4)
                              nm                           0

   The …rst order condition for Am is:

                                               Z       S
                          Am = E1 (Z) +                        (s) z (s) dF (s) +           A                         (B.5)
                                                   0


Using Eq. (B.2) with E1 (Wm ) as de…ned in Eq. (B.4), we can rewrite Eq. (B.5) as:


 Am =         E1 (Z) + A                                                                                                      (B.6)
                                Z sm                                                    Z     sm
               n m 1 Am
             2           E1 (Z)      [z (sm )                       z (s)] dF (s)                  z (s) [z (sm )   z (s)] dF (s)
               nm 2 nm           0                                                        0


Consider Am > 0 so that     A   = 0:

  1. If sm = S, then Eq. (B.6) reduces to:

                                                                 E1 (Z)
                                       Am =                      nm 1
                                                   +2          nm (nm 2) V1 (Z)


       which con…rms Am > 0. To con…rm that Eq. (B.3) delivers sm = S, we need:

                                                                             nm nm        2
                                 z (S)     E1 (Z) <
                                                                    2        Am n m       1

       Substituting in the solution for Am , the condition for sm = S simpli…es to:

                     nm (nm 2)   2                 E1 (Z) z (S)                  E1 Z 2       + V1 (Z)
                               >
                       nm 1



                                                       58
      The left-hand side of this inequality is increasing in nm and the right-hand side is
      positive. Therefore, sm = S if nm is above some threshold.

   2. If the solution to Eq. (B.3) is interior, then sm is de…ned by:

                                    Z     sm
                                                                                                nm nm    2
                                               [z (sm )       z (s)] dF (s)                                             (B.7)
                                      0                                                  2      Am n m   1

      and we can use Eq. (B.7) to simplify Eq. (B.6) to:

                                                          Z   sm
                                   nm 1
                Am             2                                   z (s) [z (sm )       z (s)] dF (s)    = E1 (Z)       (B.8)
                                 nm (nm 2)                0


      Using Eq. (B.8) to substitute Am out of Eq. (B.7), we can then rewrite Eq. (B.7) as:

                     Z   sm                                  Z            sm
        E1 (Z)                                                                                                      nm (nm 2)
                              [z (sm )         z (s)] dF (s)+                  z (s) [z (sm )   z (s)] dF (s) =
                     0                                                0                                           2   nm 1
                                                                                                                         (B.9)
                              @sm
      which implies           @nm    > 0. Notice from Eq. (B.7) that Am > 0 and, to con…rm sm < S,
      we need nm below the threshold that delivered sm = S in the previous bullet.

    We have now shown that the key insights of Propositions 2 and 3 continue to hold. If
small markets are stable, then debt will be traded in that market structure. If large markets
are stable, then equity will be traded in that market structure.
    A market structure where all investors trade in the same market is trivially stable, so,
as long as N is large, there always exists an equilibrium where investors trade equity in
large markets.
    It remains to show that the key insights of Proposition 4 also continue to hold. In
particular, we want to show that small markets are also stable if heterogeneity in investor
preference shocks,             2,   is su¢ ciently low. The investor’s expected pro…t is still given by
Eq. (17) so we follow the steps in the proof of Proposition 4. Speci…cally, if we can show
dV1 (Wm )        2V1 (Wm )
  dnm       <   nm (nm 2)       for any nm where the equilibrium security is Wm 6= Z, then we can
conclude that small markets are stable when                                2    is su¢ ciently low.




                                                                      59
    The variance of the equilibrium security derived above is:
                               "Z                                                     Z                                               2
                                                                                                                                          #
                           2        sm                                                      sm
                   Am                                             2
    V1 (Wm ) =                           [z (sm )        z (s)] dF (s)                           [z (sm )        z (s)] dF (s)
                   nm           0                                                       0


where Am depends on sm and nm as per Eq. (B.7) and sm depends on nm as per Eq. (B.9).
Therefore:

                                                                                                                Z    sm
dV1 (Wm )   2V1 (Wm )           dAm           Am  2A2                                                dsm
          =                                      + 2m [1                     F (sm )] z 0 (sm )                           [z (sm )    z (s)] dF (s)
  dnm          Am               dnm           nm   nm                                                dnm         0


where:
                                                                         n2m 2nm +2
                                     dsm                               2   (nm 1)2
                           z 0 (sm )     =              E1 (Z)                Rs
                                     dnm                         F    (sm ) + 0 m z (s) dF           (s)

and:
                                    0                                                                        1
                                                                                          Am
             dAm   Am n2m 2nm + 2 @                                                        F (sm )
                 =                    1                                                    Rs                A
             dnm   nm (nm 1) (nm 2)                                        E1 (Z)
                                                                                  F (sm ) + 0 m z (s) dF (s)

                                              dV1 (Wm )            2V1 (Wm )
The condition we want to check,                 dnm         <     nm (nm 2) ,        simpli…es to:

                                         Z    sm
                       0      dsm
       [1    F (sm )] z (sm )                      [z (sm )       z (s)] dF (s)
                              dnm         0
                                             "Z                                                     Z                                            2
                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                   sm                                                     sm
        1 nm       1       nm dAm                                               2
  <                                                     [z (sm )           z (s)] dF (s)                        [z (sm )      z (s)] dF (s)
       nm nm       2       Am dnm              0                                                      0


,

                                                                                     nm (nm 2) 1
                  [z (sm ) E1 (Zjs sm )]2                                       2      nm 1 F (sm )              n2m       2nm + 2
1+[1     F (sm )]                         <h                                                                i
                        V1 (Zjs sm )                                  E1 (Z)
                                                                                + E1 (Zjs           sm ) [z (sm )             E1 (Zjs         sm )]

,

                                                                                       n2m 2nm +2
[1 F (sm )] [z (sm ) E1 (Zjs sm )]2                                                      (nm 1)2
                                                                                                  V1 (Zjs                   sm )
                                    <1 h                                                                i
 (nm 1)2          V1 (Zjs sm )                                         E1 (Z)
                                                                                + E1 (Zjs           sm ) [z (sm )              E1 (Zjs        sm )]


It follows from z 0 ( ) > 0 that E1 (Z)                          E1 (Zjs            sm ) and [z (sm )                E1 (Zjs         sm )] >



                                                                 60
V1 (Zjs sm )                                    dV1 (Wm )          2V1 (Wm )
E1 (Zjs sm ) ,   so a su¢ cient condition for     dnm       <     nm (nm 2)    is:


                         [z (sm ) E1 (Zjs sm )]2
                                                 < n2m                2nm + 2          1
                               V1 (Zjs sm )

The right-hand side is increasing in nm so, with nm                   3, it will be enough to have:
                                                          s
                            z (k) E1 (Zjs k)                  5
                               p             <                        1; 8k 2 (0; S]
                                 V1 (Zjs k)

with     >   5   .




                                                     61
Appendix C –Alternative Timing

Suppose the timing is such that intermediaries post securities …rst, then investors choose
markets. Market choice is still made before the realization of investor preference shocks,
but now intermediaries can compete for investors through security design. By posting
securities …rst, we mean that the intermediary commits to a particular payo¤ pro…le before
investors choose their markets. The intermediary is rational so his security design problem
will take into account the best responses of investors. However, the intermediary cannot
post a security whose payo¤ pro…le is contingent on the number of investors who show up.
That would constitute a customized contract, not a standardized contract. The focus of
our paper is on standardized contracts.
   Consider two intermediaries, 1 and 2. Intermediary 1 o¤ers a security W1 and attracts
n1 investors. Intermediary 2 o¤ers a security W2 and attracts N               n1 investors.
   The expected value to investor i of trading Wm in a market of size nm is still given by
E0 Vmi in Eq. (17). In the extreme case of        2   = 0:

                                                  nm
                                E0 Vmi =                    V1 (Wm )                              (C.1)
                                             2 nm       2

By a continuity argument, all results derived under          2   = 0 will extend to   2   2 0;   , where
  is some positive upperbound.
                  nm
   Notice that   nm 2   in Eq. (C.1) is decreasing in nm . Also recall that Wm is no longer
responsive to nm at the stage where investors choose their markets. Eq. (C.1) says that in-
vestors want a more variable security when    2   is low. This is because the trading equilibrium
delivers a low enough price (or, equivalently, a high enough risk premium) to compensate
them for taking the risk. Investors also want to take this risk in very small markets, re‡ect-
ing the fact that the risk premium increases with an individual investor’s price impact.
   Given the securities W1 and W2 , investors will move around until they are indi¤erent
between the two intermediaries. We abstract from the integered nature of investors here to
avoid unnecessary algebra. The best response of investors then yields a market structure




                                              62
characterized by n1 , where n1 solves:

                                             n1                           N        n1
                                                      V1 (W1 ) =                            V1 (W2 )                                             (C.2)
                                            n1    2                   N         n1      2

                                                         V1 (W1 )
Eq. (C.2) de…nes n1 as a function of                     V1 (W2 ) .   Di¤erentiate Eq. (C.2) to get:

                                  dn1      n                                1                           1
                                          = 1                                      n1
                                dV1 (W1 )   2              1
                                                                +                                   V1 (W1 )
                                                         n1 2         (N      n1   2)(N n1 )


This derivative is positive. If intermediary 1 posts a more variable security than intermedi-
ary 2, then intermediary 1 will attract more investors.
         Each intermediary seeks to maximize his expected pro…t subject to a state-by-state
feasibility constraint on the payo¤s of the security he designs. He still o¤ers one unit of the
security to each investor in his market and, as in Appendix B, pays a cost to procure the
assets that back this security. The Lagrangian for intermediary 1’s problem is thus given
by Eq. (B.1) but with n1 = n1 , where n1 depends on W1 as per Eq. (C.2). The choice
variables are the payo¤s w1 (s) for each state s 2 [0; S] and the number of units A1 of Z
that will back the n1 units of W1 .
         The …rst order condition for w1 (s) is:
                                            0                                                         1
                                                                            2
                                            B                       (n1 )          4n1 +      2       C
    (s) =                                   @2 (n1      1) +                                          A [w1 (s)                E1 (W1 )]
                               n1       2                                       n1 (n1 2)
                                                                1+
                                                                       (N       n1 2)(N n1 )
                                                                                                                                   Z   S
                                    1                    w1 (s) E1 (W1 )
                +                           n1
                                                                         (                            ) E1 (W1 )                           (s) w1 (s) dF (s)
                     1
                           +                                  V1 (W1 )                                                             0
                    n1 2       (N   n1      2)(N n1 )


Multiply both sides by w1 (s) then integrate over s 2 [0; S] to isolate:

                                                                                0                                     2                      1
                                                                                                                 (n1 )         4n1 +2
                                                                                     2 (n1        1) +
Z                                                                            B                                        n1 n1(2)     C
     S                                                                       B                              1+                     C
                                                                             B                                   (N   n1  )(N n1 ) C
                                                                                                                               2
           (s) w1 (s) dF (s) = (                  ) E1 (W1 )                 B                                    1                C V1 (W1 )
 0                                                               n1         2B          1+                                         C
                                                                             @                    1
                                                                                                        +
                                                                                                                      n1
                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                               n1     2
                                                                                                            (N   n1   2)(N n1 )




                                                                    63
We can now rewrite the …rst order condition for w1 (s) as:

                                                                        2(n1 1)(n1 2)
                                                          n1       2+
                                                 n1                   (N n1 2)(N n1 )
                 (s) =                                                                  [w1 (s)                E1 (W1 )]     (C.3)
                                           n1         2                    n (n 2)
                                                          n1       1 + N n1 21 N n
                                                                      (     1  )(    1)



The …rst order condition for A1 still takes the form of (B.5).
   In a symmetric equilibrium, both intermediaries o¤er the same security W . Eq. (C.2)
                 N
implies n1 =     2    which, when substituted into Eq. (C.3), implies:

                                                                    N2           8
                                      (s) =                                          [w (s)       E1 (W )]
                                                                   N (N           4)

for each s 2 [0; S]. Therefore, the security that prevails in a symmetric equilibrium has
payo¤s:                                                        8
                                                               <    2A
                                                                    N z (s)        if s < s
                                                w (s) =
                                                               :    2A
                                                                    N z (s)        if s       s

where the threshold s 2 [0; S] is de…ned by:

                                                               N                                  N (N        4)
                         s = arg min z (k)                                 E1 (W ) +                                         (C.4)
                                      k2[0;S]                  2A                                  N2        8

and A solves:
                                                               Rs
                                            E1 (Z) + (        ) 0 z (s) dF (s)
 A=
              2 (N 2 8)        Rs        2          Rs               2   Rs             RS
          +   N 2 (N 4)         0 (z (s)) dF (s)     0 z (s) dF (s)       0 z (s) dF (s) s z (s) dF (s)
                                                                                                                             (C.5)
If the solution to Eq. (C.4) is interior, we can combine Eq. (C.4) and (C.5) to get:

                  Z      s                                     Z       s
      E1 (Z)                                                                                                     N 2 (N 4)
                             [z (s)    z (s)] dF (s) +                     z (s) [z (s)    z (s)] dF (s) =
                     0                                             0                                           2   N2 8

We then need:

                                2                                                                        N2 8
                      <                         z (S) E1 (Z)                E1 Z 2        + V1 (Z)
                                                                                                       N 2 (N 4)




                                                                           64
for the solution to indeed be interior, in which case:

             ds     N N 3 24N + 64                 1
                =             2           R   h                         i            >0
             dN   2    (N 2 8)              s
                                   z 0 (s) 0 z (s) +           E1 (Z)
                                                                            dF (s)

                                                      N
where the inequality follows from N     6 to ensure   2   3. Therefore, the alternative timing
considered here does not change the result that debt is traded in smaller markets than
equity.




                                             65
