                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  LEARNING IN EQUILBRIUM MODELS OF ARBITRATION




                                Robert S. Gibbons




                             Working Paper No. 2547




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 1988




I am happy to acknowledge several forms of assistance and support: I have benefitted
greatly from extensive discussions about arbitration with David Bloom, Christopher
Cavanagh, Henry. Farber, and Stanley Jacks. Many others have made helpful comments
on this paper: David Card, Vincent Crawford, Paul Kiemperer, Gregory Leonard,
Meg Meyer, Keven M. Murphy, Joel Sobel, and seminar audiences at Chicago, Harvard,
MIT, and Princeton.   Finally, the NSF provided financial support through grant
1ST 86—09691.   The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program
in Labor Studies.   Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                              NBER Working Paper #2547
                                                              March 1988




                       Learning    in Equilibriuni Models of Arbitration



                                               ABSTRACT




           This paperanalyzes strategiccommunication in     equilibrium models ofconvenuonal

   and final-offer interest arbitration. Both models emphasize the role of learning by the

   arbitrator from the parties offers about the state of the employment relationship, which is
   known to the parties but not to the arbitrator. In both models, the arbitratorsequilibrium

   behavior is identical to the reduced-form decision rule typically assumed in the empirical

   literature. The paper thereby provides a structural interpretation for the existing empirical

   work.

            The paperalso represents progress towards a complete theory of arbitration because
   it satisfies three conditions that will be required of any such theory. First, the models
   predictions match the existing empirical evidence. Second, the models describe equilibrium
   behavior. And third, the models are built on a common set of assumptions about

   preferences, information, and commitment. The paper therefore not only provides an

   equilibrium foundation for the intuition that the arbitrator might learn from the parties
   offers, but also uses the idea of learning to develop a unified analytical treatment of the two

   major forms of interest arbitration.



Robert S. Gibbons
Department of Economics
E52-251B
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                                                                 I



1.   Introduction
         This paper analyzes strategic communication in equilibriummodels of conventional
and final-offerinterest arbitration. Both models emphasizethe role of learningby the
arbitratorfrom the parties' offers about the state of the employmentrelationship,which is
known to the parties but not to the arbitrator. In both models, the arbitrator's equilibrium
behavioris identical to the reduced-form decision rule typicallyassumedin the empirical
literature(namely, a weighted average of the parties' offersand a settlementmotivatedby
the publicly observablefacts of the case). The paper thereby provides a structural

interpretation for the existing empirical work.
         The paper also represents progresstowards a complete theory of arbitrationbecause
it satisfies three conditionsthat will be required of any such theory. First, the models'
predictionsmatch the existing empirical evidence. Second, the modelsdescribe equilibrium
behavior. And third, the models are built on a common set of assumptions about

preferences, information, and commitment.       (Jhis last condition is crucial for accurate
welfare comparisonsof conventionaland fmal-offer arbitration.) The paper thereforenot

onlyprovides an equilibriumfoundation for the intuitionthat the arbitratormight learn from
the parties' offers, but also uses the idea of learning to develop a unified analytical

treatment   of the two major forms of interest arbitration.
         Understandinginterest arbitration is importantfor severalreasons. First,
considerable resourcesare allocatedthrough interest arbitration     of wage disputes, both in
the public sector (especially where strikesare prohibited)    as well as in private-sector
industries such as professionalbaseball. Second, outsidethe context of wage disputes, the

cloggedjudicial systemhas createda growinginterest in alternativedispute-resolution
procedures, especiallypre-trial arbitration. Third, interest arbitration offers a rare natural
experimentinvolving    strategic behavior and significant stakes: the rules of arbitration

constitutea well defined game, and the players' choices often are observedwithout error.
        A fourthreason to understand arbitration is that it is an institution that allows parties
to write an incompletecontract ex-ante whilelimitingopportunistic behaviorex-post.
Indeed,Williamson (1975) argues that the possibility of arbitration by informed insiders is
one of the central virtues of intemal overmarket organization. Even if some state-

contingentactions cannot be specified in a contract ex-ante, the contract can include the
provisionthat ax-post disputes will be resolvedthrough arbitration. Grossmanand Hart
(1986) analyze two other responsesto incomplete contracts: integration(i.e., assigning
residual rightsof control) and ax-post bargaining. Arbitration is a third option.

        Formally, this paper considersinterest arbitration, as opposed to grievance

arbitration, but the thrust of the paper seems applicable to grievance arbitration as well. In
interest arbitration the arbitratorsettles wage (or other) disputes that arise when a new
contract is negotiated; in grievance arbitration, the arbitratorsettles disputesthat arise

duringthe life of an existing contract. The two majorforms of interest arbitration are
conventional arbitration and fmal-offerarbitration. In final-offer arbitration, the parties

simultaneouslysubmit wage offers,and then the arbitratorimposesone of the two offers as
the settiement in conventionalarbitration, the arbitrator's choice of a settlement is
unconstrained,

       Althoughthis paper contains no data, it is closely relatedto the empirical literature
on interest arbitration. As noted briefly above, the arbitrator's equilibriumbehaviorin this

paper is identical to the reduced-form decision rule typicallyassumed in the empirical
literature, In both the conventional and the final-offer arbitration models developedbelow,

the arbitrator's preferred settlement,y, is a weighted average of the average of the parties'
                                                                                               3



offers, y = (Ye + yu)/2, and a settlement motivated by the publiclyobservablefacts of the
case, y*(f):


        ya = CL y'   + (1-a) y*(f)


A decision rule of this form appears in empirical studies of conventionalarbitration as
equation (12) in Ashenfelterand Bloom (1984), equation (3) in Farberand Bazerman
(1986), arid equation (ib) in Bloom (1986); it also appears in empiricalstudies of fmal-

offer arbitration as equation (7) in Ashenfelter and Bloomand equation (6) in Farber and
Bazerman. One of the purposesof this paperis to provide a structuralinterpretationfor the

estimated parametera.

        The paper also is an attempt to move towards a complete theory of arbitration. A
first requirement for such a theory is that it matchthe empirical evidence. Perhaps the

strongestpiece of evidence is that the parties offers matter in the arbitrators decision-
making (i.e.,   a is positive; see Bloom and Farber-Bazerman).    Indeed, Stevens (1966)

proposal of final-offer arbitration was motivated by the observationthat the offers seem to
matter too much in conventional arbitration: the arbitratorsometimes seems simpiy to split

the difference between the parties' offers, ignoringthe publiclyobservablefacts of the

case. This paper uses the arbitrator's need to learn from the parties' offers to explain the
observedimportanceof the offers in the arbitrator's decision-making. The equilibrium
behaviorthat emerges also is consistentwith the Farber-Bazermanfinding that the

importance   of the offers in the arbitrator's decision-making increaseswhen the offers are
closer together, and with the Ashenfelter-Bloom and Farber-Bazerman finding that the
 arbitrators notion of an ideal settlement is identical in final-offer and conventional
 arbitration.

         A second requirement for a complete theory of arbitration is that it describe

 equilibriumbehavior. The following discussion explains why an equilibriumanalysis of
 arbitration is a crucial complement to empirical work on the arbitrators decision rule.

 ConsiderStevens'observationthat in conventional arbitration the arbitratorsometimes
 seems simplyto split the difference between the offers. If the arbitratorwere committedto

 splittingthe difference, then the parties would submit the most extreme offers possible.
 Suppose instead that the arbitratoris committed to splitting the difference between
reasonableoffers but to ignoring(or evenpunishing)unreasonable ones. Such a decision
rule could cause the parties always to submitreasonableoffers, and so lead to the
appearance      of mechanicalcompromising by the arbitrator, but the observedbehaviorwould
be only half the story: the data would be silent about how the arbitratorwould have
behaved had the parties not submitted reasonable offers. Out-of-equilibrium responsesby

the arbitratorare never observed, and so can never be estimated, but play a crucial role in

determining what is observed. Only equilibrium models can elucidatethe out-of-

equilibrium behaviorthat empirical analyses are forced to ignore.
        A thirdrequirementfor a complete theory of arbitration is that models of different
forms of arbitration be built on a common set of assumptions about preferences,

information, and commiment. This is a prerequisite for accurate comparisons       of
conventionaland final-offerarbitration for two reasons, the first empiricaland the second
theoretical. First,if each form is adopted in environments in which it performswell (and if

the data cannot reveal the differences in these environments), then comparisons   of
performancedata from real arbitrations are likely to suffer from selectionbias. And
                                                                                                 5




second, because   any form of arbitration couldin principle be adopted in any given
environment,a successfulmodel of a given form of arbitration must be built on

assumptions that permit other forms of arbitration to be analyzed within the same model.
ConsiderFarber's (1980) model of final-offerarbitration, for example. Farber's model is
the leading contribution to the existing theoretical literature on that form of arbitration, and
is the basis for all of the empiricalwork on the subject. Its importantliability,however,is
that the analogous model of conventional arbitration implies that the parties offers are
irrelevant in the arbitrator's decision-making, an implication that is strongly contradictedby

the empirical evidence.
        This paperis able to meet these threerequirements because it emphasizesthe
arbitrator'sattemptto learn from the parties'offers. The paper introduces the possibility of
such learningby assumingthat the arbitrator's preferred settlement is determinednot only

by the publiclyobservablefacts of the case but also by the state of the employment
relationship,which is known to the parties but not to the arbitrator, The most important
disunctionbetween the facts of the case and the state of the employment relationship is

simply that the arbitrator observesthe former but not the latter. Examples of publicly
observable facts are the inflationrate, recent wage settlements in related industries,   a coarse
indicationof the firm's financialhealth, and so on. The state of the employment

relationship, in contrast, is a collection   of privately observable details of the production
environment and the labor market that the employer and unioninhabit. Because          of their
long and close relationship, the employerand the union understand the state well. The
arbitrator, in contrast,has less experiencewith these details but conducts an independent

investigation to gather information,
                                                                                                6




         Two importantassumptions maintainedthroughout the paper deserve brief mention,

First, the arbitratoris assumed to be unable to committo a decision rule before the parties
submit their offers. This assumption seems to representobservedpractice accurately, but
the complementary case also deserves attention. Second, the parties are assumed to share a
commonperception of the state of the employment relationship. While it seems realistic
that the parties should both be considerably better informed aboutthe state than the

arbitratoris, it also seemslikely that the parties themselves will have different beliefs about
the state. Detailed discussions    of both of these assumptions are provided in Section 7.
         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describesFarber's

equilibriummodel of final-offer arbitration, As will becomeclear, this model plays an
importantrole in the development of the learningmodels       ofth final-offer and
conventionalarbitration analyzed here. Section 3 specifies the economic environment(i.e.,
makes assumptionsabout the players preferences and information structures) that

underliesthis paper's models of both final-offerand conventional arbitration. Sections4
and 5   analyze   separatingequilibria in the final-offerand conventionalarbitration games,
respectively. In both cases, the parties' offers perfectlyreveal their private information,
and the arbitratoruses this information to determinean ideal settlement. in final-offer
arbitration the arbitratorchooses the offer that is closerto this ideal as the settlement; in

conventionalarbitration the arbitratorsimplyimposesthe ideal itself. The model of
conventional arbitration in Section 5 is of independent interest as a contributionto the

theory of cheap-talkcommunication games. Section 6 summarizesthe relationship between
these learningmodels and the empiricalliterature. Finally,Section 7 discussesa program
of extensions of the models developed here,
                                                                                               7




2. Final-OfferArbitration without Learning

        This section presentsthe key points in Farber'smodel of final-offerarbitration.
The analysis of learning in equilibriummodels of final-offer and conventional arbitration
that follows in Sections 4 and 5 builds on the work described here.
        Farber characterizes an arbitratorby a number, z, that describesthe arbitrators
most preferred settlement in the case in question. To facilitate comparison    of this model
with those that follow, suppose that the arbitrator's utility if the ideal settlementis z and the
actual settlementis y is given by the utilityfunctionv(y,z) = -(y-z)2. In final-offer

arbitration,the arbitratoris constrained to chooseone of the parties' offers as a settlement.
Assuming that the employer'soffer, ye, is below the union's offer, Yu' the arbitrator
chooses the employer'soffer if and only if z <y, where y = (ye + Yu)12 is the average of
the parties' offers.
        The parties are assumed to be uncertainabout the value of z. Let this uncertainty be
described by the probability distribution F(z). Assume that F(z) has a continuous and

strictly positive density f(z) with connected support. Assume also that the parties have

strictly opposed preferences and are risk-neutral:the employer simply seeks to minimizethe
arbitrator's expectedsettlement,while the union seeks to maximizeit.

        The timing of the arbitration game is as follows. First, the parties simultaneously
submittheir offers to the arbitrator. Then the arbitratorchooses the offer that maximizes
the utility functionVa(Y,Z). The parties' Nash equilibriumoffers thereforemust solve



(1)     nX YeF(Y)+yu[1(Y)J,                             and

         Yu
(2)
         Ye



The first-order conditions for these optimization problems are


(3)    1-F(y)   =   (Yu   Ye)   f(y)   and



(4)         F(y)=(y-y)f(y),

which imply that F(y) 1/2 and Yu -     Ye
                                            = f(y)4. (Notethat the assumption that Yu> Ye

clearly cannot be false in equilibrium.) These first-order conditions express a simple trade-
off: in equilibrium, each party considers making a more agessive offer but must balance
the gain from having such an offer accepted againstthe reduced probability that it will be

accepted.
       Much of what follows assumes that z is Normally distributed withmean M and

precision H (i.e., variance 1/H). In this case, (3) and (4) imply that the equilibriumoffers
are


(5)    Y=M+\I                          and



(6)    YeM\j'
                                                                                                9



(Checking for the global optimality      of these and subsequent offers is tedious and so is
relegated to Appendix     1.)   Note that the equilibriumoffers are centeredabout the mean of
the parties belief about the arbitratorsideal settlement, and that the distancebetween the

equilibriumoffers decreases as this belief becomes more precise.




3. An Economic Environment

        This section describes the preferencesand information structurethat underlieboth
the fmal-offer and the conventional arbitration models analyzed in Sections 4 and 5. The
novel feature introduced here is an unknowncalledthe state of the employment relationship

(or simply the state) and denoted by s. The state of the employment relationship represents
the details of the production environment and the labor market that the employerand the
union inhabit. Because     of their long and close relationship, the employerand the union
understand the state well. The arbitrator,in contrast, has less experiencewith these details

but conducts an independentinvestigation to gatherinformation.

        The central theme of the models analyzed below is as follows, If the arbitrator
knew the state precisely then the ideal settlementwouldbe clear. Because the arbitratoris

comparativelypoorlyinformed,however,any information about the state that can be
extracted from the parties' offers may be useful. Such inferencesmust of course account
for the natural incentive of each party to mislead the arbitrator.


3a. Preferences

        Assume that the arbitrator's ideal settlement depends on the state of the employment

relationship:   z = z(s). This dependence could arise because the arbitratorwishes to be fair,
                                                                                               10


or to be rehired. For simplicity, let z(s)=s and let the arbitrator's (von Neumann-
Morgenstern) utility functionbe Va(Y,S)
                                           =

        Unlike the arbitrator, the parties are assumed to be risk-neutraland to have

preferencesthat are independentof the state: Ve(Y,S) = -y andv(y,s)=y, As in the
previoussection,theemployer simply seeks to minimizethe arbitrator's expected
settlement,whilethe union seeks to maximize it. Thus, the parties are well informed about
what a fair settlementwouldbe, but this information does not affecttheir preferences.
        These assumptions about preferences keep the analysis simple. It may seem odd,

however, that the state s appears in the arbitrator's utilityfunctionbut not in the parties'
utility functions. Two justifications for this can be given. First, the intuitiondeveloped

here seems unlikelyto disappear when the parties' preferences do dependon the state. And
second, the assumptions could be correct as they stand. Let the value of the enterprise be
V(s)when the state is s, let the settlement y be the wagebill, and let employmentbe fixed.
Then the union's utility functionis v(y,s)=y,the employer'sis v(y,s) = V(s) - y (which

changes nothing in the analysis), and the arbitrator's ideal settlement z(s)=s reflects a
judgment aboutthe fair division of V(s).


3b. InformationStructure
        Let s be Normally distributed withmean m and precision h. Also, let the parties

knowledgeof the state be summarized by the noisy signal


(7)     s=s+e,.
                                                                                              11



where     is Normally distributed with zero mean and precision h,1,. Notice that the parties

share a commonperceptionof the state of the employmentrelationship. This is important

in what follows, and is discussed in Section 7. Finally, let the results of the arbitrators

private investigationbe represented by the noisy signal


(8)     Sa=S+Ca,


where Ca is Normally distributed with zero mean and precision      ha.   The three random
variabless,   e, and   Ca   are assumed to be independentof each other. In keeping with the

idea that the parties are better informed about the state than is the arbitrator, one could
assume that h.,> ha, but this is not necessaryfor what follows.
        To summarize,the information structure is as follows: the parties both observe
the arbitrator observes Sa, no one observes s, and everyone observes m, h,      h, and ha.    The

parameters m and h that specify the prior distribution of s can be interpretedas the publicly
observablefacts of the case.
        Because of the independenceof s, e, and Ca, the simple formulaeof the Normal

learningmodel (DeGroot, 1970, Chapter 9) characterize the Bayesian updating that occurs
in the model. Some of the results of this updatingare recordedhere for future use. The

conditionaldistributionof s given Si (where i e (p,a}) is Normal with mean M1(s) and

precision H1, where


(9)     M(s)   = hrn +h1s                 and
                 h + h1


(10)    H1=h+h1.
                                                                                             12




Similarly,the conditional distributionof s given   s and    s8 is   Normal with mean M(Sp*Sa)

and precision Hpa where

                       hm+hs +hsa                     and
(11)   Mpa(spsa)        h +   h+h
(12)    Hpah+ hp+ha.

These definitions provide a convenient shorthand for describing the beliefs and decision-

making in the models below.




4. Learningin Final-OfferArbitration

       This section analyzes a model of final-offer arbittation in the economicenvironment

specifiedin Section 3. The analysis focuses on a separating equilibrium: The arbitrator
perfectly infers the parties private information (sr) from their offers and then uses this
information and the signal (ga) to compute a posterior belief aboutthe state (s) and to

choose the expected-utility-maximizing offer as the settlement. The parties understandthat

the arbin-ator will draw an inferencefrom the offers and so considerthe payoff from

misleadingthe arbitratorwhen choosingtheir offers, but find it optimal not to submit
misleading offers.
       The timing of the game is as follows. First, the parties observe      s and the arbitrator
observes 5a- Second, the parties simultaneouslysubmitoffers, Ye and         y. Third, the
arbinator chooses the offer that maximizesE5{v(y,s)     I              where the conditioningon
Ye and Yu   denotes the informationaboutSp that the arbitratorextracts from the parties'
offers. Note that the arbitratoris not allowed to committo a decision rule in advance;

rather, the arbitrator'schoice must satisfy sequential rationality at the thirdstage of the

game.
         Before describing the separating equilibrium in detail, it helps set the tone for the

subsequentanalysis to show that             learning must   occur in equilibrium. That is, it
cannot be equilibriumbehaviorfor the arbitratorto learn nothing from the parties offers.

To see this, suppose the arbitratorthought that no information could be extractedfrom the
offers. Then the arbitrator'sideal settlement,ya(Sa), would be Ma(5a) from (9), or

                    hm+ haSa
(13)     Ya(Sa) =



Given   s, the parties' belief about Ya(a)is Normally distributed with mean rn and
precision h', where


(14)    m= hrn + haMp(sp)                 and
                    h+ha

        h   —
                (h + h)(h + ha)2
(15)
                 ha(h+hp+ha)


(Note that the dependenceof rn' on     s has been suppressedin the notation.) The logic
behind Farber'sequilibriumnow appliesdirectly:       if the arbitratorlearns nothing from the
parties' offers then   s is relevant only because it changes the parties'beliefs about the
arbitrator's ideal settlement. The equilibrium offers are thereforeanalogous to (5) and (6):
                                                                                             14



(16)   Yu(p)
                =m                      and



(17)   Ye(Sp)   =m'


                                                             from these offers. The
Contrary to the hypothesis,the arbitratorcan learn something

average                                                  s
       of the offers is rn, and (9) and (14) determine from m'. Lets(m') denotethe
(point) estimateof   s computed in this way. Sequential rationality then requiresthat the
arbitrators ideal settlementbe Mpa(sp(m')     Sa) from (11),   or


(18)    Ya(Ye,Yu,Sa)
                        _(m5a
The fact that (18) differs from (13) establishes the following result.


osition 1. There does not exist a perfect Bayesian equilibriumin which the arbitrator
learns nothing from the parties' offers.


        The crucial difference between (13) and (18), of course, is that in the latter the

parties' offers help the arbitratordetermine the ideal settlement. In an equilibriumfeaturing
this kind of learning, each party'soffer must balancenot only the probabilityof and the
                                                        as in Farber'smodel, but also the
gain from submitting the offer chosen as the settlement,
effectthe off has on the arbitrator's inferenceaboutthe ideal settlement The rest of this

sectionestablishesthat a separating perfectBayesian equilibrium exists in which the

parties' offers perfectlyreveal s, to the arbitrator.
        Supposethat the arbitratorbelievesthat y, the average of the parties' offers,
                                                                                       the
perfectly reveals s. That is, for any pair of offers Ye arid Yu the arbitratorcomputes

point estimate sp = Sp(Y). (Otherseparating equilibria may exist in which some other
                                 s
function of Ye and Yu reveals to the arbitrator.) The arbitrator's ideal settlement is then



                             hm + hs(y)+ haSa
                                   h h
                         —
(19)    Ya(Ye,Yu,a)      —
                               h +   +


and (assuming    Ye <Yu) the arbitrator chooses Ye as the settlement   if and only if the ideal

settlement,Ya(Ye,YU,Sa)'is less than the average of the offers, y.
       It is simple to showthat if the equilibriumvalue of y is to reveal s in this way then
the arbitrator's inferencerule must be



(20)    sp(y)
                = (h +   hy - hm

To see this, use (19) and (11) to express the event that the arbitratorchooses Ye as

Sa < S(y), where




(21)    S(y)= h3y
                      +      h(y - m)+   h(y - Sp(y))

A derivation analogous to that leading to (3) and (4) then yields the first-orderconditions


(22)    l-F[S(y)]        -
                      (Yu Ye) f[S(yflS'(y)      and
                                                                                              16




(23)          F[S(y)]    (Yu Ye)     f[S(y)]S(y),


where F is now the distributionof 5a conditionalon        s, which is Normal with meanM(s)
given by (9) and precision

                  hp(h   + h0)
24)     H     —

                  h+hp+ha'

As in (5) and (6), these first-order conditions imply that S(y) = M(s). SubstitutingSp(y)
for Sp in M(s) and solving for sp(y) yields (20), the desired result.
        The inferencerule Sp(y) in (20) impliesthat (21) simplifies to S(y) = y: the
arbinator's decisionrule is to choose Ye if and onlyif Sa <y. Note that this is directly

analogous to the decision rule used in Farbefs model (where there is no learning). Not

surprisingly, therefore, the equilibrium strategies for the parties that solve the first-order
conditions (22) and (23) are directly analogous to (5) and (6):


(25)    Yu(Sp)     = Mp(sp) +                       and



(26)    Ye(Sp)      Mp(Sp)
                                 -


The averageof the offers is Mp(sp), which yields a more convenientexpression        of the
inferencerule (20): in equilibrium, the arbitratorinfers 5p from the average of the parties

offers, uses it in (19) to compute the ideal settlement, and then chooses the offer closer to

this ideal.
        The summaryof this argumentis the main resultof this section.


Prpoositin2. The parties' offer strategiesgiven in (25) and (26) and the arbitrator's
decision strategy basedon the ideal settlement (19) and the inferencerule (20) constitute    a'

separating perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the final-offer arbitration game. In this

equilibrium, the arbitrator's ideal settlement can be written

        Ya=   aY+(lcL)sa, where
        —    hm   +hs           and
              h+h
               h +
             h +  h+ ha


        The key feature of the arbitrator's equilibrium strategy is its treatmentof unexpected
offers from the parties. In equilibrium,the parties' offers differ by '2it/H' , and the
arbitratorperfectly infers the parties' private information from the averageof the offers.

Any pair of offers that differs by this prescribedamount is on the equilibriumpath; a pair
that differs by any other amount is off the equilibriumpath. The arbitrator's inferencerule

ignores this distinction, however:(20) producesthe point estimate of s, both on and off the
equilibriumpath. Thus, any change in eitherparty's offer changesthe arbitrator'sestimate
of Sp at the rate (h   h) I 2h9. The reason the arbitratoris not misled in equilibriumis that
the parties must balance this opportunityto influence the arbitrator's beliefagainst the two

considerations that determinedthe equilibriumoffers in Farber'smodel, the gain from

having a more aggressive offer acceptedand the reduced probability that it will be accepted.
        There are two cases in which learning plays no role in the private-information game

analyzedin this section: (1) the arbitratorhas nothing to learn (i.e., ha approaches infinity);
and (2) the parties havenothing to communicate (i.e., hp approaches zero). One appealing
feature of the separating equilibrium analyzed here is that it approaches the equilibrium in

Farber's complete-informationgame as the learning becomes unimportantin the private-

information game. As ha approaches infinity, for instance, the arbitrator's uncertainty

about s disappears, and Sp becomesrelevantonly as a signal to the parties aboutthe
arbitrator's ideal settlement. In this case, the precisionof the parties' belief aboutthe

arbitrators ideal settlement(i.e., H in (5) and (6) in Farber'smodel) is h +   h, which is
indeed the limit of H' in (25) and (26) as ha approaches infinity. Similarly, as hp

approaches zero, the parties'privateinformation does not improvetheir prior information
about the arbitrator'sideal settlement,so H in (5) and (6) is hha/(h + ha), which is indeed
the limit of H' as   h approaches zero.
        One other limit also bearsconsideration. As    h approaches infinity, the arbitrator
perfectly infers not only Sp but also s from the average of the parties' offers. Given perfect
information about s, the arbitrator's private signal sa becomesirrelevant in determining the

arbitrator's ideal settlement,and this eliminates the parties' uncertaintyaboutthe arbitrator's

ideal settlement. Recall that as the analogous uncertainty disappears in Farber'scomplete-
information model, the parties' equilibrium offersconverge to the mean of the distribution

of the arbitrators ideal settlement (Formally, as H approaches infinity, the equilibrium
offers given in (5) and (6) converge to M.) Interestingly,as hp approachesinfinity, H'
does not approachinfinity (rather, it approaches ha), so the equilibriumoffers given by

(25) and (26) in the private-information model do not converge. This happensbecause (as
noted above) (20) and (21) imply that the arbitratorchooses ye if and only if 5a <Y,

independentof the value of hp. Thus, sa serves as a tie-breakerin the arbitrator's decision
rule even though it is irrelevantto the arbitrator's inferenceprocess.
5. Learningin Conventional      Arbitraon
         This section analyzes a modelof conventional arbitration in the economic
environmentspecifiedin Section 3. The analysis focuses on a continuumof payoff-

equivalent separating equilibria. In each of these equilibria, the arbitratorperfectly infers
the parties' private information(s) from their offers and then uses this informationand the

Signal (Sa) to compute   a posterior belief aboutthe state (s) and to impose whatever
settlement maximizesexpected utility given this belief. The parties understandthat the

arbitratorwill draw an inferencefrom the offers and so considerthe payoff from

misleadingthe arbitratorwhen choosingtheir offers, but find it optimalnot to submit
misleadingoffers.
        The timing of the game is as follows. First, the parties observe s, and the arbitrator
observesSa. Second, the parties simultaneouslysubmit offers, Ye and Yu' Third, the
arbitratorimposeswhateversettlementmaximizes             Es{va(y,5)   Sa,Ye,YuJ. As in the previous

section, the arbitratoris not allowed to committo a decision rule in advance. It will become
clear below, however,that in this modelof conventional arbitration the arbitratorwouldnot

value the opportunityto committo a decision rule: each of the continuum of sequentially
rational decision rules associatedwith the continuum of separating equilibria described
below would be an optimalrule if the arbitratorcould commit.
        The crucialdifference between this model of conventional arbitration and the

previous sections model of final-offerarbitration is that here arbitration is modeledas a
cheap-talk game: the parties' offers are not directlyrelevantto any player's payoff; they
matter only indirectly through the information they convey.1 In this case, it is natural in the

model (as well as faithful to the institutional details of arbitration) to envisionparty is offer


1See Crawford and Sobel (1982) for the seminal work on cheap-talk games.
                                                                                                          20



as a long speech that ends "and that is why we believe that an appropriate settlement is yj.'
Finai-offerarbitration is not a cheap-talk game because one of the parties' offers must be
chosen as the settlement,and so directly affects payoffs. Similarly, conventional
arbitration would not be a cheap-talk game if the offers in the arbitration game were

constrainedto be the parties' last offers ma prior bargaininggame, because such offers
could have been acceptedand wouldthen have directly affected payoffs.2
         All cheap-talk games share two distinctive features. The first is that in any cheap-
talk game there exists a trivial equilibrium in which no communication occurs. In the

conventional arbitrationmodel, for instance, the arbitrator expects thereto be no

informationin either party's offer and so pays no attention to either offer when choosinga

settlement,and each party is contentto choose an offer at random because no offer has any
affect on the arbitrator'ssettlement. Thus, there is no analog of Proposition I here: in this
model of conventional arbitration theredoes exist an equilibrium in which the arbitrator
learns nothing from the parties' offers. Note well, however,that in this equilibriumthe
arbitrator'sideal (and imposed) settlement is independentof the parties' offers. Since such

independenceis not observedin the data, this no-communication equilibriumis suspect.
      The second distinctive feature of all cheap-talk games is that, given a fixed cheap-
talk game, any perfectBayesianequilibrium(separating or otherwise) is associated with a
class of payoff-equivalent perfect Bayesianequilibria that differonly by a translation: since

messagesare costless, the informationcommunicated in any given equilibriumalso can be
communicatedin other payoff-equivalent equilibria that differonly in the languageused to

2ThUS. in this paper, the parties offers in arbitration need not be identical to their last offers in a prior
bargaining game. This flexibility arises if (as is required in some contracts) the bargaining record has been
sealed and is unavailable to the arbitrator. Also, it will become clear below that the incentive for the parties
to make concessions in arbitration can be quite strong, perhaps stronger than the analogous incentive in
bargaining. Therefore, even if the bargaining record has not been sealed, the last offers from the bargaining
game may be sufficiently far apart that they have no bearing on the parties' choices of offers in arbitration.
                                                                                                        21



communicate. This accounts for the great multiplicity of payoff-equivalent separating

equilibria mentioned above.
        This sections modelof conventional arbitration is a cheap-talk game with a third
distinctive feature: neither party alone can achieve any communication with the arbitrator,

because each party has preferences over settlements that are independentof the state of the

employment relationship (the employer simply seeks to minimize the arbitratorsexpected

settlement,while the union seeks to maximize it). This section demonstrates,however,
that togetherthe parties can achieve perfect communication: there exist separating perfect

Bayesianequilibriain which the parties' offers perfectly reveal            s to the arbitrator.
         One scheme for extracting       a single piece of information from two informed agents
is to ask each to make a claim about the information and to shoot them both if their claims
disagree.3 Such schemesare not feasiblein the arbitration model analyzed here, however,
for two reasons. First, the arbitrators power is limited to imposinga transfer between two
risk-neutral parties, so outcomes that are Pareto-inefficient for the two parties are

impossible. And second, the arbitrator's behaviormust be sequentially rationali given any

pair of offers   (ye,yu)   and any signal (sa), the arbitratormust formulatea belief about the

parties' private information,l.L(sp I Sa,ye,yu), and act optimally given this belief.
        In spiteof the facts that Pareto-inefficient outcomes are impossible and that the
arbitratormust be sequentially rational, the arbitrator can extract Sp from the parties. The
crucialfeature of the model that drives this result is that the parties'information(Sp) is
correlatedwith the signal from the arbitrator's investigation (sa).
         To understand this result, it is helpful to considerthe intermediatecase in which
Pareto-inefficient outcomes are impossiblebut sequential rationality              is not required.   In this



3see Kalai and Rosenthal (1979) for a more careful (if less dramatic) statement of this result.
                                                                                                    22



case, the followingscheme induces truth-telling: ask each party for a claim about s; if they
disagree then compare each partys claim about Sp to the signal 5a and enforce a large
transferto the party who seems to have made the more reasonable claim from the party who
seems to have made the less reasonable claim. Given any correlation between           s and   5a.

there exists a sufficiently large transfer such that truth-telling is the uniqueequilibriumof
this scheme.
        It is simple to extend the spirit of this scheme to the model of conventional
arbitration studiedhere, in which the arbitrator's behaviormust be sequentially rational,

The argument relies on the fact that in a perfect Bayesian equilibriumof the conventional
arbitration game, the arbitratorsbeliefoff the equilibrium path is unrestricted. This

freedom ensures that thereexists a beliefoff the equilibrium path that makes    it sequentially
rational for the arbitratorto enforce the required transferif the parties disagree.
        There is a close relationship between the incentives created in a conventional
arbitration game in which the arbitrator uses the scheme described above and the incentives

createdin a final-offerarbitration game: the size of the transfer and the conditions under
which it is awarded to one party or the other in the conventional arbitration game are

analogous to the gap between the offers and the conditions under which the arbitrator
chooses one party's offer or the other's in the final-offerarbitration game. In fact, the

proof that there exists a continuum of separating perfect Bayesian equilibria in the
conventional arbitration game v-ith learningrelies on the construction of the following

continuumof final-offergames without learning.
        Recall that in Section 2 the arbitrator's ideal settlement was denoted by z, and the

parties' shared beliefabout z was denoted by F(z). Supposeinstead that for some fixed
k c (.oo, o), the arbitrator's ideal settlementis
                                                                                             23




               — (h + h)5p- khm
       zk(Sa) —
(27)              (1 - k)h +         h
                                                                                        needs to
Note that if the ideal settlement is given by (27) then thereis nothing the arbitrator

learn from the parties   5a   completely determinesthe arbitrator's ideal settlement,

independentof Sp. In this case, the only role for Sp is to help the parties forecast zk(Sa),
Given s, the parties shared beliefabout zk(sa) is Normalwith mean Mk(sp) and precision

Hk, where


(28)                                                      and
        Mk(Sp)=


                  k)h h0]2       +
('9)
 -   Hk = (hha[(1
             + h)(h + h + ha)


From (5) and (6), the parties' euiibrium offers in this model of final-offerarbitration
without learning are


(30)    Yuk(Sp)
                  = Mk(Sp) +                       and




(31)    Yek(5p)    Mk(sp)



These equilibriumoffers from the final-offer game withoutlearningwill turn out to be
identical to the equilibrium offers in this section'smodel ofconventional arbitration with

learning!
                                                                                                24



        Imagine that in the model of conventional arbitration withlearning, the arbitrator
believedthat the parties' offer strategies were (30) and (31). The arbitratorcould then
invert the offer strategies so as to interpret the offers as implicitclaims about the parties

information, Given the offerYu from the union, for instance, the arbitrator could solve

(30) for sto arrive at the implicitclaim that the parties' private information is


                   =           -                  where
(32)    Spuk(Yu)       ck[Yu       /2Hk]

(33)
                            p


solves Mk(sp) = x for si,. Similarly,   given the offer Ye from the employer,the arbitrator
could solve (31) for    s to arrive at the implicitclaimthat the parties   privateinformation is


                   =
(34)    Spek(ye)       Ye + "j2Hk]
Note that if the parties' offers are in fact determined by (30) and (31) then these implicit

claims will be identical even thoughthe offers are not.    If the implicit claims agree, as they
will in equilibrium, then it is natural for the arbitratorto believe the commonclaim.
Everything hinges, however, on what the arbitratorbelieves when the implicit claims

disagree.

       Suppose that after observingthe signal sa and the offers Ye and Yu the arbitrator

arrives at the point estimate Sp = Sp(Ye'yuSa). Then sequential rationality dictates that the

arbitrator impose the ideal settlement MpafSp(ye,yu,Sa),sa] from (11), or
                                                                                          25


                            hm   + hsp(ye,yu,Sa) + haSa
       ya(Ye,Yu,Sa) =
(35)                              h +   h+
It turns out to be more convenientto express the arbitratorsinferencerule not as
                                where (28) yields
Sp(yeYuSa) but as Mk(Ye,yu,Sa),

                          - k)hm + hpsp(ye,yu,Sa)
(36)   M k(Ye,Yu,Sa) — (1
                             (1 - k)h +



Thislastpieceof notationmakes it possibleto state the sections main resultin a compact
form. (The proof of the Proposition is given in Appendix2.)


Proposition 3. For each k c (oo, co), there exists a separatingperfect Bayesian equilibrium

of the conventional arbitration game. In each of these equilibria, the arbitrators ideal (and
imposed)settlementis (35). For each fixed k, the parties offer strategiesare (30) and
(31), and the arbitrators inferencerule is


                             I                    C(Y)        Spuk(Yu) and Zk(5a) >

                                                if spek(Ye) = Spuk(Yu),
       Mk(ye,Yu,Sa)               y
                             L    Ye            if Spek(Ye)   Spuk(Yu) and zk(Sa)


Given k, the arbitrators ideal settlement can be written
                —             khm + hasp
       Ya = ak Yk + (i-ak) kh + ha             where

       —
        Yk
              (1-k)hm +     hs,           and
                  (i-k)h+h
             —   (l-k)h +   h
                 h .+   h + ha
         Several observations about this plethoraof equilibria are in order. First, as noted

earlier, all of the equilibria described in Proposition 3 are payoff-equivalent: even though

changes in k affectboth the mean of and the distancebetween the parties' offers,
differences in k are simply differencesin the languages used to communicate. Second, two

values   of k are simple to interpret: k =0 and k = 1. When k =0, (28) becomesMk(Sp) =

M(s), so in equilibriumthe arbitrator interprets y as the parties' expectationof s given 5p
When k = 1, (28) becomesMk(Sp) = s, so in equilibriumthe arbitratorinterpretsy as Sp

itself. And third, in the separating equilibrium th k =0 the parties' offers in conventional
arbitration are identical to their offers in the separating equilibriumin fmal-offerarbitration

described in Section 4.
         Although the inferencerule M(ye,yu,sa) stated in the Proposition dependson

knife-edgejudgments by the arbitrator(i.e., whetherSk(Ye) = Sp(Yu) or not), it has the
same spirit as a decision rule that seems reasonable in practice: The arbitrator gives both

parties the opportunityto presenttheir cases fully and to challenge assertions in the others
case. Afterwards,when all the cards are supposedto be on the table, the arbitratorasks the

parties whether they can now resolve their dispute.   If they cannot, then the arbitrator
(thinking that reasonable people should by this point agree) conducts an investigation,

compares the result to the parties' claims, and throws the book at the party who seems to
have made the less reasonable claim. Note that this inferencerule has the virtue of

supporting a separating equilih-ium and so providing the arbitratorwith the maximum
amount of information in imposinga settlement. Thus, for any k, the decision nile
described in Proposition3 would be an optimal rule if the arbitrator could commit.
                                                                                                       27



6. Relationship of the Learning Models to the Empirical Literature

       This section describesthe connections between the empirical literatureon arbitration
and the learning models developedin Sections 4 and 5. As described in the Introduction,
much of the empirical work on arbitratorbehaviorassumes the followingmodel of the
arbitratorsideal settlement:


        ya=aY+()Y*(O.

As Propositions 2 and 3 emphasize, the arbitratorsequilibriumbehaviorin this paper takes
                                                                       for the empirical
exactly this form. The paper thus provides a structural interpretation
literatures reducedform model: in both conventional and final-offer arbitration, the
arbitrators ideal settlementdependson the parties offers because the offers convey
information, and the importance of the offers (as measured by ct) increases as the
                                                                  observable information and
importance of this information increases relative to the publicly
the arbitrator's independentinvestigation(i.e.. as hp increases relative to h and ha).4
      The paper also fits nicely with two of the stylized facts uncovered by the empirical
work. The first stylizedfact is that the arbitrator's ideal settlement is identicalin the two
forms of arbitration;see Ashenfelter-Bloom and Farber-Bazerman. The separating

equilibria in the learningmodels analyzed here are founded on just such
                                                                        an invariantnotion

of an ideal settlement: under any form of arbitration, if the arbitratorperfectly infers 5p from
the parties' offers then the ideal settlementis Mpa(sp,sa) given in (11).




4This structural interpretation is incorrect in the conventional arbitration equilibria in which cq> 1, which
occur when k < -(ha/li), but empirical estimates suggest that ct < 1.
                                                                                                  28


        The second stylized fact is that the parties' offers are more importantin the
arbitrators decision-making(i.e., cx is higher) when they are closer together; see Farber-
Bazerrnan. The learningmodels in both Sections 4 and 5 predict that        a should be higher
when the offers are closer together, but suggest that this neednot be a causai relationship.

ConsiderProposition2, for instance. Note that a increases with hp. In equilibrium, the
difference between the offers in (25) and (26) is 'J2ic / H', where H'    is given by (24) and
also increases with hp. Thus, an increasein     h results in both an increasein a and a
decreasein the difference between the offers, thereby producing the observedcorrelation.
The causal story behind the correlation is as follows. The arbitratorputs more weighton
the parties' offers when the parties' information is known to be more precise,and hence
more valuablein the arbitrator's inferenceprocess. At the same time, when the parties'

information   is more precise, the parties' belief about the arbitrator'sprivate signal, Sa, is
more precise,and this causes the parties to submit offers that are closer together.

        The model of final-offerarbitration developed in Section 4 does          correspond
well to one other stylized fact: Ashenfelter and Bloom find that the union's offer is selected

as the settlement more than half the time, whereas in Section 4 the parties' offers are

equally likely to be selected. Farber'smodel of final-offer arbitration withoutlearningis
consistentwith the Ashenfelter-Bloom finding if the union is more risk-averse than is the

employer, and so prefers to submit a conservative offer with a large probability     of being
chosen rather than an aggressivoffer with a small probability. It wouldbe interesting to

knowwhether a learningmodel withparties of differing risk aversion could inteate the
Ashenfelter-Bloom findingon offer-selection frequencies with the role of the parties' offers

in the arbitrator's inferenceprocess emphasized here.
                                                                                           29



7. Extensions

         Although this papersatisfies threeof the conditions that will be required of a

complete theory of arbitration, much work remains to be done, both in extending the
models analyzed above and in building new models. This section is limited to describing

two extensionsof the models analyzed aboveand to providing furtherdiscussion of the

papers two most importantassumptions.


7a.   arinc Conventional and Final-OfferArbitration
         This paper analyzes conventional and final-offerarbitration within   a single
economicenvironment. As explainedin the Introduction,this is a prerequisite for a

complete theory of arbitration. The obviousnext step is a welfare comparisonof these and
other forms of arbitration. Unfortunately, the model analyzedhere is not rich enoughto
make the comparisoninteresting. First, because the parties are risk-neutral and have

strictly opposed preferences, any preferenceby one party for one form of arbitrationwould
be exactly reversedfor the other party. And second, the arbitratorclearlycannot improve

upon the separating equilibrium in conventional arbitration, wherethe ideal settlementis
basedon full informationand the actual settlement is unconstrained.
         A more interestingcomparison might arise if the parties were risk-averse. If a

separatingequilibriumexists in conventional arbitration when the parties are risk-averse
then this will again be the arbitrator's preferred form of arbitration. The parties, however,

might find that final-offerarbitration offersbetterinsurance than conventional arbitration
does. If the parties are allowedto choose the form of arbitrationthen the arbitrator's

preferencefor conventional arbitration may be overridden.
7b, Modeling OtherForms of Arbitration

         Ashenfelter, Dow, and Gallagher (1986) study an interestingvariant of final-offer

arbitration that is practicedin Iowa. The rules are as follows: first, an arbitrator, acting as a
factfinder, suggests a settlement; then the parties either accept the settlementor continue

their dispute and submit offers; finally, if the dispute continues then a second arbitrator

(drawn from the same pool as the first) chooses one of the parties' offers       the faodinders

proposed settlement.
         It is straightlorward   to extend the model described in Section 4 in order to analyze

this version of fmal-offerarbitration. Supposethe factfindersinvestigationyields the

signal   s=   s   + e, where Cf is Normal withzero mean and precision hf and is independentof

the other random variables in the model.Then (as in the conventional-arbitration model of
Section 5) the factfinder'sproposed settlementshould be yf(sf) = Mf(Sf), given by       (9).   The
rest of the model is as before. except for two changes. First, both parties and the second
arbitratorupdate their beliefs after observing the factfinder'sproposal. And second, the
second arbitratornow has a third choice in the feasible set of imposedsettlements.

         Ashenfelter, Dow, and Gallagherargue that the "extent to which the second
arbitratordoes not concur in the factfmder'sproposal is an obvious measureof the degree
of arbin-al uncertainty that exists in the system" (p. 2). While this interpretation is certainly
plausible, the disagreement between arbitrators also may reflect the second arbitrator's

learning from the parties' offers.


7c. Commitment by the Arbitrator

         One of the two importantassumptions in this paper is that the arbitratoris unable to
commit ex-ante to a decision rule, even though this mightinduce a socially desirable
                                                                                           31



outcome of the negotiation and arbitration process. This assumption seems to represent
observedpractice accurately: arbitrators do not commit to decision rules before the parties
make their offers. On the other hand, the assumptionignores the importantpossibility that
an arbitrator might develop a reputation in the course of repeated play. The arbitrator-
selection mechanisms described and analyzed by Bloom and Cavanagh(1986a,b) will play

an importantrole in the eventualanalysis of such dynamic games. Becausethe complete
dynamic analysis is likely to be difficult,however, it wouldbe worthwhileto analyzethe
models that complement this paper---static models in which the arbitratoris allowedto

commit to a decision rule ex-ante. As noted in Section 5, each of the continuum of decision
rules described there is an optimalrule if the arbitrator can commit in conventional
arbitration. The natureof the analogous optimalrule undercommitment in final-offer

arbitrationis an open question.


7d. Arbitration BetweenParties with Symmetric Information
       The second important assumption in this paper is that the parties have symmetric
informationabout the state of the employment relationship.    It seems likely, instead,that
each of the parties will have private information about some aspects of the employment

relationship. Such an information asymmenybetween the parties may influenceboth the
means and the substanceof the parties' equilibrium communication with the arbitrator.

Perhaps more importantly, it promptsthe questionof how the parties came to be in
arbimation.

        The theory of bargainingunder symmetricinformation,due to Nash (1950) and
Rubinstein (1982), suggeststhat negotiationsshould not fail when information is

symmetric, especiallywhen the arbitration game that followsfailed negotiations imposes
                                                                                               32


 costs (such as the arbitrators fee) on the parties. This does not imply, however, that the

 prospectof arbitration has no effect. Crawford (1982a), for instance, analyzes the way
 arbitration changes the threat point in a Nash bargaining game: arbitration has an effect even

 though the bargainersnever fail to settle, Crawford's analysis involvesmodels of
 conventional and final-offerarbitration without learning. The analogous analysis using this

 paper's learningmodels seemslikelyto imply that the prospectof arbitration has a smaller
effect on negotiated settlements when learning is more important, because learninglinks the
arbitrated settlement to the state and so preventsa disadvantaged bargainerfrom escaping

an unattractive negotiated settlement through arbitration by an uninformedarbitrator,

        Thus, the prospectof arbitration between parties with symmetricinformation can

have an effect even if the parties neverenter arbitration. Furthermore, in richer models than
those developed by Nash and Rubinstein, disputes      g   occur between parties with

symmetric information. Crawford (1982b), for instance, formalizes Schelling's(1956)
view that bargaining is a struggle between the bargainers to commit themselvesto favorable

positions. Attempts at commitment are uncertainto succeed, but are irreversibleif they do.
if only one party's attempt succeeds then that party wins a favorablenegotiatedsettlement,
but if the parties are both committed to incompatible positionsthen negotiations fail and
arbitration may occur. A model based on these ideas can produce disputes between parties

with symmetric information,but more work needs to be done in modelingthe process of
commitment.

        One intriguing approach to modeling the process of commitment emphasizes the
idea that the parties are groups rather than individuals; see Walton and McKersie (1965). A
union leader, for example, can try to incite and yet control the rank and file, but internal

politics and group dynamics may make the rank and file's reactionsbeyond the union
                                                                                          33



leaders control.   In this case, the union   leader may become committedin the sense

envisioned by Schellingand Crawford. Alternatively, when the parties are groups a
                                                                                         their
dispute may occur because of asymmetric information between them about features of
relationshipthat are of no concern to the arbitrator, including perhaps the career concerns of
individual negotiators. In this case, with regard to the learningin the arbitrators inference

problem the parties are appropriately viewedas having symmetric information,even though
asymmetric information on another dimension caused the dispute. These possibilities
                                                                               a firm and a
suggest that it may be a mistake to take too literally models that approximate
union as single-agentbargainers.
                                                                                                     34



                                                   APPENDIX 1


       This appendix establishes the globaloptiniality of the offers that satisfy the first-
order conditions (5) and (6), (16) and (17), (25) and (26), and (30) and (31). An explicit

proof is given for the union'soffer specifiedin (5), All the other cases are analogous.
       Let the union's expected payoffgiven in (1) be denoted


(Al)   U(y         Ye)
                         = ye F(y) + Yu [1-F(y)],


where y = (Yu +ye)/2 is the average of the offers and F is a Normal distribution with mean
M and precision H. In this notation, the first-ordercondition(3) is simply U'(y            Ye)   = 0,
wheretheprimedenotesa derivative with respect to y, and


                         = [l-F(y)]
(A2)   U'(Yu   I
                                      Yu -

The goal   of this appendix is to prove that Yu = M +        -7I    achieves   the global maximumof

U(y I Yea') where ye* M - 'ht/2H from (6).
       It suffices to prove that U is quasi-concavein y when ye = ye*. This is done in
two parts. The first establishes that U is concavefor Yu a [ve* , M + DJ, where D > 0.

And the second establishestha i]             <0 for Yu (M + d, o), where 0 <d <D. (Recall that
union offers below the employer'soffer are sub-optimalfor the union, and so need not be

consideredhere,)
       The concavity of U on          [ye*   , M + D] follows from evaluating U" on this interval:
                                                                                         35



(A3)    U"(y     Ye*) =    f(y*) -    (Yu - Ye*)f(Y*),




where  y = (Yu            /2.   For the Normal disuibudon with mean M and precision H,
        = H(y*M)f(y*),so


(A4)    U"(y I Ye*) = f(v*){I + Yu y*)(y*                M)},



which is negativefor (Yu M)2                  +    =

        The negative slope of U on (M + d, oo) follows from a simple inequality:



(A5)    H(y* - M) [1-     (y*)J <f(v*)

This inequalityfollows from integrating (x - y*) f(x) over (y*,) when x is Normal with
mean M and precision H. Given (A2) and (A5), it suffices to show that


(A6)    (Yu Ye*)(Y*   M) >


which holds for (yu - M)2 >
                                 -   (4   -       d2
                                                                                              36


                                         APPENI)IX 2


        This appendix proves Proposition3. The proof that the arbitrator'sstrategy is a

sequentiallyrational best responseto the parties' strategiesis simple. Using (33), the
inferencerule Mk(Ye,YU,Sa) given in the Propositioncan be expressed as the inference rule

5p(YeYu*5a) used in (35),    This inferencerule is clearly correctin equilibrium and is well
defined off the equilibrium path; given this belief, (35) guarantees sequentialrationality.

        The proofthat the parties' strategiesare best responsesto each other and to the
arbitrator'sstrategy is slightly more involved. The central point is that out of equilibrium in
the conventional-arbitrationgame, it is as though the arbitratormakes the parties play a
final-offergame that has a uniqueNash equilibriumthat yieldsboth parties the expected

payoff Mk(sp), which equals their equilibriumexpectedpayoff in conventionalarbitration,
Consider the payoff to, say, the employerfrom submittingan offer different from the

equilibriumoffer given by (31). (A deviation by the union is analyzed symmetrically.) By
hypothesis,the union's offer will be given by (30), so any deviation by the employer will
cause 5pek(Ye)   Spuk(Yu)'   This in turn causes the arbitratorto use one of the two out-of-

equilibrium parts of the inferencenile M(ye,y,s) specifiedin the Proposition.
Therefore,the problem of finding the optimal misleadingclaim,      5k for the employer to
submit in the conventional-arbitrationgame is equivalentto the problem of finding the

optimal offer, Ye' for the employerto submit in the final-offer game analyzed in the text.
But the solutionto this second problemis given by (31) and yields a payoff identical to the

employer's equilibrium payoff in the conventional-arbitrationgame. Thus, no deviation is
profitable.
                                                                                        37


                                           REFERENCES


 Ashenfelter,0. and D, Bloom, 'Models of ArbitratorBehavior: Theory and Evidence,"
        American Economic Review, 74(1984), 111-24.
__________     J.   Dow, and D. Gallagher, "Arbitratorand NegotiationBehavior under an

        Appelate System," Princetonmimeo, August 1986.
Bloom, D., "Empirical Models of ArbitratorBehavior Under ConventionalArbitration,"
        Review of Economics and Statistics, 68 (1986), 578-85.

__________ and C. Cavanagh, "An Analysisof the Selection of Arbitrators,"American

        Economic Review, 76 (1986a), 408-22.
__________and __________, "An Analysis of Alternative Mechanisms for Selecting
        Arbitrators," Harvard Instituteof Economic Research D.P. # 1224, April 1986b.
Crawford,V., "CompulsoryArbitration,Arbitral Risk, and NegotiatedSettlements: A
        Case Study in Bargaining Under ImperfectInformation," Review of Economic

        Studies, 49 (1982a), 69-82.
__________,"A Theory of Disagreementin Bargaining,"Econometrica,50 (1982b), 607-
        637.
__________ and J. Sobel, "Strategic InformationTransmission,"Economeu-ica, 50

       (1982), 1431-1451.
DeGroot, M., Otima1 Statistical Decisions,New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970.
Farber, H., "An Analysis of Final-Offer Arbitration,' Journal of Conflict Resolution, 35
       (1980), 683-705.
                                                                                   38



_________ and M. Bazerman,"The General Basis of ArbitratorBehavior: An Empirical
     Analysis of Conventionaland Final-OfferArbitration, Econometrica,54 (1986),
       819-44.
Grossman, S. and 0. Hart, "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership:A Theory of Vertical
       and Lateral Integration,"Journal of Political Economy,94 (1986), 691-719.

Kalal, E. and R. Rosenthal, "Arbitrationof Two-PartyDisputes Under Ignorance,"
       International Journal of Game Theory, 7 (1979), 65-72.

Nash, J., "The Bargaining Problem,' Econometrica. 18 (1950), 155-162.

Rubinstein,A., "Perfect Equilibriumin a BargainingModel," Econometrica,50 (1982),
       97-109.
Schelling,T., "AnEssay on Bargaining," American Economic Review, 46 (1956), 557-
       73.

Stevens, C., "Is CompulsoryArbitration Compatiblewith Bargaining?," Industrial

       B.j.jon, 5 (1966), 38-52.
Walton, R. and R. McKersie,A BehavioralTheory of Labor Negotiations. New York:
       McGraw-Hill Co., 1965.
Williamson, 0., Markets and Hierarchies, New York: The Free Press, 1975.
