                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MEASURING OPPORTUNITY IN U.S. HIGHER EDUCATION

                                       Caroline M. Hoxby
                                          Sarah Turner

                                       Working Paper 25479
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25479


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors acknowledge constructive comments from
Sandy Baum, Sandra Black, John Bound, Damon Clark, Paul Courant, David Ellwood, Joshua
Goodman, Michael McPherson, Richard Murnane, David Neumark, Jeffrey Smith, Christopher
Taber, Martin West, and participants in several scholarly seminars and conferences. The authors
also acknowledge helpful feedback from a number of government staff and a number of persons
involved in academic governance. The data in this paper were previously generated as
descriptive statistics used in the writing of Hoxby and Avery (2013) and Hoxby (2015a). We
therefore gratefully acknowledge those who helped us with those projects including The College
Board, ACT, and (under contracts TIR-NO-12-P-00378 and TIR-NO-15-P-00059 ) Barry W.
Johnson, Michael Weber, and Brian Raub of the Statistics of Income Division, Internal Revenue
Service.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Caroline M. Hoxby and Sarah Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Opportunity in U.S. Higher Education
Caroline M. Hoxby and Sarah Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 25479
January 2019
JEL No. H0,H75,I20,I22,I23,I24,I32

                                         ABSTRACT

In identifying whether universities provide opportunities for low-income students, there is a
measurement challenge: different institutions face students with different incomes and
preparation. We show how a hypothetical university's “relevant pool”–the students from whom it
could plausibly draw–affects popular measures: the Pell share, Bottom Quintile share, and
Intergenerational Mobility. Using a proof by contradiction, we demonstrate that universities
ranked highly on the popular measures can actually serve disproportionately few low-income
students. We also show the reverse: universities slated for penalties on the popular measures can
actually serve disproportionately many low-income students. Furthermore, the Intergenerational
Mobility measure penalizes universities that face relatively equal income distributions, which are
probably good for low-income students, and rewards universities that face very unequal income
distributions. In short, by confounding differences in university effort with differences in
circumstances, the popular measures could distort university decision making and produce
unintended consequences. We demonstrate that, with well-thought-out data analysis, it is possible
to create benchmarks that actually measure what they are intended to measure. In particular, we
present a measure that overcomes the deficiencies of the popular measures and is informative
about all, not just low-income, students.


Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Building, 579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
choxby@stanford.edu

Sarah Turner
University of Virginia
Department of Economics
Monroe Hall, Room 237
248 McCormick Rd
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
sturner@virginia.edu
                    MEASURING OPPORTUNITY
                   IN U.S. HIGHER EDUCATION

                 Caroline M. Hoxby and Sarah Turner†

                                      Abstract
In identifying whether universities provide opportunities for low-income
students, there is a measurement challenge: different institutions face students
with different incomes and preparation. We show how a hypothetical
university's "relevant pool"-the students from whom it could plausibly
draw-affects popular measures: the Pell share, Bottom Quintile share, and
Intergenerational Mobility. Using a proof by contradiction, we demonstrate
that universities ranked highly on the popular measures can actually serve
disproportionately few low-income students. We also show the reverse:
universities slated for penalties on the popular measures can actually serve
disproportionately many low-income students.                Furthermore, the
Intergenerational Mobility measure penalizes universities that face relatively
equal income distributions, which are probably good for low-income students,
and rewards universities that face very unequal income distributions. In short,
by confounding differences in university effort with differences in
circumstances, the popular measures could distort university decision making
and produce unintended consequences.            We demonstrate that, with
well-thought-out data analysis, it is possible to create benchmarks that
actually measure what they are intended to measure. In particular, we present
a measure that overcomes the deficiencies of the popular measures and is
informative about all, not just low-income, students.


†
  The authors' affiliations are, respectively, Stanford University and the National
Bureau of Economic Research and University of Virginia and the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The authors acknowledge constructive comments from Sandy
Baum, Sandra Black, John Bound, Damon Clark, Paul Courant, David Ellwood, Joshua
Goodman, Michael McPherson, Richard Murnane, David Neumark, Jeffrey Smith,
Christopher Taber, Martin West, and participants in several scholarly seminars and
conferences. The authors also acknowledge helpful feedback from a number of
government staff and a number of persons involved in academic governance. The data
in this paper were previously generated as descriptive statistics used in the writing of
Hoxby and Avery (2013) and Hoxby (2015a). We therefore gratefully acknowledge
those who helped us with those projects including The College Board, ACT, and (under
contracts TIR-NO-12-P-00378 and TIR-NO-15-P-00059 ) Barry W. Johnson, Michael
Weber, and Brian Raub of the Statistics of Income Division, Internal Revenue Service.

                                           1
Hoxby & Turner             Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          1 Introduction
              Higher education may be one of the most important channels
          through which people can attain improved life outcomes based on
          their merit rather than family background. If qualified students
          from lower-income families are underrepresented in higher
          education-owing to credit constraints, information barriers, or
          other obstacles-there is potentially a failure not just in equity but
          economic efficiency.
              The question of which institutions lag (or lead) in providing
          opportunities for low-income students has become a front-line
          issue in national policy discussions. Legislative initiatives such
          as the Senate's ASPIRE Act propose to rank institutions on their
          representation of low-income students and to impose financial
          penalties on institutions below a certain ranking.1 And, the most
          recent version of the U.S. News and World Report Rankings
          include a measure of "social mobility." Other news outlets such as
          The New York Times and Washington Monthly have prominently
          published rankings of colleges based on representation of
          low-income students, while taking editorial positions excoriating
          individual institutions and demanding policies based on such
          measures.2
              Unfortunately, these initiatives ignore a thorny measurement


          1
            In December 2017, Senators Chris Coons (D-Del.) and Johnny Isakson (R-Ga.)
          introduced the Access, Success, and Persistence In Reshaping Education Act (ASPIRE
          Act, S.2201 - 115th Congress).The U.S. Department of Education ("ED") has been
          working on a plan to reward and penalize colleges based on their Pell or Bottom
          Quintile shares. Several states already give larger appropriations to colleges that are
          ranked higher on one of these indices. ED (2018) continues to pursue a "College Ratings
          Framework." The National Conference of State Legislatures (2018) identifies 10 states
          that appropriate funds on the basis of the Pell Share. Private funders such as the
          Bloomberg Philanthropies' American Talent Initiative give funds to institutions based
          on their Pell Shares.
          2
            Further, an editorial in The New York Times (2014) demanded that the federal
          government "set minimum performance standards for all colleges receiving federal aid:
          at least 17 percent enrollment of poor and working-class students .…" The New York
          Times used the measures to single out individual institutions in articles such as
          "Virginia, Betraying Jefferson" (Leonhardt, 2017b).

                                                    2
Hoxby & Turner         Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          challenge, one that can turn good intentions into penalties for
          institutions that are actually succeeding in providing
          opportunities for low-income students and trigger rewards for
          institutions that are far less successful than they might appear.
          What makes measurement challenging is that different
          institutions face students whose family income and preparation
          differ.
               Suppose that the University of Maine and University of
          Connecticut enroll all students from their respective states who
          fit their academic standards, as defined by receiving a score on a
          college admissions test that is within the range of most students
          currently enrolled. Based on the different populations of their
          states, the University of Maine would draw 22 percent of its
          students from families with incomes below $40,000, while the
          University of Connecticut would draw only 10 percent of its
          students from this income range. The University of Maine would
          be judged much more favorably by popular measures of
          "opportunity" and rewarded by proposed accountability systems,
          while the University of Connecticut would be penalized. However,
          those rewards and penalties could not result from their
          differential success in enrolling low-income students since, in the
          example, all relevant students enroll at each university,
          regardless of their incomes. The universities would be rewarded
          based on their circumstances, not their behavior or effort.
               More generally, popular measures of "opportunity" confound
          differences in universities' effort with differences in their
          circumstances. Specifically, while the measures mean to measure
          a university's effort to enroll well-qualified low-income students,
          what they actually measure can largely reflect differences in the
          pools of students from whom the universities could plausibly
          draw. The popular measures include a university's share of




                                          3
Hoxby & Turner            Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          students who receive federal Pell grants (the "Pell Share")3, the
          share whose family income is in the bottom 20 percent of the
          national family income distribution (the "Bottom Quintile"
          measure), and the Intergenerational Mobility ("IGM") measure
          based on the percentage of enrolled students whose families are
          in the bottom 20 percent but who as adults end up in the top 20
          percent of the national income distribution. That is, the IGM
          measure multiples the Bottom Quintile measure by an estimate
          of the probability that a Bottom Quintile student at the school
          ends up in the top quintile of the national income distribution.
              Does a university that does well on these popular measures
          necessarily have more successful policies for recruiting
          low-income students than a university that does poorly on these
          measures? As we show in this analysis, the answer is no.
              To be clear, we are not criticizing the intentions behind the
          efforts to measure the success of institutions in providing
          opportunities for low-income students. Rather, we are attempting
          to give higher education leaders the understanding and tools
          needed to conduct self-evaluation that is likely to further those
          good intentions.

          A. What this Analysis Attempts to Do
              Our analysis has two main aims. First, we provide a proof by
          contradiction. That is, we demonstrate that some universities
          slated for rewards based on the popular measures actually serve
          relatively few low-income students from their pool. The reverse
          is also true: some universities that are slated for penalties based
          on the popular measures actually serve disproportionately many
          low-income students from their pool. Thus, measurement
          matters greatly in this context: judging institutions using the
          popular measures is likely to produce unintended outcomes


          3
            Tebbs and Turner (2005) discuss other reasons-such as adult and international
          students-why the Pell Share is problematic.

                                                4
Hoxby & Turner         Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          because they often give the wrong answer.
              Second, in order to demonstrate that metrics that measure
          what they intend to measure are available, we construct a new
          measure of a university's success in providing opportunities to
          low-income students. Specifically, we show how to construct a
          university's "relevant pool"-the pool of students from which it
          could plausibly draw based on its academic mission and
          geographic location. We illustrate how to compare a university's
          students to its relevant pool, and we demonstrate that such
          comparisons are highly informative—not just to show how the
          university serves low-income students but how it serves all
          students.
              The Pell, Bottom Quintile, and IGM measures could be
          regarded as reasonable proxies for universities' effort in
          recruiting low-income students if, when tested, they proved to be
          closely aligned with measures based on universities' relevant
          pools. However, we show that they are not, in fact, closely
          aligned and are, therefore, measuring something (a university's
          circumstances) that is different from what they are intended to
          measure (a university's effort). Even worse—because "top
          performers" and "bottom performers" receive most of the
          attention—is if the popular measures identify top performance as
          bottom performance and vice versa. Unfortunately, as we show,
          such top-to-bottom inversions do occur, and they affect some very
          salient universities.
              In addition to our two main aims, we discuss the IGM
          measure in some detail because it appears to us that it may be
          substantially misunderstood. We show that it shares the issues
          that affect the Bottom Quintile measure but, moreover, that it
          has additional issues that lead it to punish universities that face
          relevant pools with high levels of income equality. It rewards
          universities that face relevant pools with very high levels of
          income inequality —for instance, universities located in
          California. Since the IGM measure penalizes income equality


                                          5
Hoxby & Turner          Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          rises and rewards income inequality, it may fail to embody its
          intended uses.
              This paper concludes with a broad discussion of the process by
          which universities might evaluate themselves on the degree to
          which they are providing the opportunities that fulfill their
          educational missions. We also discuss why universities might
          benefit from such a process, which involves both self-examination
          (as to mission) and data-based metrics that measure what they
          intend to measure (such as the degree to which the university is
          enrolling low-income students from its relevant pool).

          B. What this Analysis Does Not Attempt to Do
              Having said what we attempt, it is worth saying what we do
          not attempt. Although we suggest methods by which schools
          could judge whether they are accomplishing their educational
          missions, we do not seek to define those missions. These differ in
          terms of the backgrounds and preparation of the students served.
          For instance, Berea College states that its mission is: "To provide
          an educational opportunity for students of all races, primarily
          from Appalachia, who have great promise and limited economic
          resources." This statement defines Berea's relevant pool (all
          races, primarily Appalachian, of great promise) and its income
          representation goal (disproportionate emphasis on low-income
          students). The methods we propose would allow Berea to judge
          itself against its own mission, but we do not propose to impose a
          mission on Berea.
              Precisely because we do not want to impose missions on
          universities, we use examples drawn from states' most selective
          or "flagship" public universities for our proof by contradiction and
          our illustration of a sound way to measure opportunity. We use
          them because their key undergraduate mission and constraints
          are a matter of public record—largely to educate well-prepared
          students from their own state. Thus, we know approximately
          how they would define their relevant pools, and we can construct


                                           6
Hoxby & Turner              Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          those pools with a fair degree of confidence. However, the
          measurement issues we confront apply just as much to
          non-flagship institutions that are more or less selective and
          public, nonprofit, or for-profit. Even universities like Harvard and
          Stanford, which claim to recruit students nationally, in fact have
          relevant pools that differ substantially owing to strong
          geographical skews.
              Although flagships' missions and constraints are quite public
          and the pools we construct for them are grounded in empirical
          evidence about their behavior, we emphasize that our
          assumptions are meant only to facilitate illustration. They do not
          preclude a university specifying alternative parameters.
              Moreover, we do not attempt—in this analysis—to answer
          fundamental questions such as (i) why students' preparation
          varies with family background; (ii) why different institutions
          have curricula and resources designed to serve students with
          different levels of preparation; and (iii) why students often prefer
          more proximate institutions even when not constrained to attend
          them. These questions are of absorbing interest to us and other
          economists of higher education, but we stick to a simpler question
          in this paper: Given the curricula offered by various institutions
          (which implicitly constrain the students for whom their offerings
          generate a high return), given the legal and market conditions
          under which institutions operate (which affect how attractive
          they are to out-of-state or otherwise distant students), and given
          the correlation between income and preparation, how can we
          measure an institution's enrollment of students from across the
          income distribution?4


          4
           We and others investigate such questions in prior and continuing research. Among
          the important explanations are: (i) market forces that tend to align educational
          investments with students' capacity to benefit from them; (ii) market forces that induce
          institutions to offer skills demanded by local employers; (iii) forces that induce
          institutions to minister to students with preparation typical of local high schools; (iv)
          states' structuring their public postsecondary sectors in accordance with their
          populations sizes and with economies of scale and scope.

                                                     7
Hoxby & Turner          Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          2.    How a University is Affected by                          the
          Income-Achievement Distribution of its Pool
             Consider a hypothetical university that enrolls a student body
          that is fully representative of its relevant pool. How is an
          indicator such as the Bottom Quintile measure affected by the
          divergence between the relevant pool's and nation's
          income-achievement distribution?
             To illustrate the issues, we assume that the relevant pool's
          and nation's distributions of income and preparation are bivariate
          normal and differ only by mean achievement, mean income, the
          variance of achievement, the variance of income, and the
          covariance of achievement and income. Think of these means and
          variances as representing differences across
          geographically-defined pools. The illustration varies these
          characteristics over ranges inspired by their ranges among U.S.
          states.
             To represent most U.S. schools, we vary the university's
          curriculum to be designed for:
             i. "open enrollment"—that is, designed to serve students
             whose preparation is above the 25th percentile, approximately
             those who attain a high school diploma on-time;
             ii. students who achieve above the median on a national basis
             (for instance, flagship universities associated with
             certain—usually small population—states);
             iii. students who achieve in the top quartile on a national
             basis;
             iv. students who achieve in the top decile on a national basis
             (for instance, the most selective several flagship universities).

             Although we attempt to select reasonable ranges to
          characterize the distributions of income and achievement, keep
          in mind that this is a hypothetical exercise designed to show
          what happens as we change each mean and variance, keeping the



                                           8
Hoxby & Turner              Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          others the same. Below, we provide evidence based on real
          universities' pools.
              Table 1 varies the earnings and achievement distributions
          (rows) and preparation required at different levels of college
          selectivity (columns), showing striking implications for the
          Bottom Quintile measure. (The results would be similar if we
          showed the Pell Share.) The first row shows the case in which
          the university draws from all the nation. Even for an open
          enrollment school in this case, the percentage of the university's
          pool that falls into the Bottom Quintile is only 14.7 percent. It is
          14.7 percent, as opposed to 20 percent, because drop-outs are
          concentrated in the bottom income percentiles.5 Moreover, the
          Bottom Quintile share falls as we increase the preparation
          expected of potential students, dropping to 11.1 percent at the
          50th percentile and then to 5.1 percent at institutions with a
          curriculum designed for top decile students.
              Changing the mean income of the area from which a
          university draws its relevant pool, shown in the next two rows,
          illustrates how circumstances affect a university's Bottom
          Quintile measure.6 Facing a high income area, even an open
          enrollment university has a Bottom Quintile share of only 7.0

          5
            Empirically, students who lack college-readiness are concentrated at the bottom of the
          income distribution. For instance, in the American Community Survey ("ACS" 2015),
          12 percent of 18 year olds in the bottom income decile are high school dropouts. This
          percentage declines monotonically as we move to higher deciles. Chetty et al (2017) do
          not condition on any measure of preparation (not even age-for-grade) and therefore set
          the threshold for their Bottom Quintile measure well below the 20th percentile among
          students reasonably likely to obtain a high school diploma on-time. Chetty et al's
          (2017) threshold is $25,000 for the 1980 birth cohort whereas it is about $31,000 if we
          use the nationally representative ACS and merely eliminate drop-outs and the
          institutionalized (most of whom are in juvenile detention and are not ready to enroll in
          college). In fact, among students who are not drop-outs or institutionalized, $25,000
          is approximately the 16th percentile of income, not the 20th percentile. The foregoing
          statistics are for the 1980 birth cohort when they are age 17, based on the ACS 3-year
          file 2006-2008.
          6
            Such changes correspond to a university serving an area with average income that
          differs from the nation. Our high (low) mean income assumption is 70 (30) compared
          to 50 for the nation. If we set the nation's mean income to 50, a state with mean income
          of about 70 is Connecticut. A state with mean income of about 30 is New Mexico.

                                                     9
Hoxby & Turner             Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          percent. It is a mere 1.9 percent if the university serves students
          with preparation in the top decile. In contrast, a university
          facing a low income area has a pool with a Bottom Quintile share
          of 26.3 percent if it is open enrollment and 11.0 percent if it
          serves students with top decile preparation.
              The next two rows change the variance of the income
          distribution, corresponding to areas in which incomes are more
          and less equal than they are nationally.7 In a more equal area,
          fewer families are in the national bottom quintile so there are
          fewer bottom quintile students who could attend any
          university—leading to a low Bottom Quintile share. Conversely,
          in an unequal area, the income distribution has fat tails, with the
          consequence that there are more students in families below the
          national 20th percentile—leading to a high Bottom Quintile
          share. The less equal the area, the higher is the Bottom Quintile
          share and vice versa.
              Low and high variance cases generate very different Bottom
          Quintile shares. For instance, a top-decile-serving university
          facing a relatively equal income distribution would find that only
          2.6 percent of its relevant pool was in the bottom quintile. If it
          were facing an unequal income distribution, 7.2 percent of its pool
          would be in the bottom quintile. It is important to grasp that the
          low and high variance cases are so different precisely because the
          quantile being considered is so low. The lower is the quantile, the
          more the tails of the distribution affect measurement. By
          focusing on the 20th percentile (as opposed to—say—the 40th),
          the Bottom Quintile measure exacerbates problems due to the
          relevant pool's having income equality that differs from that of
          the nation.




          7
            We change the coefficient of variation from the nation's average of 1 (which is
          approximately correct) to a low of 0.75 and a high of 1.25. Alaska resembles our low
          case and New York resembles our high case.

                                                  10
Hoxby & Turner              Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




              The next row of the table increases the correlation between
          income and achievement from 0.4 to 0.6.8 This has the effect of
          reducing the Bottom Quintile share greatly—especially at schools
          with curricula designed for those with top decile preparation.
          Those schools face a Bottom Quintile share that falls from an
          already low 5.0 percent to a minimal 1.2 percent as the
          achievement-income correlation rises.
              The final row of the table reduces mean preparation in a local
          area.9 This causes the Bottom Quintile share to fall for all
          universities. In a low achieving area, an open enrollment school
          would have only 12.6 percent of its students in the Bottom
          Quintile (relative to 14.7 percent in the national case) while a
          top-decile-serving university would have only 3.8 percent in the
          Bottom Quintile (relative to 5.1 percent in the national case).
              The highest Bottom Quintile share in the table is 26.3 percent;
          the lowest is 1.2 percent. These are very large differences that
          cannot be attributed to differential university "effort" (since that
          is assumed away in the exercise). These statistical matters seem
          to be greatly under-appreciated by analysts who attribute the
          differences in schools' ranking on the popular measures to
          institutional effort. They confound behavior with circumstances.




          8
            There is no ideal range of achievement-income correlations for consideration in our
          hypothetical example. The empirical correlation varies with scaling (whether
          achievement is measured in SAT points, for instance) and selection (how we deal with
          drop-outs and other students who do not take college assessments, for instance). One
          useful benchmark, though, is the correlation between a student's college assessment
          percentile (among test-takers) and his or her family's income percentile (among families
          who a child aged 17 who is approximately on-grade). This percentile-percentile
          correlation is about 0.37 for the nation-the reason that we first use a 0.4 correlation.
          U.S. states' correlations generally fall within 0.2 of the nation's.
          9
            If we normalize the nation's mean achievement to 50 (as in the example), then
          low-achieving states like Mississippi are in the 30s and high-achieving states like
          Minnesota are in the 60s.

                                                    11
Hoxby & Turner             Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          3. The Income Distribution of Academically Prepared
          Students Varies across States
              In this section, we begin our proof by contradiction by
          demonstrating that differences in real universities' relevant pools
          generate substantial issues for the popular measures. As
          examples, we use the main campuses of the flagship universities
          of Connecticut (Storrs), Maine (Orono), Illinois
          (Urbana-Champaign), Montana (Missoula), New Mexico
          (Albuquerque), and Wisconsin (Madison). We chose these
          universities because their relevant pools are distinct in ways that
          affect measurement. Since the main contributions of this analysis
          are the proof by contradiction and demonstration that sound
          measures are possible, we needed to choose interesting
          universities, not average ones. Our aim is certainly not to rank
          all universities—indeed, we deliberately refrain from doing so
          because it is a university's responsibility (and not the prerogative
          of outside economists) to define its mission and, thereby, its
          relevant pool.
              This analysis employs statistics from de-identified tax data
          and the population of college test takers that were constructed for
          use in Hoxby and Avery (2013) and Hoxby (2015a). The statistics
          are for the high school class of 2008.10
              To construct each university's relevant pool, we include all
          students from the state whose scores on a college assessment put
          them in their flagship's "core" preparation range. Universities
          report these core ranges—the 25th and 75th percentiles of the
          scores of their students—to the U.S. Department of Education
          and college guides. While selective universities consider multiple
          indicators of preparation and most practice holistic admissions,
          these core ranges efficiently summarize academic standards and
          are comparable across geographic areas as, for instance, letter


          10
            This facilitates comparison with Chetty et al (2017) who use approximately the same
          cohort but lack data on academic preparation.

                                                   12
Hoxby & Turner             Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          grades are not. (Our use of test scores should not be taken as
          indicating that we endorse their exclusive or formulaic use in
          admissions. Nor do we suggest that a university should define its
          relevant pool only in terms of test scores or geography.11 This is
          an illustration, not a policy prescription.)
              Figure 1 shows the relevant pool's income distribution for the
          flagship universities. The 20th, 40th, 60th, and 80th percentiles
          of each income distribution are marked to facilitate comparisons.
          For instance, compare the University of Connecticut and
          University of Maine distributions. Maine's 20th percentile is
          much lower than Connecticut's 20th percentile.            In fact,
          Connecticut's 20th percentile is approximately the same as
          Maine's 40th percentile. Connecticut's 40th percentile is midway
          between Maine's 60th and 80th percentiles. The Illinois-Montana
          comparison of relevant pools generates similar insights. Illinois'
          20th percentile is higher than Montana's 40th percentile, and
          Illinois' 40th percentile is between Montana's 60th and 80th
          percentiles. Clearly, if one sets any low-income threshold based
          on a national distribution, as the Pell and Bottom Quintile
          measures do, a larger share of Maine's or Montana's relevant pool
          will fall below it. These comparisons illustrate how universities
          could be penalized for facing higher income distributions
          (Connecticut, Illinois) or rewarded for facing lower ones (Maine,
          Montana, New Mexico).
             The University of Wisconsin's relevant pool is interesting
          because the state of Wisconsin has a relatively equal income
          distribution. (Notice that although Wisconsin's 40th, 60th, and
          80th percentiles are well below those of Connecticut and Illinois,
          Wisconsin's 20th percentile is about the same as theirs.)


          11
            Any observable student characteristic could be used be used to construct a pool of
          prospective applicants. For instance, a university could use students' high school
          grades, performance on their state's mandatory examinations, reported postsecondary
          goals, etc. If a university concludes that tests are biased against certain groups, it
          could construct its pool using test score ranges that differ by group.

                                                   13
Hoxby & Turner          Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          Wisconsin's income equality translates into relatively few
          students with very low incomes by national standards. Thus,
          Wisconsin's relatively equal income distribution—which is
          probably good for disadvantaged students—generates penalties
          for the university when it is evaluated on Bottom Quintile or Pell
          measures. Ironically, the university would be less penalized if
          Wisconsin had more unequal incomes—as does California, say.

          4. Relevant-Pool Based Measures of a University's
          Success in Enrolling Students from all Income
          Backgrounds
              By incorporating information on each university's relevant
          pool, we can address the measurement challenge and create a
          metric that measures what it intends to measure—namely,
          universities' effort rather than their circumstances. In this
          section, we illustrate this measure using the flagship universities
          we selected as examples.
              Figure 2 illustrates how the universities' in-state enrolled
          students' income distributions fit into the income distributions of
          their relevant pools. Specifically, we compute what percentage
          of each university's in-state students fall into each of the relevant
          pool's 5-percentile-wide bins. If the university is enrolling
          students of all incomes equally, each bin will contain 5 percent of
          students. We divide the bin's percentage by 5 so that the number
          1 is a useful marker on the "measuring stick." For instance, if the
          height of the 20th to 25th percentile bin is 1, then the university's
          representation of enrolled students from the 20th to 25th
          percentiles is exactly the same as their representation in the
          relevant pool. If the height is 1.5, the university's representation
          of enrolled students is 50 percent greater than their
          representation in the relevant pool. If the height is 0.5, its
          representation is 50 percent lower.
              Although 1 is useful marker, it is just a marker—not a
          mission we impose on schools. For instance, Berea College and

                                           14
Hoxby & Turner          Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          many other universities—public and private—that have a
          mission to serve disadvantaged students especially might want
          to see numbers above 1 for low-income students. A flagship
          university might be unconcerned if its numbers were less than 1
          for high-income students—especially if the school were aware
          that it offered opportunities to high-income students but that
          some chose to attend private universities with comparable
          curricula at their own expense (saving taxpayers' money, thereby,
          for potential reallocation to needier students).
              At each of the universities of Connecticut, Illinois, and
          Wisconsin, the height of the bars is consistently above 1 for
          enrolled students from low-income backgrounds—up through at
          least the 40th percentile of the relevant pool's income
          distribution. In other words, these universities recruit low-income
          students sufficiently effectively that such students'
          representation is disproportionately large. In contrast, the height
          of the bars is consistently below 1 for enrolled students from
          low-income backgrounds at the universities of Maine, Montana,
          and New Mexico-indicating that low-income students'
          representation is disproportionately small.
              At the universities of Connecticut, Illinois, and Wisconsin, the
          height of the bars for middle-income students is about 1,
          indicating that their representation is similar to their
          representation in the relevant pool. At the universities of Maine,
          Montana, and New Mexico, the height of the bars for
          middle-income students is consistently above 1, indicating that
          middle income students' representation is disproportionately
          large. Recall that, for the same schools, low-income students'
          representation was disproportionately small.
              At all six universities, the height of the bars tends to be below
          1 for high-income students. Although we cannot be sure, this is
          probably not due to the flagships' failing to provide upper-income
          students with opportunities but, rather, those students choosing
          to attend private universities at their own expense.


                                           15
Hoxby & Turner            Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




               These examples show the key advantages of our method:
               1. Unlike threshold-based metrics like the Pell, Bottom
               Quintile, and IGM measures, our method shows how each
               university is enrolling students across the whole of its
               relevant pool's income distribution. This comprehensiveness
               allows observers to take in the entire picture or focus on
               whatever part of the income distribution interests them.
               2. Our method provides a measuring stick but does not
               impose a mission on a university. A university can choose its
               own targets across the income distribution—which may
               include enrolling low-income students disproportionately
               3. Our method does not encourage perverse behavior such as
               neglecting students just above an arbitrary income threshold.
               This is unlike the popular measures that make such
               students—who may need substantial financial aid and
               encouragement—fail to count towards a university's ranking.
               Moreover, when—as in proposed federal legislation—all
               universities face rewards and penalties based on the same
               threshold, there is increased likelihood of an "arms race" to
               enroll threshold-eligible students (e.g. Pell students),
               exacerbating any tendency to focus aid on them at the expense
               of other modest-income students.

              Two comments are in order. First, because there is
          year-to-year variation in a university's applicants and relevant
          pool, a university might compromise its academic standards if it
          tries to achieve certain income representation targets each year,
          exactly. A university might want to employ moving averages or
          confidence intervals.12
              Second, a university might wish to assess the extent to which
          it has exhausted the pool of relevant students


          12
            Kane and Staiger (2002) note that schools overinterpreted year-to-year movements
          on accountability measures.

                                                 16
Hoxby & Turner         Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          or—alternatively—"left some on the table." It could do this by
          constructing a simple variant of Figure 2 that shows its
          "utilization rate": its number (not percentage) of enrolled
          students in each bin divided by the relevant pool's number of
          students in that bin. To assess pool exhaustion, the university
          would then need to consider the size of its class relative to its
          market. This is best explained with examples.
              Suppose that the University of Wyoming were assessing
          whether it had exhausted its pool. Since it is the only
          baccalaureate-granting public university in a state that has only
          one (tiny) private baccalaureate-granting institution, it might
          look for utilization rates fairly close to one as indicating
          exhaustion. (A rate of one would be overexhaustion because some
          Wyoming students attend out-of-state.) In contrast, a utilization
          rate that would indicate exhaustion for the University of
          California-Berkeley or University of California-Los Angeles
          would be well below 0.5. These two flagships share the same
          relevant pool and, moreover, have a pool that overlaps with those
          of numerous other public and private institutions in California
          and the West. And this is before accounting for California
          students' tendency to attend out-of-state.

          5. Proof by Contradiction QED: Popular Measures
          Generate Rankings in Which Schools that
          Disproportionately Enroll Low-Income Students from
          their Pools are "Bottom Performers" while Schools that
          Fail to Do So are "Top Performers"
             Acknowledging that threshold-based measures and rankings
          based on them are fundamentally flawed, it is nevertheless
          important to our proof by contradiction to compare rankings
          based on universities' relevant pools to rankings based on the Pell
          or Bottom Quintile measures to illustrate the magnitude of
          mismeasurement. We ranked all 50 flagship universities on the
          shares of their enrolled students whose family incomes fall below

                                          17
Hoxby & Turner         Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          the 20th and 40th percentiles of the relevant pool distribution.
          We also ranked the universities using the Pell and Bottom
          Quintile measures. The rankings are such that 1 is the "best" at
          enrolling low-income students according to the measure being
          used, and 50 is the "worst." See Table 2.
             The University of Illinois is ranked 2nd best on both of the
          relevant-pool-based measures. However, it is ranked 36th on the
          Pell measure and 26th on the Bottom Quintile measure.
          Similarly, the universities of Connecticut and Wisconsin are
          among the several best on the relevant-pool-based measures.
          However, they are in the bottom fifteen schools on the Pell and
          Bottom Quintile measures.
             Despite the fact that low-income students are
          well-represented in relation to the relevant pools at these three
          universities, policies based on the popular measures would
          punish these universities in various ways, because the mean
          income of their relevant pools is high, because their income
          distribution is relatively equal, or because of both.
             The University of Montana is ranked 47th and 40th
          on—respectively—the first and second relevant-pool-based
          measures. However, it is ranked 3rd on the Pell measure and 7th
          on the Bottom Quintile measure. Similarly, the universities of
          Maine and New Mexico rank among the bottom fifteen schools on
          the relevant-pool-based measures but rank in the top five on the
          Pell and Bottom Quintile measures. Therefore, despite their own
          states' low-income students being underrepresented at these
          universities, policies based on the popular measures would
          reward the universities of Montana, Maine, and New Mexico
          because they face relevant pools with low incomes, relatively
          unequal income distributions, or both.
             For our proof by contradiction, we selected six universities to
          demonstrate that measurement matters. Of course, there are
          universities that rank somewhat similarly regardless of whether
          we use the relevant-pool-based, Pell, or Bottom Quintile


                                          18
Hoxby & Turner             Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          measures. This is because some states happen to have
          income-achievement distributions in their relevant pools that are
          fairly similar to the national distribution. Such states' similar
          rankings, across the measures, are not a reason to endorse the
          Pell or Bottom Quintile measures. Observing that the measure
          does not affect these states' rankings much is akin to observing
          that it would not matter how we measured height if everyone
          were of average height.

          6. The Intergenerational Mobility Measure
              The increasingly popular intergenerational mobility (IGM)
          measure has received ample attention, including favorable
          coverage in The New York Times, and has been presented as a
          measure of the effect of universities on the economic success of
          low-income students. The Intergenerational Mobility or IGM
          measure is calculating by multiplying a university's Bottom
          Quintile measure by an estimate of the probability that the
          university's students from the national bottom income quintile
          end up, as adults, in the national top quintile ("Bottom-Top
          Mobility").13
              The IGM measure has two problems. First, the IGM measure
          is dominated not by Bottom-Top Mobility—as one might think,
          given the "intergenerational" in its name. Rather, two-thirds of
          the variation in the IGM measure is generated by variation in the
          Bottom Quintile measure. Thus, the IGM measure is something
          of a "Bottom Quintile `Plus'", rather than a benchmark that
          measures something different (or mainly different). As a result,
          the IGM measure shares all the issues that affect the Bottom
          Quintile measure.14 Second and importantly, the IGM measure

          13
             As noted at greater length in footnote 5, the Bottom Quintile threshold used in the
          IGM measure in Chetty et al (2017) is not at the 20th percentile among students
          reasonably likely to obtain a high school diploma on-time. Rather, it is approximately
          the 16th percentile among students who are not drop-outs and not institutionalized.
          14
             The correlation between the Bottom Quintile and the IGM measure is 0.65 whereas
          the correlation between bottom-top mobility and the IGM measure is only 0.29.

                                                   19
Hoxby & Turner            Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          has peculiar problems that flow through Bottom-Top Mobility.
              The University of Wisconsin exemplifies the problems. We
          have seen that because the state of Wisconsin has an unusually
          equal income distribution, it has relatively few prospective
          students who fall into the national bottom quintile. Thus, despite
          the university's success in enrolling low-income students from its
          pool, its ranking on the Bottom Quintile measure is poor. But, a
          second implication of the state's unusually equal income
          distribution is that it has comparatively few adults in the
          national top income quintile. Thus, University of Wisconsin
          students are disproportionately unlikely to end up in the national
          top quintile if they stay in Wisconsin, regardless of the income
          with which they grew up. Thus, the IGM measure penalizes
          Wisconsin's income equality twice: once through the Bottom
          Quintile measure and again through Bottom-Top Mobility. Thus,
          it should be no surprise that the University of Wisconsin ranks
          22nd out of the 25 highly selective public colleges for which this
          measure is reported via the New York Times. Ironically, the
          University of Wisconsin would be less likely to suffer IGM-based
          penalties if the state of Wisconsin had less equal incomes.
              For universities that face unusually unequal distributions, the
          situation is reversed. For instance, the California flagships face
          a relevant pool with large percentages of students at both the
          very top and very bottom of the income distribution. This is
          because California is a state that, by almost any measure, has
          one of the highest levels of income inequality.15 Its income
          distribution exhibits strikingly fat tails. Thus, the IGM
          (especially) and other popular measures "reward" the California
          flagships for their state's income inequality. Unless the intended
          use of the IGM measure is to provide incentives for increased


          15
            Regardless of which commonly used measure of income inequality is employed-the
          Gini Coefficient, the Atkinson Index, the Theil Index, Relative Mean
          Deviation-California is always among the top five most unequal states. See Mark W.
          Frank (2019).

                                                 20
Hoxby & Turner             Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          income inequality, its construction is problematic.

          7. Discussion: Pursuing Educational Missions and
          Providing Opportunities Regardless of Background
              So far, we have emphasized the good intentions behind
          initiatives to measure the degree to which universities are
          providing opportunities for low-income students. However, as we
          stated in the opening paragraph, well-being and economic growth
          tend to be maximized when students—regardless of family
          income—are provided with opportunities that allow them to make
          optimal investments in their own education. For many colleges
          and universities, providing need-based financial aid to enable
          well-qualified students to attend regardless of family
          circumstances is a matter of enlightened self-interest, not simply
          a response to external pressures. For instance, Hoxby (2009) and
          Hoxby (2015b) argue on the basis of, respectively, historical
          evidence and economic theory that the universities that have
          been most successful in making admissions decisions to "craft a
          class" of academically outstanding students from a diversity of
          backgrounds without regard to ability-to-pay-tuition have gained
          in resources and innovative capacity and are often regarded as
          the best in the world.16 Thus, even if a university were to lack
          good intentions and to lack motives to pursue society's goals, its
          own self-interest might induce it to engage in rigorous
          self-examination, asking itself whether it was providing
          opportunity regardless of family income.
              The autonomy, decentralization and variation in mission of
          colleges and universities have been widely hailed as strengths
          that distinguish the U.S. market; public and non-profit
          institutions span local, regional and national markets. While this


          16
            See Epple et al. (2018) for additional economic theory on the reason why selective
          institutions have incentives to recruit high-achieving students regardless of family
          income.

                                                  21
Hoxby & Turner          Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          extraordinary diversity of mission and market geography is often
          celebrated, it also severely limits the extent to which
          "one-size-fits-all" performance standards or accountability
          measures such as Pell Shares or Bottom Quintile measures can
          provide constructive incentives or useful information. As we have
          shown with examples based on public flagship universities, states
          differ markedly in the level and inequality of incomes resulting
          in differences in the popular measures that are often unrelated
          to a university's success (or lack thereof) in drawing students
          from across the income distribution of its relevant pool.
          Moreover, colleges and universities differ significantly in mission
          including the academic requirements of the curricula or the
          emphasis on serving particular student populations such as
          students from Appalachia in the case of Berea or students with
          particular interests in science (such as California Institute of
          Technology and Massachusetts Institute of Technology). Given
          constraints, which include overall enrollment capacity and
          funding available for student aid, efforts to use the Pell Share or
          the Bottom Quintile measures as a cudgel to change behavior
          through either regulation or external pressure are likely to
          distort universities' behavior, ultimately reducing the capacity of
          the higher education sector to serve as an engine of opportunity
          for the long run. Indeed, given geographic differences combined
          with differences in mission among colleges and universities,
          optimizing institutions (and those operating in the public
          interest) would be expected to differ markedly on the popular
          measures.
              Although low-income students are less likely to be high
          achievers than high-income students are, nevertheless more of
          low-income high achievers exist than are enrolled at selective
          universities when those universities are considered as a group
          (Hoxby and Avery, 2013). This now well-known aggregate result
          is too often misinterpreted to imply that all selective universities
          can achieve the same absolute representation of low-income


                                           22
Hoxby & Turner         Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          students. How successful a university is at enrolling low-income
          students or the potential for increasing enrollment of low-income
          students cannot consistently be revealed by the popular
          measures—as we have demonstrated.
              Furthermore, the main takeaway from Hoxby and Avery
          (2013)—which many readers seem to miss—is that the "missing"
          students cannot be identified and recruited without rigorous data
          analysis. For instance, admissions staff often reach out only to
          secondary schools with high concentrations of students who
          participate in the national free lunch program: such crude
          targeting, which is akin to using the Pell Share or Bottom
          Quintile measure, allows institutions to find only a small fraction
          of the low-income students in their relevant pool. Similarly, in
          Hoxby and Turner (2013), we found that the low-income high
          achievers who were induced to enroll in selective universities by
          an informational intervention were exactly those students whom
          universities tended to overlook with crude identification methods.
          We identified the students in question using sound data analysis,
          not shortcuts akin to the popular measures.
              In short, well-intentioned commentators and leaders appear
          to be ignoring one of the most important conclusions of recent
          research—namely that true improvements on providing
          opportunity can be attained only with sound data analysis.
          Measurement does matter. The "quick and dirty" popular
          measures can generate "dirty" incentives and policies because
          they confound differences in universities' effort with differences
          in their circumstances.
              As we have demonstrated, differences in the
          income-achievement distributions faced by universities can
          produce Pell/Bottom Quintile/IGM-based penalties and rewards
          that are not only unintended but even the inverse of what was
          intended. Recall the example of the University of Wisconsin
          which faces a relevant pool with an unusually equal income
          distribution. Facing strong policy incentives or public pressure


                                          23
Hoxby & Turner         Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          to improve on the popular measures could produce distortions
          such as (i) enrolling less prepared students who meet the Pell or
          Bottom Quintile threshold even when there are much
          better-prepared students just above the threshold, (ii)
          substituting out-of-state students who meet the threshold for
          in-state students, (iii) encouraging graduates to migrate to less
          equal states where their earnings are more likely to be in the top
          quintile. In other words, a university that pursues the popular
          measures may find that the easiest way to attain a better ranking
          is to deviate substantially from its educational mission.
              A university that evaluated its success in enrolling students
          from low- and moderate-income families using measures that
          assessed outcomes relative to the relevant pool, as presented in
          our analysis, would not find a conflict between pursuing its
          educational mission and providing opportunities to students
          regardless of background. If universities use metrics that
          measure what is intended, they can further both equity and
          excellence simultaneously.




                                          24
Hoxby & Turner         Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          8. References

          Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner,
          and Danny Yagan. 2017. "Mobility Report Cards: The Role of
          Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility," The Equal Opportunity
          Project Working Paper.

          Dynarski, Susan, Katherine Michelmore, and Carmello Libassi.
          2018. "Increasing Economic Diversity at a Highly Selective
          University: Results from a Large Field Experiment," University
          of Michigan manuscript.

          Education Trust. 2014. Tough love: Bottom-line quality standards
          for colleges. Washington, DC: Author.

          Epple, Dennis; Richard Romano, Sinan Sarpca, Holger Sieg and
          Melanie Zaber. 2018. "Market Power and Price Discrimination in
          the U.S. Market for Higher Education." RAND Journal of
          Economics (forthcoming).

          Frank, Mark W. "U.S. State-Level Income Inequality Data."
          Internet site https://www.shsu.edu/eco_mwf/inequality.html,
          accessed January 2019.

          Heckman, James J., Carolyn Heinrich and Jeffrey Smith. "The
          Performance Of Performance Standards," Journal of Human
          Resources, 2002, v37 (4,Fall), 778-811.

          Hoxby, Caroline M. 2009. "The Changing Selectivity of American
          Colleges." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23 (4): 95-118.

          Hoxby, Caroline M. 2015a. "Computing the Value-Added of
          American Postsecondary Institutions," Internal Revenue Service
          Statistics of Income working paper.

                                          25
Hoxby & Turner         Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          Hoxby, Caroline M. 2015b. "Endowment Management Based on
          a Positive Model of the University," in How the Financial Crisis
          and Great Recession Affected Higher Education, Jeffrey R. Brown
          and Caroline M. Hoxby, editors. Chicago: University of Chicago
          Press.

          Hoxby, Caroline M., and Christopher Avery. 2013. "The Missing
          "One-Offs": The Hidden Supply of High-Achieving, Low Income
          Students." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2013 (1): 1-65.

          Hoxby, Caroline M. and Sarah Turner. 2013. "Expanding College
          Opportunities for High-Achieving, Low Income Students" SIEPR
          Discussion Paper 12-014.

          Kane, Thomas, J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2002. "The Promise
          and Pitfalls of Using Imprecise School Accountability Measures."
          Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(4): 91-114.

          Leonhardt, David. 2017. "College Access Index Methodology." The
          New York Times. (May 26) https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/26/
          opinion/2017-college-access-index-methodology.html

          Leonhardt, David. 2017. "Virginia, Betraying Jefferson" The New
          York Times. (September 18).

          National Conference of State Legislatures. 2018. "Performance
          Based Funding for Higher Education."           Retrieved from:
          http://www.ncsl.org/research/education/performance-funding.aspx
          (April 25).

          Sallee, James, Alexandra M. Resch, and Paul Courant. 2008. "On
          the optimal allocation of students and resources in a system of
          higher education." B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy,
          8(1).


                                          26
Hoxby & Turner        Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




          Tebbs, Jeffrey and Sarah Turner. 2005. "Low-Income Students:
          A Caution about Using Data on Pell Grant Recipients." Change:
          The Magazine of Higher Learning.

          The New York Times, The Editorial Board. 2014. "Tying Federal
          Aid to College Ratings" (June 25) Page A22.

          U.S. Department of Education. 2018. "For Public Feedback: A
          College Ratings Framework." Retrieved from https://www.ed.gov/
          collegeratings (April 25).

          Washington Monthly. 2017. "The 2017 College Guide." Vol 49 No
          9/10 (September/October) https://washingtonmonthly.com/
          2017college-guide?ranking=2017-rankings-national-universities




                                         27
                                                          Figure 1
         Income Distributions of Students who are in the Core Preparation Range of their State's Flagship University
                               Connecticut, Maine, Illinois, Montana, Wisconsin, New Mexico
                                                                                                                                         Hoxby & Turner




28
                                                                                                                                         Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




     Notes: Each figure shows the distribution of family income for students in a state whose test scores put them in the core
     preparation range of their state's flagship university. Family income in thousands of dollars is on each horizontal axis.
     Density is on each vertical axis. The vertical lines in each figure mark the 20th, 40th, 60th, and 80th percentiles of the income
     distribution.
                                                         Figure 2
              How Enrolled Students' Income Distribution Fits into the Income Distribution in the Relevant Pool
                  Flagship Universities of Connecticut, Maine, Illinois, Montana, Wisconsin, New Mexico
                                                                                                                                          Hoxby & Turner




29
                                                                                                                                          Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




     Notes: Each figure shows the distribution of family income of the students at a state's flagship university fit into the
     distribution of family income of the students in the state who are in the university's core preparation range (the relevant pool).
     The bars are based on 5-percentile ranges of the relevant pool's income distribution. The horizontal line set at 1 is an equal
     representation marker (see text).
               Table 1. Simulations of Low-Income Students' Representation in the Pool Relevant to a University
                          When Its Pool's Income and College Preparation Differ from National Norm

                                                          Overall Percent
                                                                                     Percent with Income Below the National 20th
                                                               Below the
                                                                                                                                                Hoxby & Turner




                                                                                   Percentile and College Preparation At or Above the
                                                           National 20th
                                   College         Family   Percentile in                25th            50th           75th           90th
                               Preparation         Income         Income            percentile      percentile     percentile     percentile
     Baseline
     mean                          50.1         50.1                  20.0%             14.7%           11.1%           7.6%            5.1%
     standard deviation            50.0         49.9
     Increase Mean Income
     mean                          50.1         70.1                  10.7%               7.0%           4.9%           3.0%            1.9%
     standard deviation            50.0         49.9
     Decrease Mean Income
     mean                          50.1         30.1                  32.9%             26.3%           21.1%          15.5%           11.0%




30
     standard deviation            50.0         49.9
     Decrease Variance of Income
     mean                          50.1         50.1                  13.2%               8.9%           6.3%           4.0%            2.6%
     standard deviation            50.0         37.4
     Increase Variance of Income
     mean                          50.1         50.1                  25.0%             19.1%           14.8%          10.5%            7.2%
     standard deviation            50.0         62.4
                                                                                                                                                Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education




     Increase Income-Achievement Correlation from 0.4 to 0.6
     mean                          50.1         50.1                  20.0%             11.3%            6.4%           2.8%            1.2%
     standard deviation            50.0         50.0
     Decrease Mean College Preparation
     mean                          30.1         50.1                  20.0%             12.6%            8.9%           5.9%            3.8%
     standard deviation            50.0         49.9

     Notes: Baseline estimates assume a bivariate normal distribution of income with the indicated means and standard deviations of income
     and college preparation. The baseline income-achievement correlation is 0.4. Estimates are from a simulation with 500,000 draws from the
     indicated distribution.
                                                        Table 2
      Rankings Based on Relevant Pool Indicators Versus Rankings Based on Pell Share and Bottom Quintile Measure

                                                                      Rank Based on...
                                           Percent Below        Percent Below                  Pell Share       Bottom Quintile
                                                                                                                                     Hoxby & Turner




                                      the 20th Percentile the 40th Percentile                                         Measure
                                     in the Relevant Pool in the Relevant Pool

     University of Illinois                              2                       2                     36                      26
     University of Wisconsin                             6                       4                     48                      36
     University of Connecticut                           7                       5                     35                      41
     University of New Mexico                           34                      30                      2                       1
     University of Maine                                42                      34                      5                       3
     University of Montana                              47                      40                      3                       7

     Notes: The table shows a comparison between rankings based on universities' relevant pools and rankings based on the Pell




31
     or Bottom Quintile measures. This is important to our proof by contradiction. We ranked all 50 flagship universities on the
     shares of their enrolled students whose family incomes fall below the 20th and 40th percentiles of the relevant pool
     distribution. We also ranked all 50 universities using the Pell and Bottom Quintile measures. The rankings are such that 1 is
     the "best" at enrolling low-income students according to the measure being used, and 50 is the "worst."
                                                                                                                                     Measuring Opportunity in Higher Education
