                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   NOISY MEMORY AND OVER-REACTION TO NEWS

                                  Rava Azeredo da Silveira
                                    Michael Woodford

                                     Working Paper 25478
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25478


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




We thank Yeji Sung for research assistance, and Ben Hebert, David Laibson, Yueran Ma and
Andrei Shleifer for helpful discussions. Azeredo da Silveira gratefully acknowledges research
support from the CNRS through UMR 8550. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Rava Azeredo da Silveira and Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Noisy Memory and Over-Reaction to News
Rava Azeredo da Silveira and Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 25478
January 2019
JEL No. D91,E71,G41

                                           ABSTRACT

We propose a model of optimal decision making subject to a memory constraint. The constraint is
a limit on the complexity of memory measured using Shannon’s mutual information, as in models
of rational inattention; but our theory differs from that of Sims (2003) in not assuming costless
memory of past cognitive states. We show that the model implies that both forecasts and actions
will exhibit idiosyncratic random variation; that beliefs will fluctuate forever around the rational-
expectations (perfect-memory) beliefs with a variance that does not fall to zero; and that more
recent news will be given disproportionate weight. The model provides a simple explanation for a
number of features of expectations in laboratory and field settings, most notably apparent over-
reaction of both elicited forecasts and spending decisions to transitory fluctuations in economic
time series.


Rava Azeredo da Silveira
Département de Physique
Ecole Normale Supérieure
24 rue Lhomond
75005 Paris, France
rava@ens.fr

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mw2230@columbia.edu
    The hypothesis of rational expectations (RE) proposes that decisions are based
on expectations that make use of all available information in an optimal way: that is,
those that would be derived by correct Bayesian inference from an objectively correct
prior and the data that has been observed to that date. Yet both in surveys of
individual forecasts of macroeconomic and financial variables and in forecasts elicited
in experimental settings, beliefs are more heterogeneous than this hypothesis should
allow, and forecast errors are predictable on the basis of variables observable by the
forecasters, contrary to this hypothesis. And it is arguable that the dynamics of
macroeconomic and financial variables are more easily explained on the hypothesis
of expectations that respond to news in systematically biased ways, as proposed for
example by Fuster, Hébert and Laibson (2011).
    One reason for expectations to be both heterogeneous and biased is inattention
to current conditions on the part of decision makers (DMs). In models like those of
Woodford (2003) and Sims (2003), subjective perceptions of the DM’s situation are
corrupted by noise (representing idiosyncratic cognitive imprecision), though deci-
sions are nonetheless assumed to be optimal, conditional on their having to be based
on the imprecise internal representation of the situation, rather than on the DM’s
true situation.
    Such a theory can easily account for insensitivity or delayed reaction to changing
conditions, as when prices appear to be “sticky” in response to a monetary distur-
bance. But often people appear instead to over-react to news, relative to the decisions
that would be made in the RE case. As discussed below, Bordalo et al. (2018) present
evidence of over-reaction in professionals’ forecasts of a variety of macroeconomic and
financial series, while Landier, Ma, and Thesmar (2017) show this even more directly
in the case of forecasts by laboratory subjects. Similarly, Fuster, Hébert and Laibson
(2011) discuss aspects of macroeconomic and financial dynamics that they attribute
to over-extrapolation of short-run trends in economic series. Such patterns of over-
reaction might seem to require sources of bias other than an optimal response to a
fuzzy perception of one’s situation.
    We show instead that over-reaction of the kind documented by these authors is
consistent with a model of rational inattention. Our model differs, however, from
the kind proposed by Sims (2003). In the Sims model, the information constraint
limits the precision of new observations of one’s situation, but a DM is assumed to
have perfect memory of all past observations; and there are perfect records of all past
data in the external environment as well, so that events are equally easily observed


                                         1
anytime after they happen. In our model, instead, the crucial cognitive constraint is
on the precision of memory, which is furthermore the only source of access to past
events.


1     A Model of Noisy Memory
As an illustration of our theory, consider a problem in which a DM observes realiza-
tions of an i.i.d. random variable, yt , drawn from a Gaussian distribution with an
unknown mean µ but (for simplicity) a known variance σ 2y . The DM’s prior is that µ
is drawn from a distribution N (0, Ω). Each period, after observing yt the DM must
produce an estimate zt of a forward-looking moving average of the state, the true (ex
post) value of which will be
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                zt∗   ≡ (1 − β)         β j yt+j ,
                                                  j=0

where 0 < β < 1 is a discount factor.
    Since the optimal information structure depends on the penalty for inaccurate
estimates, we assume that the DM’s goal is to minimize the discounted mean squared
error (MSE) of her estimate. This can be justified as corresponding to discounted
expected utility maximization in a consumption-smoothing problem. In this applica-
tion, yt is the DM’s income (other than from assets) in period t, and her real asset
holdings at evolve according to

                              at+1 = β −1 [at + yt − ct ],

where ct is consumption, and the real return on assets is assumed to equal the DM’s
rate of time preference. The DM’s problem is to choose a state-contingent path of
consumption so as to maximize the expected discounted value of utility, where in each
period u(ct ) = −(ct − c∗ )2 , subject to a transversality condition on asset holdings.
If we let zt ≡ ct − (1 − β)at be consumption in excess of interest income, then
maximization of expected discounted utility is equivalent to minimizing the expected
discounted value of (zt − zt∗ )2 . In this application, zt can be understood as an estimate
of the DM’s “permanent income” apart from financial assets.
    Under the RE assumption, this would be a consumption-smoothing problem of
the kind treated by Sargent (1987, chap. XII). Instead, we assume that in period t

                                            2
the DM’s choices can depend only on her current cognitive state, a vector consisting
of a memory state mt and the current observation yt (assumed for simplicity to be
observable with perfect precision). Thus the choice of zt must be some function of
(mt , yt ). In addition, the conditional probability of different possible memory states
mt+1 in the following period must also be some function pt (mt+1 |mt , yt ) of the current
cognitive state. The actual state mt+1 will be a random draw from this conditional
distribution; the randomness reflects the limited precision with which mt+1 can reflect
the DM’s cognitive state at time t.
    We do not arbitrarily specify a form for the memory state or its dynamics, but we
assume a cost of greater precision. Specifically, we assume a cost each period of stor-
ing a memory for retrieval in the following period (or alternatively, a cost of retrieval)
that is proportional to It , the mutual information between the cognitive state (mt , yt )
and the memory state mt+1 ; this is a measure of the informativeness of the subse-
quent memory state about the prior cognitive state (Cover and Thomas, 2006).1 Our
hypothesis is that the decision rule zt (mt , yt ) each period and the stochastic transition
law pt (mt+1 |mt , yt ) for the memory state minimize the objective
                                 ∞
                                 X
                                       β t E[(zt − zt∗ )2 ] + θ It ,
                                          
                                 t=0

where θ > 0 indexes the cost of greater memory precision. Here the expectation is
over the value of µ, the sequence of realizations {yt }, and the stochastic evolution of
the memory state.
    Azeredo da Silveira and Woodford (2018) show that in the solution to this prob-
lem, the optimal structure for memory implies that the posterior distribution for µ
implied by any memory state mt will be a Gaussian distribution with a variance that
depends only on elapsed time; we can thus index memory states by the implied poste-
rior mean value for µ (so that mt is a real number). At least for small enough values
of the information cost θ, the posterior uncertainty about µ decreases over time (i.e.,
with additional observations of yt ). In the perfect-memory case (θ = 0), the posterior
uncertainty evolves according to the usual Kalman filter formulas, and converges to
   1
      This is the cost function used by Sims (2003). For Sims, however, the cognitive state is a history
of subjective observations (st , st−1 , . . .), and the information cost each period is proportional to
the mutual information between the new observation st and the entire history of objective states
(yt , yt−1 , . . .).


                                                 3
zero as t becomes large; asymptotically, the value of µ is known, and observations
of yt have no effect on expectations, as in the RE solution. But when memory is
imperfect (θ > 0), the posterior uncertainty asymptotes to a positive level, no matter
how many observations have been made. In this case, fluctuations in yt continue to
cause beliefs about µ to fluctuate, forever.
    In the asymptotic limit, the joint dynamics of the external state yt and the DM’s
memory state mt are described by a linear system with constant coefficients and
Gaussian innovations. Each period, the DM’s estimate of µ after observing yt will be
given by
                       µ̂t ≡ E[µ |mt , yt ] = (1 − γ)mt + γyt ,
where the gain coefficient 0 < γ < 1 depends on the degree of imprecision of memory,
and the optimal action will then be

                        zt = E[zt∗ |mt , yt ] = (1 − β)yt + β µ̂t .

Since the accuracy of future actions will depend only on the accuracy of one’s future
estimates of µ, the optimal use of finite memory capacity is to store as precise as
possible a record of one’s current posterior for µ, which is completely summarized by
the value of µ̂t . Thus
                                 mt+1 = λµ̂t + ω t+1 ,
where ω t+1 is a mean-zero Gaussian disturbance term representing idiosyncratic mem-
ory noise, and both the coefficient 0 < λ < 1 and the variance of the noise term depend
on the degree of imprecision of memory.


2    Over-Reaction of Consumption to Income News
We first illustrate the implications of this solution for the consumption problem dis-
cussed above. (In these numerical solutions, we assume that Ω/σ 2y = 100, and consider
a variety of possible values for the ratio θ̃ ≡ θ/σ 2y .) Figure 1 shows the responses of
consumption ct and asset holdings at to a unit positive income surprise y0 at t = 0.
In the case of perfect memory (the case θ̃ = 0, shown by the solid lines in the figure),
consumption permanently increases by an amount equal to fraction 1 − β of the in-
come innovation; there is also a permanent increase in asset balances, by an amount


                                           4
                               ct                                   at
          0.035                                  1.0

          0.030
                                                 0.8
          0.025
                                                 0.6
          0.020

          0.015                                  0.4                      = 0.020
          0.010                                                           = 0.016
                                                                          = 0.012
                                                 0.2                      = 0.008
          0.005
                                                                          = 0.004
                                                                          = 0.000
          0.000                                  0.0
                  1   0   1      2   3   4             1   0   1      2   3     4
                              Time                                 Time

Figure 1: Impulse responses of consumption and asset holdings to an income shock.

equal to the income innovation, starting at t = 1. Thus both consumption and asset
holdings are martingales in this RE solution.
    Instead, when θ̃ > 0, consumption over-reacts, in the sense that it increases
by more than the model-consistent increase in permanent income. However, the
increase is no longer permanent; because assets are not increased to the extent that
would be necessary to finance a permanent increase in consumption of that size, both
consumption and assets fall over time, eventually returning (beyond the borders of
the figures) to their initial levels. Thus both consumption and asset holdings are
stationary processes in this case (without any need to invoke an endogenous real rate
of return or non-time-separable preferences). Moreover, consumption changes are
more volatile than they would be under RE.
    The model with noisy memory implies that changes in consumption should be fore-
castable, contrary to the prediction of the RE permanent-income hypothesis stressed
by Robert E. Hall (1978). In particular, as shown in Azeredo da Silveira and Wood-
ford (2018), it predicts that consumption changes should be negatively autocorrelated
over the medium run, as Fuster, Hébert and Laibson (2011) find to be true of ag-
gregate US nondurable consumer expenditure. As in the model proposed by these
authors, the negative autocorrelation reflects over-reaction of consumption to tran-


                                             5
sitory income variation. Our explanation differs from their hypothesis of “natural
expectations,” however, in that over-reaction is predicted to occur in our model even
when the income process is a very low-order autoregressive process (in the numerical
illustration here, it is not persistent at all). Under the hypothesis of natural expecta-
tions, expectations should be perfectly model-consistent when the true dynamics are
given by a low-order autoregressive process; in our model, instead, the prediction of
negative autocorrelation is more robust.


3    Over-Reaction of Forecasts
The forecastability of consumption changes reflects the existence of systematic bias in
the DM’s estimates of the hidden state µ. Figure 2 shows the impulse response of the
minimum-MSE estimate µ̂t to the same income shock as in Figure 1, for each of the
several possible values of θ̃. In the case of perfect memory (the RE case), there would
be no response at all of beliefs (or of forecasts of future income) to current income
observations. Instead, when θ̃ > 0, the current income realization is extrapolated
into the future to a greater extent than would occur under rational expectations (so
that a higher yt results in a higher forecast of future income). Moreover, the forecast
bias (that is, departures of µ̂t from the correct value µ) is predicted to be persistent;
as shown in the figure, a transitory shock to income results in a shock to the forecast
bias that decays only slowly.
    Both of these features of the dynamics of forecast bias are observed in the ex-
perimental data of Landier, Ma and Thesmar (2017). Letting ∆it be the discrepancy
between subject i’s forecast of the future value in question and the RE forecast at
time t (µ̂it − µ, in our model), and st the difference between the variable observed
at time t and the RE forecast of that variable before its realization (yt − µ, in our
model), they regress ∆it on ∆it−1 and st , and find significantly positive values (less
than 1) for both coefficients. Our model predicts that these regression coefficients
should equal λ(1 − γ) and γ respectively, and thus both lie between 0 and 1.
    Bordalo et al. (2018) argue that professional forecasters’ individual forecasts of
many macroeconomic and financial time series also exhibit over-reaction to news.
They draw this conclusion from a regression of the demonstration that revisions of a
forecaster’s forecast of a given variable can predict the difference between the revised
forecast and the (eventually revealed) correct value: an upward revision, say, of the

                                          6
              0.025

              0.020

              0.015

              0.010

              0.005

              0.000
                      1       0         1           2        3         4
                                             Time

Figure 2: Impulse response of beliefs about µ to an income shock. The several lines
correspond to the same values of θ̃ as in Figure 1.

forecast increases the extent to which the later forecast is likely to be too high.
Our model predicts that this should be observed. In our model, µ̂it should exhibit
stationary fluctuations around the true value µ; hence the covariance between the
forecast error µ − µ̂it and the forecast revision µ̂it − µ̂it should equal −(1 − ρ) times the
variance of the forecast error process, where ρ ≡ λ(1 − γ) is the coefficient of serial
correlation of the forecast errors, a quantity between 0 and 1.
    Unlike many models of extrapolative forecast bias in the literature (including the
“natural expectations” of Fuster, Hébert and Laibson or the “diagnostic expectations”
of Bordalo et al.), our model also provides an explanation for the heterogeneity of
individual forecasts, even when different forecasters observe the same information (as
is clearly the case in the experiment of Landier, Ma and Thesmar); this follows from
the idiosyncratic noise in the evolution of the memory state.
    Our model also predicts that the discrepancy between any individual DM’s fore-
cast µ̂it and the average forecast µ̂t (averaging over all possible realizations of the
idiosyncratic memory noise) should predict subsequent revisions of DM i’s forecast,
as is shown to be true in surveys of professional forecasters by Fuhrer (2018). In


                                            7
our model, the existence of transitory idiosyncratic variation in beliefs of the kind
indicated by Fuhrer’s results is not unrelated to the common bias resulting from
over-reaction to news; instead, in our model, it is the noise in individual forecasters’
memories that results in the common bias. Thus the hypothesis of limited memory
precision provides a parsimonious explanation for both common and idiosyncratic
biases.




                                         8
                               REFERENCES

Azeredo da Silveira, Rava, and Michael Woodford. 2018. “A Model of Noisy
Memory.” Unpublished.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. 2018.
“Over-Reaction in Macreconomic Expectations.” NBER Working Paper no. 24932,
August.
Cover, Thomas M., and Joy A. Thomas. 2006. Elements of Information Theory.
New York: Wiley, 2d ed.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey. 2018. “Intrinsic Expectations Persistence.” Unpublished.
Fuster, Andreas, Ben Hébert, and David Laibson. 2011. “Natural Expecta-
tions, Macroeconomic Dynamics, and Asset Pricing.” NBER Macroeconomics An-
nual, 26, 1-48.
Hall, Robert E. 1978. “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income
Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy, 86, 971-987.
Landier, Augustin, Yueran Ma, and David Thesmar. 2017. “New Experi-
mental Evidence on Expectations Formation.” Working Paper.
Sargent, Thomas J. 1987. Macroeconomic Theory. Boston: Academic Press, 2d
ed.
Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of
Monetary Economics. 50: 665-690.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of
Monetary Policy,” in Philippe Aghion et al., eds., Knowledge, Information and Ex-
pectations in Modern Macroeconomics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                      9
