NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ACTIVE CHOICE, IMPLICIT DEFAULTS, AND THE INCENTIVE TO CHOOSE
John Beshears
James J. Choi
David Laibson
Brigitte C. Madrian
Working Paper 25473
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25473

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019
We thank the employees of Express Scripts, especially Robert Nease, for their cooperation with
this project. We thank Gretchen Chapman (Guest Editor for the special issue), our anonymous
referees, and audience members at the ASSA meetings, Columbia, the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, Johns Hopkins, NBER, Syracuse, UCLA, University of Chicago, University
of Kentucky, University of Lausanne, and University of Pennsylvania for their feedback.
Christopher Clayton, Luca Maini, Lea Nagel, and Brendan Price provided excellent research
assistance, and Sarah Holmes and Gwendolyn Reynolds provided outstanding project
management. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Pershing Square Fund for
Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior and the National Institute on Aging (grants
R01AG021650, P01AG005842, and P30AG034532). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Express Scripts, the National Institute on
Aging, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the authors’ home universities. See the
authors’ websites for lists of their outside activities.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25473.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Active Choice, Implicit Defaults, and the Incentive to Choose
John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 25473
January 2019
JEL No. D03,D04,D91,I13
ABSTRACT
Home-delivered prescriptions have no delivery charge and lower copayments than prescriptions
picked up at a pharmacy. Nevertheless, when home delivery is offered on an opt-in basis, the
take-up rate is only 6%. We study a program that makes active choice of either home delivery or
pharmacy pick-up a requirement for insurance eligibility. The program introduces an implicit
default for those who don’t make an active choice: pharmacy pick-up without insurance
subsidies. Under this program, 42% of eligible employees actively choose home delivery, 39%
actively choose pharmacy pick-up, and 19%make no active choice and are assigned the implicit
default. Individuals who financially benefit most from home delivery are more likely to choose it.
Those who benefit least from insurance subsidies are more likely to make no active choice and
lose those subsidies. The implicit default incentivizes people to make an active choice, thereby
playing a key role in choice architecture.
John Beshears
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 439
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jbeshears@hbs.edu

David Laibson
Department of Economics
Littauer M-12
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dlaibson@gmail.com

James J. Choi
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu

Brigitte C. Madrian
730 B N. Eldon Tanner Building
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602-3113
and NBER
brigitte_madrian@byu.edu

Introduction
Revealed preferences are tastes that rationalize an economic agent’s observed actions.
Economists usually assume that these revealed preferences are also normative preferences—
preferences that represent the economic actor’s true interests. In some situations, giving revealed
preferences normative status makes sense. There are many cases, however, in which “choices”
do not reveal a true preference, but reflect the combined influence of true preferences and
decision-making biases. For example, in some situations, economic agents do not actively make
choices. Instead, they passively accept defaults that are chosen by others. Preferences revealed
through passive choice are often inconsistent, since variation in defaults generates large variation
in outcomes (e.g., Madrian and Shea, 2001; Johnson and Goldstein, 2003; Beshears, Choi,
Laibson and Madrian, 2008b). To the extent that the wedge between normative and revealed
preferences is created by inertia around the default, active choice mechanisms that encourage
individuals to explicitly state their preferences may produce outcomes closer to the normative
benchmark.
However, such active choice mechanisms generally don’t work in practice the way they
are hypothesized to work in theory. 1 In an active choice enrollment system, choice is either
encouraged or even “required,” but not choosing is usually also a de facto option, whether or not
it is officially acknowledged. 2 In an active choice regime, not choosing triggers an “implicit
default.” Our empirical analysis shows that such an implicit default is an important element of
choice architecture.
We examine the implementation of an active choice regime designed to encourage home
delivery for long-term prescription medications in an employer-sponsored prescription drug

1
2

See Sunstein (2015) for a full enumeration of the problems with active choice programs.
Sometimes the option of not choosing is shrouded, as in the active choice regime studied by Carroll et al. (2009).

2

benefit plan. Under an opt-in regime for home delivery, take-up is very low: only 6% of
prescriptions eligible for home delivery are filled through home delivery. The employer’s
adoption of an active choice regime leads to a sizeable increase in home delivery enrollment.
Under the active choice regime, among those eligible for home delivery, 42% actively choose
home delivery, 39% actively choose retail pharmacy pick-up, and 19% make no active choice
and therefore use retail pharmacy pick-up without an insurance subsidy, which is the implicit
default. Because home delivery is cheaper than retail pharmacy pick-up for many drugs, the
active choice program substantially reduces average out-of-pocket expenditures for individuals
with costly long-term prescriptions.
Although there is no variation in the implicit default in our setting, we do observe
variation in the cost to individual employees of accepting the implicit default. We find that the
likelihood of not choosing increases as the benefit of choosing decreases: Individuals with the
smallest insurance subsidies are more likely not to make an active choice and thereby
temporarily lose their subsidy. The implicit default generates an incentive to make an active
choice and becomes the default for those who don’t actively choose. For both of these reasons,
implicit defaults are a key design feature in active choice programs. By decreasing the
attractiveness of the implicit default, institutional designers can encourage active choices, albeit
at the cost of decreasing the welfare of those who still refuse to make an active choice.

The Active Choice Intervention
The employer sponsoring the prescription drug plan we study, Company A, is a large
national U.S. retailer. Full-time, regular employees of the firm are eligible for healthcare and

3

prescription drug benefits 90 days after hire. 3 Approximately 85% of benefits-eligible employees
at Company A enroll at in the prescription drug plan managed by the pharmacy benefit manager
(PBM) that introduced the active choice intervention.
Home delivery has several potential advantages over retail pharmacy pick-up for
individuals on long-term maintenance medications. First, home delivery prescriptions are
processed in large automated facilities located where land and labor are cheap, so filling a
prescription through home delivery is cheaper than filling it at a retail pharmacy (Federal Trade
Commission, 2005). These cost savings are shared among beneficiaries, the employer, and the
PBM. Home delivery copayments tend to be lower than retail pharmacy copayments (Appendix
Table A1). Second, home delivery saves beneficiaries the hassle of making trips to the
pharmacy. Third, while retail pharmacy fills for long-term maintenance medications are
generally for 28 or 30 days, home delivery fills are typically for 84 or 90 days, reducing the need
to remember to refill a prescription. Fourth, the automatic dispensing system used in home
delivery has a lower error rate than retail pharmacists counting pills. (However, the error rate is
extremely low no matter how a prescription is filled.)
Home delivery is not the best option for all individuals. It would be inappropriate for a
short-term prescription needed for an acute condition, such as an antibiotic to treat strep throat.
Although the PBM does have pharmacists available for phone consultation, individuals may
prefer an in-person conversation with a pharmacist. (On the other hand, some individuals may
prefer the confidentiality of speaking to a pharmacist on the phone rather than at the front of a
line in a neighborhood pharmacy.) In urban areas, individuals may be reluctant to have
prescriptions delivered in the mail if packages are dropped off in a public area that may not be

3

With a small number of exceptions, part-time and temporary employees are not eligible for benefits.

4

secure. The convenience advantage of home delivery may also be lower in urban areas where
retail pharmacies are densely located.
Prior to the active choice intervention, the PBM made home delivery available to its
beneficiaries on an opt-in basis. Beneficiaries could sign up for home delivery by filling out a
paper form, calling a toll-free phone number, or enrolling online. The view of the PBM was that
low take-up of home delivery did not reflect a lack of true demand, but rather a lack of
consideration or follow-through. Thus, the PBM and Company A adopted an active choice
program in 2008.
The active choice program targeted employees who (a) had a retail claim for a
prescription maintenance medication 4 within the past 30 days, (b) did not have an unexpired
home delivery prescription for that drug on file with the PBM, and (c) had not previously made
an active choice to use retail pharmacy pick-up instead of home delivery. 5 The company applied
these criteria in the middle of November 2008 and again at the end of November 2008 to identify
an initial set of employees to target. Starting on January 1, 2009, the criteria were applied on a
daily basis to target additional employees.
The PBM contacted employees several times to explain how the active choice program
affected them. In September 2008, letters were mailed to all employees enrolled in the
prescription drug plan describing the general nature of the program. In November and December
2008, the initial set of targeted employees received both letters and automated telephone calls
with details on the drugs for which they would be required to make an active choice about their

4

A maintenance medication is one taken on a regular basis to treat a chronic condition, such as insulin or high blood
pressure medication. The PBM was inclusive when defining maintenance medications. For example, ibuprofen was
on the list because it is sometimes used regularly for chronic pain.
5
This third criterion was not relevant when the program was first rolled out. After the initial roll-out, this criterion
ensured that employees who had declined home delivery were not contacted again.

5

future refill channel. Targeted employees were asked to affirmatively indicate to the PBM
whether their preference was to continue filling targeted prescriptions at a retail pharmacy or to
switch to receiving those prescriptions by home delivery. The benefits of home delivery were
described to them, and employees were encouraged to choose home delivery. Those wanting to
switch to home delivery could communicate their decision as well as some additional required
information to the PBM by mailing a paper form, calling a toll-free telephone number, or visiting
a website. Employees were also told that if they did not indicate an active choice in advance,
they would have to make an active choice between the retail and home delivery channels after
their first two retail pharmacy fills in 2009.
Switching to home delivery additionally required authorization from the prescribing
physician(s) for the PBM to fill the relevant prescription(s) by mail. Employees could obtain this
authorization independently, or the PBM offered to contact physicians on behalf of (and with the
consent of) employees. Individuals targeted for multiple prescriptions could elect home delivery
for some and retail pharmacy pick-up for others.
Targeted employees who did not choose home delivery in advance were restricted to two
retail pharmacy claims for each targeted drug after January 1, 2009. After each of these claims,
the PBM contacted the employee with a letter and an automated phone call telling her of the
need to make an active choice between home delivery and pharmacy pick-up via mail, phone, or
website. If the employee attempted to make a third retail pharmacy claim for a targeted drug
without making an active choice, the insurance claim was rejected at the pharmacy. The
pharmacist was asked to explain that the PBM would not accept the claim unless the employee
called the PBM to make an active choice. If the employee called the PBM and opted for retail
pharmacy pick-up, the employee could proceed with the retail pharmacy fill as intended with the

6

PBM subsidy. If the employee called the PBM to opt for home delivery, the PBM initiated the
process of switching to home delivery, including contacting the employee’s physician to
authorize the change, and the employee was permitted to receive the PBM subsidy on the
intended retail pharmacy pick-up. 6 If an employee did not call the PBM to make an active
choice, the employee could either decline to pick up the prescription at that time or pay the full
retail cost of the medication out of pocket without any PBM subsidy.
Other than the new incentive to make an active choice, the PBM did not change the preexisting home delivery and retail pharmacy pickup programs. The PBM had the same
mechanisms in place to help individuals with the logistics of switching to home delivery (e.g.,
contacting physicians) before and after the introduction of the active choice program.

Materials and methods
Data
We use data from two sources. From Company A, we have employee-level demographic
and employment data, including gender, age, and original hire date, as well as monthly snapshots
of employees’ hourly pay, employment category (regular or temporary), scheduled hours (fulltime or part-time), and employment status (active or leave of absence). From the PBM, we have
claim-level data for each employee enrolled in the prescription drug plan. These data include the
National Drug Code (NDC) and Generic Product Identifier (GPI) of the drug, an indicator for
whether the drug is generic, the number of days’ supply dispensed, the supplier (a retail
pharmacy or a PBM mail distribution center), the employee copayment, the cost to the employer

6

In about 90% of cases, home delivery was successfully set up before the employee needed another prescription fill,
but if there were delays in setting up home delivery (e.g., because of difficulty reaching the physician), the PBM
honored additional retail pharmacy claims from the employee.

7

(total cost of the prescription minus the employee copayment), and the claim date. We also have
from the PBM data on the implementation of the active choice program, including the date on
which an employee-drug class combination was added to the targeted list and information about
rejected claims, including drug identity and the date on which a claim was rejected.

Empirical Approach
To measure the impact of the active choice program, we compare employees who were
targeted for the active choice program to a similar group of employees who were not targeted.
We define the Before (control) cohort as employee-drug class 7 combinations that would have
been targeted had the active choice program been rolled out a year earlier in 2007-2008. The
After (treatment) cohort is employee-drug class combinations targeted when the active choice
program was actually implemented in 2008-2009.
Although we know which employees and prescriptions were actually targeted after the
program was rolled out, identifying the counterfactual Before control group requires creating an
algorithm to select the employee-drug class combinations that would have been targeted had the
program been rolled out in 2007-2008. To ensure that our Before and After cohorts are selected
on a consistent basis, we use this algorithm to identify the employee-drug class combinations
that comprise both cohorts in our analysis.
The selection criteria we use for inclusion in the cohorts are:

7

We deem two medications to be in the same drug class if they share the same four-digit Generic Product Identifier
(GPI4); drugs with in a GPI4 have similar chemical properties and are used to treat similar conditions. It is not
uncommon for individuals to switch between different medications within the same drug class. For example, an
individual might switch from a brand-name drug to a generic drug, or from a drug that has proven ineffective to
another similar drug.

8

•

Full-time, regular employees at the end of November 2007 (Before cohort) or 2008
(After cohort)

•

A retail claim for a maintenance drug was submitted between October 12 and
November 26 of 2007 (Before cohort) or 2008 (After cohort). 8

•

No claim for home delivery was submitted from May 1 to November 1 of 2007
(Before cohort) or 2008 (After cohort). The targeting list excludes employee-drug
class combinations for which an unexpired home delivery prescription was on file
with the PBM. We do not observe home delivery prescriptions on file with the PBM
unless they are associated with a home delivery claim, 9 so we use claims as a proxy
for prescriptions. 10

•

Employees who had not previously actively indicated that they preferred retail
pharmacy pick-up over home delivery. This aspect of the PBM algorithm was only
relevant after the initial target sample was selected.

Our algorithm successfully identifies 93% of the employees and 90% of the employeedrug class combinations that were actually targeted in November 2008; of the employees flagged
by our algorithm, 95% were actually targeted in November 2008, as were 95% of the employeedrug class combinations.
We make two additional sample restrictions. First, we analyze only 28- and 30-day
targeted prescriptions, which make up 95% of the employee-drug class combinations targeted,

8

The PBM created its targeting list by identifying employees who, on either November 16 or November 26, 2008,
had a retail claim for a prescription maintenance drug in the past 30 days. October 12 is 35 days before November
16, the first targeting date. The additional five days beyond the PBM’s 30-day look-back period account for data
processing lags and improve the match between the results of our algorithm and the results of the PBM algorithm.
9
It is possible for a home delivery prescription not to be associated with a home delivery claim, but all home
delivery claims are associated with a home delivery prescription.
10
Our results are similar if we choose a somewhat different look-back period for not having a previous home
delivery claim.

9

since prescriptions of other lengths may differ in important ways. Second, to simplify our
analysis and to make it easier to interpret our results, we restrict the bulk of our analysis to
employees targeted in November 2008 whom we can observe through October 2009, and
employees who would have been targeted in November 2007 whom we can observe through
October 2008. This restriction excludes an additional 13% of employee-drug class observations.
After applying the algorithm and sample restrictions, the Before cohort includes 20,486
employees and 38,088 employee-drug class combinations, and the After cohort includes 23,752
employees and 45,600 employee-drug class combinations. 11 We measure outcomes from
November of the calendar year in which the cohorts are defined to October of the next calendar
year. We are constrained to a one-year period because the active choice program was supplanted
by an initiative to more strongly encourage home delivery adoption. Starting on January 1, 2010,
employees who had been targeted for the active choice program and had declined home delivery
were restricted to two more retail pharmacy claims for each targeted drug at the 2009
copayment; copayments for subsequent retail pharmacy claims doubled. New employees with
prescription maintenance medications and existing employees who were starting a newly
prescribed maintenance medication were also able to submit two retail pharmacy claims at the
2009 copayment, but they had to pay the full price for subsequent retail pharmacy claims. Details
of the 2010 prescription drug plan were announced during Company A’s annual open enrollment
period, which began on October 26, 2009. Except for a small number of human resources
personnel and senior executives, employees did not learn of these changes before that date.
Our primary outcome of interest is the choice between retail pharmacy pick-up and home
delivery for each employee-drug class combination. For the After cohort, we additionally

11

13,414 individuals appear in both the 2007 and 2008 cohorts, 7,072 are in the 2007 cohort only, and 10,338 are in
the 2008 cohort only.

10

analyze whether individuals made no active choice. We control for the following variables that
are measured as of December 1 of the year in which the cohorts are defined: gender; age; tenure
at the company; salary; the number of targeted drugs the employee is taking; and the employee’s
medication adherence in the drug class 12 over the prior six months as measured by a standard
proxy, the proportion of days covered (PDC) calculated according to the approach described in
Leslie et al. (2008). The PDC is the fraction of days in a specific time interval in which an
individual has a prescribed daily dose of medication available given the individual’s refill history
and assuming the individual takes the medication as prescribed when it is available.
Because individuals may choose home delivery for its lower copayments, we also control
for the potential annual copay savings from switching to home delivery in the case of perfect
medication adherence. Appendix A explains how we construct this measure. We calculate an
average annual potential savings at the employee-drug class level of $41.51 and $39.69 for the
Before and After cohorts, respectively. For generic drugs, potential savings range from $0 (if the
retail price is less than the copay) to $12 (the difference between the annual copayments for a
generic prescription filled through home delivery rather than retail pharmacy pick-up). About
three-quarters of the prescriptions in our data are generics. For other prescriptions, the potential
savings may be much higher.
Our final control variables are dummies for the most common indication (MCI)
designations, which specify the medical condition that a drug is most commonly used to treat.
For example, the MCI for statins is “High Blood Cholesterol,” while the MCI for ibuprofen is
“Pain and Inflammation.” Note that the MCI does not necessarily designate the medical
condition for which a drug was prescribed for a specific individual. For example, the MCI for

12

Calculating PDC at the employee-drug class level ensures that we do not calculate an artificially low PDC if an
individual failed to refill one prescription because he switched to another drug within the same drug class.

11

birth control pills is “Contraceptives,” but birth control pills may also be prescribed to treat acne.
Each drug has a unique MCI.
Appendix Table A2 presents sample characteristics for the Before and After cohorts as of
December 1 of 2007 or 2008, respectively. The two cohorts are very similar in terms of share
female (49.9% Before, 49.4% After), average age (46.4 Before, 46.4 After), average salary
($32,191 Before, $32,994 After), and average number of targeted medications (1.86 Before, 1.92
After). The After cohort has higher tenure (5.7 years versus 4.9 years), higher past PDC when it
can be calculated (77.4% versus 71.2%), and more cases where PDC cannot be calculated
(29.9% versus 19.7%). PDCs cannot be calculated if the prescription is very new or if adherence
was extremely low. The last column shows the characteristics of the total employee population at
Company A as of December 1, 2008. Relative to the overall employee population, those targeted
for the active choice program are more likely to be female, are older, and have been employed at
the company longer.

Results
Impact on Home Delivery Take-Up
Figure 1 shows the fraction of individuals in each cohort who filled a prescription
through either a retail pharmacy (dashed lines) or home delivery (solid lines) within each
calendar month following cohort definition. Less than 2% of the Before cohort uses home
delivery in any month during its 12-month observation period. 13 The After cohort starts at a
similarly low rate of home delivery utilization, but its utilization rate increases from December

13

We had previously noted that 6% of prescriptions were filled through home delivery before the active choice
program. The home delivery usage rate is lower in the Before cohort because the targeting criteria exclude
prescriptions already being filled through home delivery. In addition, Figure 1 shows the fraction of individuals
filling a prescription through each channel, rather than the fraction of prescriptions filled through each channel.

12

through March before stabilizing at about 10% of individuals each month for the rest of the year.
The increase in home delivery adoption by the After cohort is offset by a corresponding decline
in its retail pharmacy fills.
The fraction of individuals with a retail pharmacy fill in any given month declines over
time for both cohorts, a pattern commonly observed in the medication adherence literature. For
the Before cohort, this decline reflects a combination of medical recovery and imperfect
adherence. For the After cohort, an additional source of decline comes from individuals
substituting home delivery for retail pharmacy fills. The decline in the retail fill rate is steeper
than the increase in the home delivery rate for the After cohort because home deliveries occur
less frequently than retail fills due to the 90-day length of home delivery prescriptions versus the
one-month length of retail prescriptions. Indeed, the After cohort’s home delivery rate increase
in excess of the Before cohort’s home delivery rate increase is about one-third of the After
cohort’s retail decline in excess of the Before cohort’s retail decline. In untabulated results, we
find that PDC is not affected on average by the active choice program.
To understand the correlates of home delivery take-up, we turn to regression analysis.
Table 1 presents coefficients from linear probability regressions. In the first column, the
dependent variable is a binary indicator for home delivery utilization at any point during the 12month observation period. The unit of observation is employee-drug class combination. Note that
home delivery adoption is a near-absorbing state; less than 3% of individuals who select home
delivery subsequently revert back to retail pharmacy pick-up within a given drug class. The only
explanatory variable in the first column is an indicator for whether an individual is in the After
cohort. Home delivery utilization is 35.6 percentage points higher for employee-drug class
combinations in the After cohort relative to the Before cohort (p < 0.001).

13

The second column adds a rich set of additional covariates to the regression. These
covariates have a negligible effect on the estimated active choice effect; the coefficient on the
After cohort dummy grows slightly to 36.6% and remains significant (p < 0.001). Home delivery
utilization is higher for those who are older, have less tenure, and are more highly compensated.
It is also higher for individuals who have been more adherent in the past (higher PDC)—
hypothetically moving from a 0% PDC to a 100% PDC is associated with a 7 percentage point
increase in take-up—and individuals for whom we do not measure a past PDC. Finally, home
delivery utilization is higher if the potential savings associated with switching to home delivery
are higher, but the magnitude of this effect pales in comparison to the magnitude of the active
choice effect; potential savings would have to exceed $4,000 per year to have the same take-up
effect as the active choice program.
To examine whether there are heterogeneous effects of the active choice program, the
third and fourth columns in Table 1 together show coefficients from a single regression that adds
interaction terms between the After cohort dummy and the additional covariates. The interaction
terms in the fourth column indicate that active choice has a larger positive impact on those who
are older, more recently hired, more highly compensated, taking more targeted drugs, more
adherent in the past, and not missing a past PDC. 14
To obtain regression-adjusted estimates of the timing of home delivery adoption, we
expand the regression so that observations are at the employee-drug class-month level. Each
month, the dependent variable is whether home delivery had ever been used for this employeedrug class combination in this month or prior. The explanatory variables are the controls in the

14

No significance should be attached to the fact that the coefficient on the uninteracted After cohort dummy falls to
0.135, since this represents the estimated effect of active choice on a hypothetical individual who has a zero value
for all of the interacted controls.

14

second column plus calendar month dummies. The last column of Table 1 shows some of the
coefficients from this regression, but the main coefficients of interest are those on the calendar
month dummies, which are plotted in Figure 2. The coefficients on the dummies for calendar
months November 2007 to October 2008 comprise the Before cohort series, and those for
calendar months November 2008 to October 2009 comprise the After cohort series.
Home delivery adoption of the Before cohort increases slowly and steadily over time, so
that it is about 6 percentage points higher than its November 2007 value at the end of the Before
cohort’s observation period. The After cohort’s home delivery adoption rate increases as well,
but most rapidly in February and March of 2009. Figure 3 shows that the number of pharmacy
claims rejected for the After cohort peaks at 4,730 in March 2009. Much of the 11 percentage
point increase in home delivery adoption in March seems likely to be driven by these rejections,
which forced employees to make an active decision about home delivery or pay the full out-ofpocket cost to get their medication. Waiting until rejection at the pharmacy is consistent with
both inattention and procrastination. However, there is evidence of forward-looking behavior to
preempt rejection in the After cohort as well, since home delivery adoption increased by 5
percentage points in January and an additional 10 percentage points in February, even though
only 1 claim was rejected in January and 263 claims were rejected in February.
Up to this point, our analysis has not distinguished between those who actively chose
retail pharmacy pickup and those who registered no choice at all with the PBM, thus ending up
with the implicit default of retail pharmacy pickup with no subsidy. An important contribution of
this paper to the literature on active choice mechanisms is to observe that the act of not making a
choice is an interesting outcome in its own right.

15

Figure 4 shows the fraction of individual-drug class observations with an active choice of
home delivery in the Before and After cohorts; for the After cohort, we also show the fraction
making an active choice for retail pharmacy pickup, and the fraction who retain retail pharmacy
pick-up by default because they made no active choice. In the Before cohort, only 6% actively
chooses home delivery at some point during the twelve-month observation period; the remainder
use retail pharmacy pick-up by default. In contrast, the active choice program is quite successful
at encouraging active decision-making in the After cohort, achieving an 81% active decision
rate. Active choices are fairly evenly split between home delivery (42%) and retail pharmacy
pick-up (39%). The remaining 22% of the After cohort make no choice. This highlights one
pitfall of efforts to encourage active choice in settings where it is not technologically feasible to
require it: some people may make no choice even when encouraged to do so (and, in this case,
even with financial incentives to do so).
How do characteristics of individuals in the After cohort vary with their prescription fill
outcomes? In Table 2, we present the average marginal effects from a multinomial logit
regression where the unit of observation is the employee-drug class combination. Those who
make no choice are more likely to be male, younger, more recently hired, lower-paid, taking
fewer medications, and less adherent. Those who choose home delivery are older, have been
more recently hired, are more highly paid, take more medications, and are more adherent. Those
who actively choose retail are more likely to be female, have longer tenure, are lower paid, take
more medications, and are more adherent.
Table 2 also shows that financial incentives matter for making an active choice. Higher
annual savings from switching from retail to home delivery significantly decrease the likelihood
of making no choice (marginal effect per $100 of savings = -0.0104, p < 0.05) and increase the

16

likelihood of choosing home delivery, although this latter effect is not significant at the 5% level
in the multinomial framework (marginal effect = 0.0081, p = 0.07). (Recall that in Table 1,
where the outcome variable was a binary indicator for whether home delivery was chosen,
potential cost savings increased the probability of choosing home delivery in a strongly
significant manner.)
Figure 5 further probes the role of financial incentives in encouraging individuals to
make an active choice. Recall that if members of the After cohort do not make an active choice,
they become liable for the full cost of future prescriptions starting with their third fill of the year.
The difference in out-of-pocket costs between having the prescription covered by insurance and
not covered is the direct incentive to actively choose. To examine the importance of this
incentive, we segment the prescription drug fill choice outcomes for the After cohort by the
insurance subsidy given to the last retail claim filled for that employee-drug class combination
on or before November 25, 2008. We see in Figure 5 that as the penalty for not choosing actively
increases, the frequency of not choosing decreases from 28% (when the insurance subsidy is $0)
to 15% (when the insurance subsidy exceeds $68).

Impact on Aggregate Prescription Drug Expenditures
The final outcome that we assess is the impact of the active choice program on aggregate
prescription spending by Company A and its employees. The program also likely conferred some
financial benefit to the PBM, but we do not have data with which to estimate this effect. Instead
of calculating the realized savings over the active choice time period analyzed thus far
(November 2008-October 2009), we calculate the annualized cost savings that would accrue to
employees and Company A in steady state.

17

Following the methodology described in Appendix B, we calculate aggregate annual
employee cost-savings of $417,001 and aggregate annual employer cost savings of $283,451, for
a total combined cost saving of $700,452. This is a $29.49 savings per capita for Company A
plus its employees.
These statistics do not account for any non-pecuniary benefits associated with home
delivery (e.g., greater convenience). Nor do they account for the costs of the program to
individuals, their physicians, the PBM, or retail pharmacies. These include the cognitive costs to
individuals of making an active choice and implementing a change to home delivery for those
who decide to switch, the cost to the PBM of operating the active choice program, the cost to
physicians of helping patients transfer their prescriptions to home delivery, and the cost to retail
pharmacies who lose some of their business to home delivery. For the PBM, the unmeasured
benefits presumably outweigh the unmeasured costs, as the PBM has expanded the active choice
approach to home delivery enrollment to many of its other clients.

Discussion
This paper adds to the small but growing literature on the effects of active choice
mechanisms. Most previous research studies settings in which individuals can be compelled, or
at least strongly coerced, to make a choice (e.g., Carroll et al. 2009, Kessler and Roth 2014,
Montoy, Dow and Kaplan 2016, Keller et al. 2011). In practice, there are many contexts like the
one we study here in which an active choice cannot be required. In these settings, reducing the
fraction of individuals who refuse to choose can increase the effectiveness of such interventions
at changing outcomes.

18

We document that in a large-scale implementation of active choice in such a domain that
involved nearly 24,000 individuals scattered across the U.S. and required the coordinated action
of pharmacists, physicians, and call-center workers, it is possible to achieve a high rate of
compliance where 81% of the eligible population makes an active choice. Toft, Schuitema, and
Thøgersen (2014) are able to achieve a 75% active choice rate in a small intervention involving
48 individuals presented with the option to adopt energy efficiency upgrades. Josephs et al.
(2018) are able to get 71% of 1,808 new hires to click on a “Future Healthcare Planning” link
that was presented as mandatory. Putnam-Farr and Riis (2016), who examine click-through rates
to e-mail solicitations regarding workplace wellness programs, get much lower active choice
rates of 7-13%.
Even though the decision not to actively choose is a relevant outcome, it has received
little attention in the literature on active choice interventions. We contribute to this literature by
examining the determinants of the no-choice outcome. First, we show that the propensity not to
choose is related to observable personal characteristics such as gender, age, salary, and tenure.
Second, we show that the probability of making no active choice responds to financial
incentives. In our study, individuals with the largest financial benefit from choosing are 13
percentage points more likely to make a choice than individuals with no financial benefit from
choosing. Choice architects can thus affect the likelihood of active choosing by selecting the
relative costs and benefits of the implicit default that is implemented in the no-choice scenario. A
very unattractive implicit default will minimize the probability of no active choice, but at the cost
of the ex post welfare of those who still make no active choice. If the penalty associated with the
implicit default is especially harsh, it may be difficult to commit to actually implementing it if
some individuals fail to choose.

19

Active choice mechanisms are often implemented in settings where agents are perceived
to not be sufficiently taking up a certain option. Consistent with most of the literature, we find
that active choice increases take-up of the targeted outcome relative to the opt-in regime, in our
case by 36 percentage points. This effect is large compared to the estimated effects of active
choice in other contexts. The study most similar to ours is Keller et al. (2011), who find a 10
percentage point increase in take-up of an automatic drug refill option in a setting where active
choice can be compelled and there is no financial incentive to choose the automatic drug refill
option. Carroll et al. (2009) document that an active choice approach to retirement savings plan
enrollment increases participation by 28 percentage points. Stutzer, Goette, and Zehnder (2011)
report that active choice increases blood donation rates by 5 to 9 percentage points among those
not aware of the importance of donating. Montoy, Dow and Kaplan (2016) find that an active
choice approach increases HIV testing rates by 13 percentage points. Josephs et al. (2018) report
that active choice increases the rate at which legally binding advance healthcare directives are
submitted by 4 percentage points. Toft, Schuitema, and Thøgersen (2014) document that active
choice increases adoption of energy efficiency upgrades by 13 percentage points, but this
difference is not statistically significant in their small sample. Kessler and Roth (2014) is the one
anomaly in this literature, finding that active choice decreases organ donation registration rates
by 2-6 percentage points.
The active choice implementation we study was bundled together with an extensive
communications campaign. The home delivery take-up effects we observe could in principle be
driven by the communications portion of the intervention rather than the active choice portion.
Alternatively, it could be that any novel policy would have increased home delivery uptake. But
the fact that there is relatively little adoption of home delivery before February 2009 despite

20

multiple communications in Fall 2008 and a sharp increase in adoption as the active choice
deadline approached points to active choice being the critical driver of the treatment effect.
Our results suggest that even when home delivery is an option for long-term maintenance
medications, many individuals are either unaware that the option exists, have not considered
whether they would prefer it to retail pharmacy pick-up, or have procrastinated in implementing
their preferences. Stutzer, Goette, and Zehnder (2011), who find that active choice increases
blood donation rates only among those who report being not sufficiently informed about the
importance of donating blood, argue that active choice facilitates preference formation, which is
consistent with the rationale for the active choice intervention that we study in this paper.
Note that any active choice mechanism will impose decision-making costs on individuals
who choose to choose (Sunstein, 2015). We do not have any information on the magnitude of
those costs in the context that we study here. Ideally, the decision-making costs of active choice
would be considered when assessing whether such interventions are appropriate.

Conclusion
We evaluate an active choice program that encourages employees on a long-term
prescription to actively choose whether to fill that prescription through home delivery or at a
retail pharmacy. Even though compliance with the requirement to actively choose was
incomplete, it increased the fraction of employees using home delivery by 36 percentage points
relative to a baseline home delivery utilization rate of 6 percent under the pre-existing opt-in
regime. Economic incentives matter: individuals with a higher expected level of cost savings
from switching to home delivery are more likely to choose home delivery. Making no choice is
also an important outcome: 19% of those required to make an active choice to preserve their

21

pharmacy insurance subsidies fail to do so. Individuals with little financial incentive to make an
active choice are much less likely to do so. The implicit default that is implemented when no
active choice is made is an important part of choice architecture in active choice regimes because
the implicit default serves as an incentive to choose and as the default for those who don’t.

References
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2008a. “How Are
Preferences Revealed?” Journal of Public Economics 92, 1787-1794.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2008b. “The Importance
of Default Options for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from the United States.”
In Stephen J. Kay and Tapen Sinha, editors, Lessons from Pension Reform in the
Americas. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 59-87
Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian and Andrew Metrick,
2009. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124,
1639-1674.
Federal Trade Commission, 2005. Pharmacy Benefit Managers: Ownership of Mail-Order
Pharmacies. http://ftc.gov/reports/pharmacy-trade-commission-report
Johnson, Eric J., and Dan Goldstein, 2003. “Do Defaults Save Lives?” Science 302(November
21), 1338-1339.

22

Keller, Punam Anand, Bari Harlam, George Loewenstein, and Kevin G. Volpp, 2011. “Enhanced
Active Choice: A New Method to Motivate Behavior Change.” Journal of Consumer
Psychology 21, 376-383.
Kessler, Judd B., and Alvin E. Roth, 2014. “Don’t Take ‘No’ for an Answer: An Experiment
with Actual Organ Donation Registrations.” NBER Working Paper No. 20378.
Leslie, R. Scott, Femida Gwadry-Sridhar, Patrick Thiebaud and Bimal V. Patel, 2008.
“Calculating Medication Compliance, Adherence and Persistence in Administrative
Pharmacy Claims Databases.” Pharmaceutical Programming 1, 13-19.
Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea, 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401 (k)
Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149-1187.
Montoy, Juan Carlos C., William H. Dow, and Beth C. Kaplan, 2016. “Patient Choice in Opt-in,
Active Choice, and Opt-Out HIV Screening: Randomized Clinical Trial.” BMJ
2016;352:h6895.
Putnam-Farr, Eleanor and Jason Riis, 2016. “‘Yes/No/Not Right Now’: Yes/No Response
Formats Can Increase Response Rates Even in Non-Forced-Choice Settings.” Journal of
Marketing Research 53, 424-32.
Stutzer, Alois, Lorenz Goette, and Michael Zehnder, 2011. “Active Decisions and Prosocial
Behaviour: A Field Experiment on Blood Donation.” Economic Journal 121, F476-F493.
Sunstein, Cass, 2015. Choosing Not to Choose: Understanding the Value of Choice. Oxford
University Press: New York, NY.

23

Toft, Madeleine Broman, Geertje Schuitema, and John Thøgersen, 2014. “The Importance of
Framing for Consumer Acceptance of the Smart Grid: A Comparative Study of Denmark,
Norway and Switzerland.” Energy Research and Social Science 3, 113-123.

Appendix A: Calculating the Savings to Individuals from Switching to Home Delivery
To calculate the potential cost savings to an individual from filling a claim through home
delivery rather than at a retail pharmacy, we have to impute what the copay would have been had
the claim been filled through the alternative channel. This is a measure we do not directly
observe. Instead, we impute the counterfactual copay from other similar claims. We now
describe this procedure.
Some individuals have claims for the same medication via both a retail pharmacy and
home delivery. For these individuals, we could use their own claims history to construct a
counterfactual copay (we call this “individual imputation”). However, many individuals in our
data only fill claims through either retail or home delivery. For these individuals, we do not have
the data necessary for individual imputation. As an alternative, we could construct a
counterfactual copay from the average of claims filled by everyone in our data who takes the
same medication but uses the other delivery channel (we call this “average imputation”). This
approach will result in fewer missing values for our “counterfactual copay” variable, but also
likely introduces greater measurement error at the individual level.
One approach to imputing the counterfactual copay would be to do the imputation at the
highest level of specificity possible—that is, to impute at the individual level if possible, and at
the average level otherwise. This approach is problematic because the Before and After cohorts
would not be treated symmetrically. Many more individuals in the After cohort have both retail
24

and home delivery claims, so there would be a dramatically higher individual imputation rate for
the After cohort. To make the imputation comparable across both cohorts, we instead use
average imputation to calculate counterfactual copayments for everyone.
A limitation of this second approach is that if an individual is taking an uncommon
medication, there may not be anyone else in the data who fills that medication in the same
formulation and dosage through the other delivery channel. For these claims, we impute the
copay using the nearest similar claim or claims in the data, where we define similarity from
either the NDC or GPI code for the medication. An NDC (National Drug Code) is a unique 10digit code assigned to each medication. Each code is divided into three segments. The first
segment identifies the drug labeler (e.g., the manufacturer or distributor). The second segment
identifies the strength, dosage form, and formulation of the drug. The third segment identifies the
package form and size. The GPI (Generic Product Identifier) is a 14-digit hierarchical drug
classification code with increasingly specific information contained in each pair of digits. The
first six digits identify the drug’s group, class, and subclass. Digits 7-10 identify the drug’s
generic name and extension, and digits 11-14 identify the drug’s dosage and form.
We impute counterfactual copayments using the highest level of specificity available. We
are able find a retail match for the vast majority of home delivery claims and vice versa using
either an exact NDC (which we look for first) or an exact GPI code. If we lack an exact NDC or
GPI match, we turn to drugs in our data that share the same 12-digit GPI code. If we still lack a
match, we then turn to drugs that share the same 10-digit GPI code, and so on, until we reach a
level of GPI aggregation that allows us to compute a copayment in the counterfactual delivery
channel for nearly all observations.

25

Because individuals in the After cohort are more likely to have claims filled through both
retail and home delivery than those in the Before cohort, they are also more likely to have a
claim for which we can find an exact NDC match with which to compute a counterfactual copay:
we can simply use their own claim. Thus, taking an average of the copayments over all claims at
a given level of drug comparability might result in less measurement error in the imputation
process for the After cohort than the Before cohort. To make the imputation process more
comparable across the two cohorts, we exclude an individual’s own claims filled through the
other delivery channel when calculating the average counterfactual copayment for a given claim.
To avoid introducing measurement error from the fact that retail drug prices change over
time, we only impute copayments for the Before cohort from claims submitted in 2007-2008, and
for the After cohort from claims submitted in 2008-09.
Potential savings for a home delivery claim are then derived by first calculating the
imputed retail copay minus the actual home delivery copay for each claim. We then average this
measure across all the claims submitted during the relevant observation period for each
individual-drug class combination. Finally, we take this measure of average savings and
annualize it, assuming perfect adherence, to obtain the ultimate measure of potential savings
used in our analysis.

Appendix B: Calculating the Aggregate Employee and Employer Savings from the Active
Choice Program
We calculate the aggregate reduction in prescription drug expenditures for both
employees and their employer as a result of the active choice program. Consumers benefit from
lower home delivery copays, while the employer benefits from the lower average prices net of

26

copays of prescriptions filled through home delivery. For the aggregate savings calculation, we
use all home delivery claims submitted from November 1, 2008, through December 31, 2009, for
drugs targeted by the active choice program.
The approach we use to calculate employee cost savings is more straightforward than that
described in Appendix A because we are calculating cost savings only for the After cohort, for
whom we have a complete and accurate copayment schedule. We thus do not need to maintain
consistency with calculations for the Before cohort.
For individuals for whom we observe both a retail and a home delivery claim for a
prescription with the same NDC, we use the individual-level average of the retail claim prices as
the counterfactual retail price for the home delivery claims. We split the total counterfactual cost
between the employer and employee using the copay schedule shown in Table A1. When we
don’t have an individual-specific retail NDC match for a home delivery claim, we use a
modification of the imputation procedure described in Appendix A.
Possible imputation methods combine (1) the choice between using only an individual’s
own retail claims versus retail claims from everyone else in the sample with (2) the level of drug
identification specificity that is used (NDC, GPI, or substrings of GPI). For each drug, we rank
the imputation methods by accuracy as follows. We first only look at the home delivery claims
for which we have an individual-level retail NDC match. For those claims, we can calculate the
average counterfactual retail costs on an individual-NDC level, which we will call the
“benchmark.” We then see what counterfactual retail cost would be calculated under each
imputation method if we did not have an individual-level retail NDC match available. We rank
the imputation methods, separately for each NDC, by the absolute average deviation between the
benchmark retail price and the imputed retail price.

27

Having ranked the imputation methods, we impute counterfactual retail costs of each
home delivery claim for which we do not have an individual-level retail NDC match, using the
highest-ranked imputation method that can be used for that claim. Note that this means the
imputation method can vary across drugs within an individual.
With the imputed counterfactual retail price and copayment for each home delivery
claim, we compute the employer and employee savings for each home delivery claim, convert
this to a savings per day, add up the daily savings for the period of time since an employee
switched to home delivery for a given drug class, and then annualize this amount to compute a
yearly measure of savings attributable to the active choice program.
There are three further adjustments that we make in arriving at our final cost savings
measure. The first is an adjustment for prescriptions that are not completely used up by the end
of the year and the possibility that some individuals are stockpiling prescriptions. For example, if
an employee filled a 90-day home delivery prescription on December 1, 2009 and took it as
prescribed, there would be a two-month supply left at the end of the year, although this employee
may not be stockpiling. If an employee filled a home delivery claim every two months of the
year instead of every three months of the year starting at the beginning of the year, and took the
medication as prescribed, there would be a 6-month supply left at the end of the year and this
employee would appear to be stockpiling. In either case, it would be inaccurate to assign the
entirety of the cost savings associated with the leftover medication at year-end to the period over
which we are calculating cost savings. For medications for which there is less than a month’s
supply left at the end of the year, we make no adjustments to the home delivery cost savings,
since filling prescriptions through the retail channel could lead to similar amounts of excess
supply. For medications for which there is more than a month’s supply left at the end of the year,

28

we scale down our cost savings estimate proportionally so that we attribute savings to no more
than one month of excess supply.
The second adjustment we make accounts for employees who were already using home
delivery before the implementation of the active choice program. The cost savings associated
with their home delivery claims should not be attributed to the program. We therefore drop the
home delivery claims of individuals who submit only home delivery claims in the six months
prior to November 1, 2008, when the initial targeting for the active choice program was done.
The third adjustment accounts for the fact that some individuals would have switched
from retail to home delivery even in the absence of the active choice program. The analysis
shown in Figure 2 suggest that roughly 15% of the After cohort who switched to home delivery
would have done so in the absence of the active choice program. We simply reduce the total cost
savings measure that we calculate by 15% to account for the switching that would have occurred
in the absence of the program.
Our estimate of the total cost savings after all adjustments are made is $417,001 for
employees and $283,451 for the employer, for a total cost savings of $700,452.

29

90

Percent of individuals

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sept

Oct

Before cohort retail participation

After cohort retail participation

Before cohort home delivery participation

After cohort home delivery participation

Figure 1. Home delivery and retail pharmacy utilization. The figure plots the percent of
individuals with at least one retail pickup (dotted lines) or one home delivery (solid lines) within
each month of the 12-month observation period. The unit of observation is the individual.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

0.50
0.45
0.40

Month effect

0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

Before cohort

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

After cohort

Figure 2. Regression-adjusted adoption of home delivery. The monthly adoption rate comes
from the calendar month dummies in the regression specification shown in the last column of
Table 1, where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether home delivery has ever been
used for the given employee-drug-class in the current month or prior. November 2007 is the
omitted category. Dotted lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. Source: Authors’ calculations.

5000

Number of claims rejected
(After cohort)

4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sept

Oct

Figure 3. Pharmacy claim rejections. This figure shows the number of prescription claims
rejected due to failure to make an active choice for the After cohort in each month from
November 2008 to October 2009. Source: Authors’ calculations.

100%

Prescription fill outcomes

19%
80%
60%

39%
94%

Actively choose retail
pharmacy pickup

40%
42%

20%
0%

No choice (retail
pharmacy pickup by
default)

Actively choose home
delivery

6%
Before cohort

After cohort

Figure 4. Distribution of prescription fill outcomes for the Before and After cohorts. This
figure shows the fraction of employee-drug class combinations in the Before and After cohorts
that, during the cohort’s 12-month observation period, (1) never makes an active choice for retail
pharmacy pickup and never receives a prescription through home delivery, (2) actively chooses
retail pharmacy pickup and never receives a home delivery, or (3) receives a prescription through
home delivery at some point. Source: Authors’ calculations.

100%

Prescription fill outcomes

80%

28%

60%

20%

20%

37%

37%

43%

42%

16%

16%

15%

39%

40%

39%

44%

44%

46%

40%

40%

20%

0%

32%

$0

>$0 & ≤ $10.5 >$10.5 & ≤ $21 >$21 & ≤ $31 >$31 & ≤ $68

>$68

No choice (retail pharmacy pick-up by default)
Actively choose retail pick-up
Actively choose home delivery
Figure 5. Prescription fill outcomes for the After cohort by prescription savings. This figure
shows the fraction of employee-drug class combinations in the After cohort that (1) never makes
an active choice for retail pharmacy pickup and never receives a prescription through home
delivery, (2) actively chooses retail pharmacy pickup and never receives a home delivery, or (3)
receives a prescription through home delivery at some point in the cohort’s 12-month
observation period. The sorting variable on the horizontal axis is the amount of the insurance
subsidy for the last retail claim filed for the employee-drug class combination before November
26, 2008. The bins are chosen so that each contains approximately the same number of
observations. Source: Authors’ calculations.

Table 1. OLS Regression Results for Home Delivery Adoption
The first

four columns of the table report coefficients from OLS regressions where the dependent
variable is a binary indicator for home delivery utilization at any point during the 12-month
observation periods for the Before and After cohorts. The unit of observation is the individualdrug class combination. The last column reports coefficients from an OLS regression where the
unit of observation is the employee-drug class-month combination. The dependent variable is a
binary indicator for whether home delivery had ever been used for this employee-drug class
combination in the current month or prior. The third and fourth columns are reporting
coefficients from a single regression; the fourth column shows the coefficients from interacting
the main explanatory variables in the third column with the After cohort dummy. Standard errors
are clustered at the individual level.

Interaction specification
With
controls

Main
effects

After cohort
interactions

Ever filled
home
delivery

0.3661**
(0.0042)
-0.0067
(0.0049)
0.0032**
(0.0002)

0.1352**
(0.0386)
-0.0046
(0.0042)
0.0016**
(0.0002)

-0.0044
(0.0090)
0.0028**
(0.0004)

-0.0047
(0.0036)
0.0025**
(0.0002)

-0.0285**
(0.0061)
-0.0305**
(0.0065)
-0.0479**
(0.0076)

-0.0129*
(0.0056)
-0.0202**
(0.0059)
-0.0233**
(0.0067)

-0.0252*
(0.0120)
-0.0135
(0.0127)
-0.0404**
(0.0142)

-0.0236**
(0.0044)
-0.0242**
(0.0047)
-0.0343**
(0.0055)

No
No

0.0079
(0.0061)
0.0203**
(0.0064)
0.0579**
(0.0068)
0.0011
(0.0018)
0.0007**
(0.0001)
0.0388**
(0.0062)
0.0079**
(0.0027)
Yes
No

0.0063
(0.0050)
0.0202**
(0.0056)
0.0339**
(0.0059)
-0.0046**
(0.0014)
0.0002**
(0.0001)
0.0794**
(0.0059)
0.0098**
(0.0022)

0.0041
(0.0117)
0.0019
(0.0117)
0.0420**
(0.0126)
0.0099**
(0.0031)
0.0009**
(0.0002)
-0.0473**
(0.0135)
-0.0032
(0.0048)

0.0057
(0.0044)
0.0153**
(0.0047)
0.0430**
(0.0049)
0.0017
(0.0013)
0.0006**
(0.0001)
0.0353**
(0.0044)
0.0065**
(0.0020)
Yes
Yes

0.164

0.185

0.193

0.202

N = 30,824
N = 83,688

N = 29,908
N = 80,988

N = 29,908
N = 80,988

N = 29,908
N = 971,856

No controls
After cohort
Female

0.3556**
(0.0040)

Age
Tenure (< 2 yrs. omitted)
2 to < 5 years
5 to < 10 years
10+ years
Salary (1st quart. omitted)
Salary 2nd quartile
Salary 3rd quartile
Salary 4th quartile
Number of targeted drugs
Past PDC
Past PDC missing
Potential annual savings
($100s)
MCI controls
Calendar month fixed
effects
R2
Sample size
Employees
Employee-drug class

* Significant at 5% level. ** Significant at 1% level.

Yes
No

Table 2. Multinomial Logit Regression Results for Prescription Fill Outcomes
in the After Cohort, Average Marginal Effects
This table shows average marginal effects from a multinomial logit regression where the sample
is the After cohort and the dependent variable is whether the employee-drug class combination
receives a prescription through home delivery at some point in the cohort’s 12-month
observation period, actively chooses retail pharmacy pickup and never receives a home delivery,
or never makes an active choice for retail pharmacy pickup and never receives a prescription
through home delivery.

Prescription fill outcome
Female
Age
Tenure (< 2 yrs. omitted)
2 to < 5 years
5 to < 10 years
10+ years
Salary (1st quartile omitted)
Salary 2nd quartile
Salary 3rd quartile
Salary 4th quartile
Number of targeted drugs
Past PDC
Past PDC missing
Potential annual savings ($100s)

Home delivery

Retail

No choice

-0.0096
(0.0082)
0.0042**
(0.0004)

0.0230**
(0.0085)
-0.0007
(0.0004)

-0.0134**
(0.0052)
-0.0036**
(0.0002)

-0.0413**
(0.0110)
-0.0357**
(0.0115)
-0.0630**
(0.0127)

0.0334**
(0.0113)
0.0464**
(0.0119)
0.0868**
(0.0133)

0.0079
(0.0067)
-0.0107
(0.0070)
-0.0238**
(0.0079)

0.0093
(0.0107)
0.0202
(0.0108)
0.0738**
(0.0114)
0.0113**
(0.0027)
0.0011**
(0.0001)
0.0348**
(0.0128)
0.0081
(0.0044)

-0.0084
(0.0112)
-0.0086
(0.0113)
-0.0508**
(0.0118)
0.0264**
(0.0030)
0.0010**
(0.0001)
0.0257*
(0.0130)
0.0023
(0.0044)
Yes
0.055

-0.0009
(0.0069)
-0.0116
(0.0070)
-0.0230**
(0.0071)
-0.0377**
(0.0023)
-0.0021**
(0.0001)
-0.0605**
(0.0069)
-0.0104*
(0.0046)

MCI controls
Pseudo R2
Sample size
Employees
Employee-drug class
* Significant at 5% level. ** Significant at 1% level.

N = 23,126
N = 44,139

Appendix Table A1. Prescription Drug Copayment Schedule for Company A in 2009
Type of
prescription drug

Retail,
30 day prescription

Home delivery,
90 day prescription

Home delivery
savings, 90 days

Generics (some)

$0

$0

$0

Generics (most)

$8

$20

$4

Preferred brand, no
generic available

$25

$55

$20

Preferred brand,
generic available

35% of full cost
$35 min/$70 max

35% of full cost
$70 min/$140 max

$35 min/$70 max

Non-preferred brand

35% of full cost
$45 min/$105 max

35% of full cost
$90 min/$210 max

$45 min/$105 max

Non-preferred brand,
excl. lifestyle drugs

35% of full cost
$70 min/$140 max

35% of full cost
$140 min/$280 max

$70 min/$140 max

Non-preferred brand,
lifestyle drugs

85% of full cost

80% of full cost

5% of full cost

Smoking cessation
products

20% of full cost

20% of full cost

$0

Fertility regulation
products

50% of full cost

50% of full cost

$0

The savings listed are those due solely to differences in the copay formulas. There could also be differences in
the full price of retail or home delivery prescriptions that cause the actual savings to be higher or lower than the
number listed. Source: Pharmacy Benefits Manager.

Appendix Table A2. Sample Characteristics for Company A
Before cohort
Dec 1, 2007

After cohort
Dec 1, 2008

All employees
Dec 1, 2008

49.9%

49.4%

37.0%

White

58.9%

61.4%

56.8%

Black

5.2%

5.6%

8.3%

Hispanic

2.1%

2.5%

6.2%

Missing

32.9%

29.4%

26.9%

Age (years)

46.4

46.4

39.7

Tenure (years)

4.9

5.7

3.9

$32,191

$32,994

$31,227

1.86

1.92

Not available

N = 20,486

N = 23,752

N = 166,221

Potential annual savings

$41.51

$39.69

Not available

Past Proportion of Days Covered (PDC)

71.2%

77.4%

Not available

Past PDC missing

19.7%

29.9%

Not available

N = 38,088

N = 45,600

Not available

A. Employee characteristics
Female
Race

Mean salary
Number of targeted drug classes
Sample size
B. Employee-drug class characteristics

Sample size
Source: Authors’ calculations.

