                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE EFFECT OF SUPERSTITION ON HEALTH:
                   EVIDENCE FROM THE TAIWANESE GHOST MONTH

                                         Martin Halla
                                         Chia-Lun Liu
                                          Jin-Tan Liu

                                      Working Paper 25474
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25474


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019




For helpful discussions and comments we would like to thank seminar participants at the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences (Centre for Social Sciences, RECENS) and the University of
Hohenheim. The usual disclaimer applies. A Web Appendix available on the corresponding
author’s website provides further results referenced in the paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Martin Halla, Chia-Lun Liu, and Jin-Tan Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Superstition on Health: Evidence from the Taiwanese Ghost Month
Martin Halla, Chia-Lun Liu, and Jin-Tan Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 25474
January 2019
JEL No. D83,D91,I12,Z12

                                         ABSTRACT

Superstition is a widespread phenomenon. We empirically examine its impact on health-related
behavior and health outcomes. We study the case of the Taiwanese Ghost Month. During this
period, which is believed to increase the likelihood of bad outcomes, we observe substantial
adaptions in health-related behavior. Our identification exploits idiosyncratic variation in the
timing of the Ghost Month across Gregorian calendar years. Using high-quality administrative
data, we document for the period of the Ghost Months reductions in mortality, hospital
admissions, and births. While the effect on mortality is a quantum effect, the latter two effects
reflect changes in the timing of events. These findings suggest potential benefits of including
emotional and cultural factors in public health policy.

Martin Halla                                    Jin-Tan Liu
Johannes Kepler Universität Linz                Department of Economics
martin.halla@jku.at                             National Taiwan University
                                                No. 1, Section 4, Roosevelt Road
Chia-Lun Liu                                    Taipei (10617), TAIWAN
Lehigh University                               and NBER
621 Taylor Street                               liujt@ntu.edu.tw
Bethlehem, PA 18015
chl416@lehigh.edu
1       Introduction
Historically, medicine was closely associated with superstitions, magic and religion. The
Greek physician Hippocrates laid the foundation for a rational approach to medicine.
While modern scientific medicine rejects any supernatural origin of disease, many patients
still believe in supernatural powers and superstition, or have severe misconceptions about
the origin of certain diseases and the effectiveness of treatments. For instance, the believe
that witchcraft can cause and heal diseases is widespread within developing countries in
general, and in Africa in particular (Tenkorang et al., 2011). One recent phenomenon
in high-income countries is the surge in the opposition to vaccines. The so-called “anti-
vaccine movement” is fueled by misconceptions and myths about immunizations (Chang,
2018; Hussain et al., 2018; Oster, 2018). Despite the pervasiveness of such wrong beliefs,
empirical evidence quantifying its impact on health is scarce.
     In this paper, we estimate the impact of superstition on health-related behavior and
health outcomes. Our research design is based on the so-called Ghost Month. In Taiwanese
culture, the seventh lunar month is Ghost Month. According to legend, during this month,
the gates of the afterlife are opened, and ghosts roam the living world. The presence of
the ghosts is believed to increase the risks of accidents and cause a higher likelihood of bad
outcomes in general. Therefore, believers of this legend try to avoid a number of activities,
such as traveling, swimming, leaving the house after sunset, major social events, major
purchases, and supposedly even elective surgeries. According to survey data, about 72
percent of all Taiwanese participate in the Ghost Month festival, and about 66 percent
believe that ghosts that are not offered any worship will wander around.1
     There are several potential channels through which the Ghost Month may affect health.
All channels are linked to the adaption of health-related behavior. The most effective
adaption would be a self-enforced restraint from (or avoidance of) certain social or eco-
nomic activities. Depending on the nature of these activities the effects on health can be
either positive of negative. The avoidance of activities involving risks or causing stress
may improve health. In contrast, adaptions in the domain of health-care utilization may
be detrimental. If followers avoid or postpone health-care services (such as surgeries or
births), they may jeopardize their health. The followers’ adaptions may also generate
spillover effects on others including non-followers. Other patients could be affected by
variation in hospital occupancy rates caused by followers. Or, on a macro-level, a reduc-
tion in the overall volume of traffic (and in related pollution) may have positive effects
on the population at a large.
     We have access to high-quality administrative data, which allows us to test the effect
of the Ghost Month in different domains. First, we have access to cause-specific mortality
    1
    About 20 percent believe in the latter statement “yes, very much”, and about 46 percent believe “yes,
somewhat”. All figures are based on data from the Taiwan Social Change Survey. Details are provided
in Section 2.


                                                   2
data. These allow us to infer on changes in activities associated with certain risks (such
as driving). Second, we can utilize information on hospital admissions to study health-
care utilization. Third, we use birth certificates to examine a potential effect on fertility
and children’s health at birth. We aim to identify an intention-to-treat (ITT) effect of
the Ghost Month, without relying on the actual behavioral adaption due to superstitious
beliefs. To identify this causal effect, we exploit the idiosyncratic timing of the Ghost
Month. The exact date of the Ghost Month is determined by the lunar calendar, which is
based on cycles of the lunar phases. Since the lunar and the Gregorian calendar are not
fully synchronized, the exact date of the Ghost Month varies in the Gregorian calendar
over years. For official and business purposes, Taiwan has adopted the Gregorian calendar
for the longest time. The traditional lunar calendar is only used to define the dates of
such festivals. Our estimation strategy is to identify the behavioral consequences of the
Ghost Month (in daily data), while controlling for Gregorian calendar day and year fixed-
effects. Thus, our identifying assumption is that the variation in timing of the Ghost
Month across Gregorian calendar years is not correlated with unobserved determinants of
our outcomes.2
    Our analysis provides evidence that the Ghost Month affects mortality, the timing of
health-care utilization, and fertility. During the Ghost Month, mortality drops by about
4 percent. Since there is no evidence that deaths were shifted to the period before or after
the event, we conclude that the Ghost Month saves (yearly about 316) lives. Our analysis
of cause-specific mortalities highlights two causal mechanism. First, there is a drop in
accidental deaths by about 8 percent. This effect is stronger among younger people, who
are less likely to die from drowning or traffic accidents. Second, there is a reduction in
non-accidental deaths by about 3 percent. This effect comes from people above 60, who
are less likely to die from cerebro-cardiovascular diseases. This can be explained with
a reduction in overall activity and lower levels of stress. With respect to health-care
utilization, we estimate a reduction in hospital admission during the Ghost Month by
about 4 percent. This reduction comes exclusively from admission with surgeries (minus
9 percent) and is substantially larger for “deferrable” conditions (up to minus 20 percent).
This effect is (at least to large extent) a tempo effect, since we observe more admissions
shortly before and after the Ghost Month. Further analysis provides some evidence for
negative health effects due to this re-scheduling of surgeries. Finally, we find an effect on
fertility. Births are significantly less likely during the Ghost month (minus 4 percent),
but peak shortly before and after. This tempo effect is mainly driven by an adaption in
conception and to a much smaller degree by a manipulation in the date of birth. There
   2
    A comparable estimation strategy has been used in the economic literature before to identify the effect
of diurnal fasting during pregnancy on later child outcomes, which exploits that the fasting month of
Ramadan follows the lunar calendar (Almond and Mazumder, 2011; Almond, Mazumder and Van Ewijk,
2015). These papers assume that pregnancies are not timed relative to Ramadan along unobserved
determinants of health.


                                                    3
are no adverse effects on birth outcomes.
    Our findings contribute to two strands of literature. First, we add to the literature
on superstition. Superstition is a widespread phenomenon. Data from the World Values
Survey (WVS), covering respondents from 33 countries, shows that about 19 percent cary
a lucky charm (such as a mascot or a talisman), and about 49 percent believe that a
lucky charm can protect or help them. About two-thirds of all respondents consult a
horoscope to know about their future, and about one-third takes this into account in
their daily life. While these beliefs and behavior are negatively correlated with education,
they are present in every strata of the population (see Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for
descriptive statistics and a regression analysis, respectively.) These figures make clear
that superstition should not be treated as a cognitive deficit found in small parts of the
population.3
    Despite the high prevalence of superstition, little is known how these false beliefs affect
market outcomes and overall welfare. The existing empirical evidence in the economics
and finance literature comes predominantly from stock markets, housing markets, and
license-plate auction markets.4 While these settings provide excellent environments to
study the effects of superstition on market outcomes, the negative welfare-consequences
are in these cases probably limited. We consider any effects on health as more relevant.
Here the analytical evidence is sparse. In the medical literature, there are a couple
of mostly descriptive papers showing that superstition affects the timing of health-care
utilization.5 Economics scholars have so far focused on the effect of superstition on the
   3
     Recent theoretical literature in economics and psychology considers choices influenced by superstition
as the result from wrong beliefs. These modelling approaches face the challenge to explain how wrong
beliefs (= superstition) can persist. Economic models are sparse. Most prominently, Fudenberg and
Levine (2006) show in a game-theoretic model that (some but not all) superstition can persist, even
when agents are rational. The model’s key insight is, loosely speaking, that persistence tends to arise if
superstition is about something that happens very infrequently. Psychologists suggest to use dual process
models — such as the corrective model advocated by Kahneman and Shane (2002, 2005) — to understand
why superstitious thinking is widespread. These models suggest that individuals derive their choices
using two systems: “System 1 quickly proposes intuitive answers to judgment problems as they arise, and
System 2 monitors the quality of these proposals, which it may endorse, correct or override” (Kahneman
and Shane, 2005, page. 51). If individuals explicitly recognize that their intuitive judgment was wrong,
but nevertheless maintain it, they are said to acquiesce to their intuition (Risen, 2016).
   4
     In the finance literature, a note by Kolb and Rodriguez (1987) started a debate, whether stock market
returns on Friday the thirteenth are different from the returns of other Fridays (Dyl and Maberly, 1988;
Chamberlain et al., 1991; Coutts, 1999; Lucey, 2001). There is evidence for an impact of numbers con-
sidered ‘lucky’ in Chinese numerology on financial decision in the Chinese initial public offering market
(Hirshleifer et al., 2018), in the Chinese real estate markets (Shum et al., 2014), as well as in the North
American market (Fortin et al., 2014). Similar findings are documented on the Russian market (Pokry-
shevskaya and Antipov, 2015). There is also a small literature on the law and economics of superstition
(summarized in Leeson (2017)), which uses rational choice theory to explain seemingly bizarre practices.
   5
     The outcomes under consideration are the timing of hospital discharge in Japan (Hira et al., 1998)
and Norther-Ireland (O’Reilly and Stevenson, 2000), of orthopedic surgeries in Taiwan (Chiu et al.,
2018), and the timing of death in several countries (Panesar and Goggins, 2009; Anson and Anson, 2001;
Wilches-Gutiérrez et al., 2012). With respect to accidents there is best to our knowledge only one paper.
Yang et al. (2008) present descriptive evidence that drowning deaths decrease in Taiwan during the Ghost
Month.


                                                    4
timing and mode of birth. Almond, Chee, Sviatschi and Zhong (2015) provide evidence
that Chinese-American mothers manipulate the timing of birth to achieve a “lucky” or
to avoid an “unlucky” birthdate, which include the number “8” and “4”, respectively.
This skewed pattern in the timing of Chinese birth is driven by sons only. The authors
provide further evidence that the change in timing is accompanied with an increase in
the incidence of C-sections. A comparable pattern was pointed out in two papers in
the medical literature, both of which study Taiwan.6 Whether or not the change in the
timing and/or mode of birth has consequences for the children’s health remains is not
analyzed in these studies.7 We add to this literature by studying the consequences of
superstition in high-quality administrative data and providing the first comprehensive
analysis of superstition and health. In terms of outcomes, our analysis (goes beyond
the timing and mode of birth and) studies a wide array of outcomes allowing us to
infer on the effect of superstition on activities involving certain risks and all types of
inpatient health care-utilization. In contrast to the mostly descriptive studies in the
medical literature, our evidence is derived from an econometric estimation strategy that
exploits only idiosyncratic variation in the timing of superstitious behavior.
    Second, we contribute more broadly to the literature on the demand for health-care
that incorporates non-rational factors (Rice, 2013; Matjasko et al., 2016). Our findings
show that false believes (driven by superstition) are an important case of bounded ratio-
nality in the domain of health. We show that superstition has far-reaching consequences
not only for health-care utilization, but also for health outcomes and even for mortality.
While our evidence is based on a specific case, we conclude more generally to pay more
attention to emotional and cultural factors in the demand for health-care. There are
several public health concerns which should be addressed with a more holistic approach.
For instance, policymakers in high-income countries have to resolve the underutilization
of vaccinations and the overutilization of antibiotics. Low-income countries face problems
such as non-pathogenic disease theories (Bennett et al., 2018), harmful belief in witchcraft
or female genital mutilation (Vogt et al., 2016).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the leg-
end of the Ghost Month in more detail and provides survey-based evidence on the number
and characteristics of followers. Section 3 presents our research design and discusses our
data sources, our estimation strategy and some descriptive statistics of our estimation
samples. Section 4 discusses our main findings. Section 5 concludes the paper.
   6
     Lo (2003) shows in data from the year 1988 that C-sections are significantly higher (lower) on aus-
picious (inauspicious) days. Closer related to our work is Lin et al. (2006), who also study the Ghost
Month. They provide evidence that C-section rates are significantly lower during the Ghost Month.
   7
     A related strand of literature examines how incentives created by taxes and subsidies affect the
timing of births (see, for instance, Dickert-Conlin and Chandra, 1999; Gans and Leigh, 2009; Schulkind
and Shapiro, 2014; LaLumia et al., 2015; Borra et al., forthcoming). This behavior can — in contrast to
adaptions due to superstition — in principle be reconciled with rational behavior. However, this literature
points to negative health effects due to birth date manipulations.


                                                    5
2       Ghost Month
In Taiwanese culture, the seventh lunar month is called Ghost Month. According to
legend, during this period, the gates of the afterlife are opened, and ghosts roam the
living world. The presence of the ghosts is believed to increase the risks of accidents and
elevate the likelihood of bad outcomes in general. Therefore, believers of this legend try
to avoid several activities. For instance, swimming during the Ghost Month is considered
as dangerous since people believe ghosts are looking for victims of drowned to be reborn.
Hospitals are regarded as the places where life and death are connected. Thus, believers
avoid visiting hospitals and supposedly even doing surgeries during the Ghost Month.
Other activities believers try to avoid include, but not limited to, traveling, leaving the
house after sunset, whistling at night, major social events such as funerals and weddings,
and major purchases.
    The period of the Ghost Month is defined by the lunar calendar. Since the lunar
calendar has intercalary months and days, it changes in relation to the Gregorian calendar
every year. Thus, the timing of the Ghost Month changes across years defined by the
Gregorian calendar. Figure 1 shows the variation in the starting and end date of the
Ghost Month (according to the Gregorian calendar) across the years 1980 to 2000. The
27th of July, for instance, was only in the year 1995 in the Ghost Month. In all other
years, the 27th of July was before the Ghost month. The dates of the lunar calendar are
always published in the printed Gregorian calendar and Taiwanese people are well aware
of the start and end-date of the Ghost Month.
    How widespread is the belief in the Ghost Month? During the Ghost Festival, which
is on the 15th day of the Ghost Month, people prepare food, burn incense, and burn joss
paper to the spirits of ancestors and lost ghosts. It is widely believed that worshiping
to the supernatural power can protect people. According to the data from the Taiwan
Social Change Survey (TSCS), about 72% of Taiwanese take part in the Ghost Festival.8
Of course, participating in this festival could simply reflect cultivation of customs and
traditions, and does not necessarily imply that participants actually believe in the legend.
To assess the prevalence of the latter phenomenon, we use the following survey question:
“Do you believe that, ghosts that are not offered any worship will wander around? ”. Ac-
cording to data from several waves of the TSCS, about 66 percent of Taiwanese believe
either “very much” or “somewhat” in this statements on ghosts. Table 1 shows the full
distribution of answers by survey years from 1994 to 2014. The share of believers is re-
markably stable over this 20 years time period. Since the responses to this question reveal
how strong respondents believe in the existence of ghosts, it should be a good proxy for
whether they also believe in the Ghost Month. In fact, the share of Taiwanese believing
    8
    Similar to the WVS, the TSCS tracks the long-term trends of various values in Taiwanese society. The
survey is carried out at 5-year cycles for each topic of questionnaires and provides pooled cross-sectional
data. The 72 percent stated in the main text are based on data from 1990.


                                                    6
in ghosts is almost as high as the participation rate in the Ghost Festival.
    Who are the believers of the Ghost Month? Having established that about two-thirds
of all Taiwanese believe in the Ghost month, we want to explore whether believers differ
systematically from non-believers in their socioeconomic characteristics. To provide evi-
dence we estimate a linear probability model. We define a binary variable equal to one
if people respond either “very much” or “somewhat” to the ghost question from above
and regress this on several demographic characteristics. The estimation results are sum-
marized in Table 2. It turns out that females and employed individuals are more likely
to be superstitious. The estimated effects are about plus 10 and 3 percentage points,
respectively. We see that superstition is decreasing with age, however the magnitude
is quite small. Most importantly, we learn that the belief is negatively associated with
educational attainment. For instance, respondents with a college degree are about 23
percentage points less likely to believe as compared to the base group with primary edu-
cation only. A comparison of the second and the third column reveals that conditioning
on educational attainment, household income is not correlated with believing.9
    Are believers of the Ghost Month indeed adapting their behavior? So far, we have
evidence that roughly two-thirds of Taiwanese believe in the Ghost Month, with believers
being more likely young, female and having a lower level of education. This evidence
based on stated preferences suggests that the Ghost Month may have pronounced effects
on actual behavioral. In our main analysis, we will test whether this translates into
health effects. At this point we are able to present some evidence on the avoidance of
major social events. We have access to data from Marriage Certificates, which covers the
universe of marriages from 1998 to 2006. Figure 2 depicts the aggregated average number
of daily marriages around the Ghost Month. This figure clearly shows that people avoid
getting married during the entire period of the Ghost Month. The average number of daily
marriages sixty days before and after the Ghost Month is 283, while the corresponding
number during the Ghost Month is only 29. This is equivalent to a reduction of about 90
percent. While these behavioral adaption — most likely affecting only the timing, but not
the incidence of marriages — bears no welfare consequences, it nicely demonstrates that
the Ghost Month affects behavior.10
    In summary, stated and revealed preferences provide compelling evidence for widespread
behavioral adaptions due to superstitious beliefs in the Ghost Month.
   9
     The correlations with sex, age and education are remarkably similar to those found in the analysis of
the determinants of other aspects of superstition in international survey data discussed in the introduction
(see Appendix Table A.2). A more comprehensive analysis of the determinants of superstition based on
WVS data is provided by Torgler (2007). Mocan and Pogorelova (2017) exploit compulsory schooling
reforms in 11 European countries to show that education causally decreases these superstitious beliefs.
  10
     An alternative strategy to provide evidence for behavioral adaption during the Ghost Month, would
have been the analysis of time-use survey data. Unfortunately, all three waves of the Time Utilization
Survey have been conducted outside the Ghost Month.




                                                     7
3      Research Design
In this section, we first introduce our administrative data sources and define our outcome
variables. Then we present our estimation strategy and discuss the resulting identifying
assumption. In the final step, we present some descriptive statistics for our estimation
samples.


3.1     Data Sources
For our empirical analysis, we have access to several high-quality administrative data
sources from Taiwan. We use three different individual-level data sets: (1) Death Cer-
tificates; (2) Inpatient Hospitalization Records; and (3) Birth Certificates. The first data
set covers the universe of all deaths in the period between 1980 and 2001. It includes
information on the exact date of death and the cause of death according to the Inter-
national Classification of Diseases (ICD). The second data set comprises information on
all hospital admissions in the period between 1982 and February 1995 for the sample of
people, who had been covered by Labor Insurance.11 It includes information on the exact
dates of admission and discharge, diagnosis, medical treatment, and fees. The third data
set includes information on live births in the period between 1978 and 2006. It comprises
information on the date and location of birth, gestational length, birth weight, and some
socioeconomic information on parents.


3.2     Outcome Variables
To study the effect of the Ghost Month on accidents, the demand of health-care utilization
and fertility, we compile different panel data sets with daily observations across all 25
counties in Taiwan. The outcome variables are the daily number of deaths (by type),
daily number of hospital admissions (by type), and the daily number of births. We also
consider sub-samples defined by characteristics such as sex, age, educational attainment
to explore potential heterogeneity of treatment effects.
    To estimate the health consequence of avoiding having appropriate medical treatments
due to false beliefs, we use individual-level data on mortality, morbidity and birth out-
comes. We use the national identification number received by each citizen in Taiwan
to merge inpatient data and Death Certificates to track death records of patients after
their hospitalization. This allows us to test whether shifting a surgery to avoid the Ghost
Month affects the probability of death within a certain period of time. To assess any
  11
    The individuals are only observed until February 1995 since the National Health Insurance (NHI)
was introduced in Taiwan after March 1995. In this study, we only obtain hospital admissions data before
the NHI. For more details on the NHI of Taiwan, see Chou et al. (2014). According to official statistics,
the number of workers who are covered by Labor Insurance before the introduction of NHI is 8, 496, 883,
which comprises 55.3% of the population aged over 15.



                                                   8
effects on morbidity, we use the longitudinal component of the Inpatient Hospitalization
Records. This allows us to estimate any effect on the likelihood of a hospital re-admission.
In the case of births, we use the information on gestational length and birth weight in
birth certificates. This data allows us to define binary outcomes of being preterm, low
birth weight, and very low birth weight.


3.3     Estimation Strategy
To identify causal effects, we exploit that the exact timing of the Ghost Month varies
across years defined by the Gregorian calendar. Figure 1 depicts the variation in the
starting and end dates across the years 1980 to 2000. To define our estimation sample
we use the earliest start date (27th of July) and latest end date (22nd of September). We
further exclude 24th and 25th of August, which belong to the Ghost Month in every year.
This way we have in our estimation sample for each calendar day at least one year, in
which this day was during the Ghost Month, as well as, at least one year, in which this
particular day was outside the Ghost Month. This variation allows us to estimate the
effect of the Ghost month, while controlling for Gregorian calendar day fixed-effects. To
be more specific, this idea can be translated into the following type of estimation model,
                                              X            X          X
                   Ordy = α + τ · gmdy +            κd +       δy +       γr + nbdy + it                (1)
                                                d          y          r


where Ordy is the absolute number of incidences in outcome O on Gregorian calendar-day
d in year y in region r. The coefficients capturing the Gregorian calendar-days fixed-
effects are denoted by κd . We also control for Gregorian calendar year fixed-effects (δy )
to capture unobserved secular trends in the respective outcome variable, and for regional
fixed-effects (γr ) accounting for time-invariant heterogeneity across regions. Finally, we
control for two types of non-business days (nbdy ). First, we include a binary variable equal
to one if the day is either a Saturday or a Sunday.12 Second, we control for official public
holidays and so-called “unofficial holidays”. This requires the inclusion of two binary
control variables for the Mid-Autumn Festival and Qixi Festival, respectively.13
  12
     It is important to control for weekends. First, there is typically a substantially lower volume of
health-care utilization on weekends. For instance, we expect a significantly lower number of hospital
admissions. Second, different strands of literature have documented a weekday pattern also in mortality.
For instance, the so-called weekend effect describes the robust finding that the risk of mortality after
admission to a hospital is significantly higher on weekends as compared to weekdays (Pauls et al., 2017).
  13
     In Taiwan, there are (official) public holidays and so-called “unofficial holidays”. In both categories,
some holidays are determined by the Gregorian calendar, while others follow the lunar calendar. The
holidays determined by the Gregorian calendar are in our estimation models automatically covered by the
Gregorian calendar-days fixed-effects κr . Notably, in the relevant time period (i.e., between the 27th of
July and the 27th of September) there are only 3 holidays, all of which are unofficial ones (Father’s Day
on the 8th of August, the Journalist’ Day on the 1th of September, and the Armed Forces Day on 3rd of
September). The holidays determined by the lunar calendar require additional control variables in our
model. During the relevant time period there is one official public holiday and one unofficial holiday.


                                                     9
    The variable of primary interest is gmdy , which is equal to one if the day d is within
the Ghost Month in the given year y, and zero otherwise. The coefficient τ measures
the effect of the Ghost Month on the respective outcome. Thus, we aim to identify an
intention-to-treat (ITT) effect, without relying on the actual behavioral adaption due to
superstitious beliefs. We have to assume that the timing of the Ghost Month is exogenous,
but the unobserved behavioral adaption can be endogenous. Using the language of RCTs,
we could compare the timing of the Ghost Month with the assignment to treatment (which
has to be random), and the actual behavioral adaption is equivalent to the compliance
(which can be endogenous). This exogeneity assumption is equivalent to assuming that the
variation in timing of the Ghost Month across Gregorian calendar years is not correlated
with unobserved determinants of the respective health outcome. We see no obvious reason
why the idiosyncratic timing of the Ghost month should be correlated with unobserved
determinants of the daily number of deaths, hospital admissions, or births.
    We estimate a version of eq. (1) that allows for a more flexible behavioral adaption
with respect to the timing. If individuals adjust their health relevant behavior in response
to the Ghost Month, they may also pre- or postpone certain activities to the period before
or after the Ghost Month. To test this specific adaption, we include binary variables gm−5 dy
and gm+5 dy , which are equal to one if the day d is within a 5 days period before and  after
the start of the Ghost Month in the given year y, respectively.

         Ordy = α + τ pre gm−5    1  1−10
                            dy + τ gmdy   + τ 2 gm11−20
                                                  dy    + τ 3 gm21−last
                                                                dy      + τ post gm+5
                                                                                   dy
                                                     X         X         X                       (2)
                                                   +     κd +      δy +       γr + it
                                                            d          y        r


Further, we allow the effect of the Ghost Month on the respective health outcome to
vary across the duration of the Ghost month. We distinguish between the first ten days
(gm1−10
    dy ), the second ten days (gmdy
                                    11−20
                                          ), and the remaining nine or ten days (gm21−last
                                                                                    dy     ).
Thus, the parameters τ 1 , τ 2 and τ 3 show to which degree the incidences change during
the Ghost Month, while τ pre and τ post , inform us about related pre- and or postponment.


3.4     Estimation Samples and Descriptive Statistics
Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for our estimation samples drawn from three differ-
ent data sources. First, we use data from Death Certificates (see Panel A). These data are
available in the period between 1980 and 2001. We compile a daily county-level data set
with 30,750 observations. Here we focus on calendar days for which with have variation
in the Ghost Month status over the years (see notes to Table 3 for details). The average
daily incidence of death is 10.78 cases, including 1.32 cases of accidental deaths and 9.26
The former is the Mid-Autumn Festival (on 15th day of the 8th lunar month) and the latter is the Qixi
Festival (on the 7th day of 7th lunar month).



                                                 10
cases of non-accidental deaths. For a small fraction of cases, the cause is unknown. Sec-
ond, we use data from Inpatient Hospitalization Records, which are available in the period
between 1982 and 1995 (see Panel B). Our unit of observation is again county-day. The
average number of admissions is 66.15, including about 41% of admissions with surgeries
and 59% without surgeries. Finally, we use Birth Certificates, which are available in the
period between 1978 and 2006 (see Panel C). We compile a daily county-level data set on
number of live births. We further use individual-level data to study birth outcomes. Here
we focus on births to mothers aged between 16 and 45. This sample comprises 1,537,170
births, where the average gestation is 39.2 weeks and the average birth weight is around
3,200 grams.


4       Estimation Results
We present our estimation results in three steps. First, we discuss our evidence on the
effect on (cause-specific) mortality. Second, we present our estimates on adaptions in
the domain of health-care utilizations using information on different types of hospital
admissions. We also explore consequences of the latter behavior on subsequent health
outcomes. Third, we turn to our evidence on the effect on fertility and birth outcomes.


4.1       Mortality
Table 4 summarizes our results of the estimation model described by eq. (2). The depen-
dent variable is the daily number of deaths (of a certain type) at county-level divided by its
sample mean. Thus, our estimates are semi-elasticities and can be interpreted as percent
changes. We find robust evidence for a reduction in mortality during the Ghost Month.
The overall number of deaths decreases by around 3.9 percent. The estimates suggest that
the effect is somewhat stronger during the first 10-day interval (almost minus 5 percent)
and decreases thereafter to 3 to 4 percent (see column (1)). All three coefficients are pre-
cisely estimated and statistically significant at the 1-percent level. In contrast, there are
no significant changes in mortality just before or after the Ghost Month. This suggests
that the reduction in mortality is not a tempo, but a quantum effect. Put differently,
behavioral adaptions to the Ghost month save lives. Each year about 316 lives are saved
due to behavioral adaptions in response to the Ghost Month.14
    In columns (2) and (3) of Table 4, we distinguish between the two broad categories of
accidental and non-accidental deaths, which are defined by the ICD-9 code available in our
data. We find comparably stronger effects for accidental as compared to non-accidental
deaths. In the former case, we see reductions between 7 to almost 10 percent. This effect
is quantitatively very comparable to the weekday-weekend gradient in this estimation,
 14
      This estimate is calculated as follows: 10.782 × 3.9% estimated reduction×30 days×25 counties = 316.


                                                    11
which suggests that there are 9 percent more accidental deaths on weekends. In contrast,
non-accidental deaths go down by only 3 to 4 percent. Notably, the baseline level of
non-accidental deaths is, however, much larger, such that the effect is more important in
absolute terms.15
    The drop in accidental deaths can unambiguously be explained by a reduction in
activities with certain risks. Since we do not see any significant effects just before or after
the Ghost Month, we conclude that individuals not only pre- or postpone risky activities,
but completely forgo these during the Ghost Month. To gain more insights, we re-run our
analysis for cause-specific mortalities summarized in Table 5. Columns (1) to (5) report
the results for the top five leading causes of accidental deaths; daily averages are reported
in the lower panel. We find the strongest effects on deaths caused by traffic accidents
(about minus 7 percent) and drowning (about minus 23 percent). This evidence is in line
with the widespread Ghost Month beliefs, that strongly emphasize to avoid swimming,
traveling, and leaving the house after sunset. For other accidental causes of death (i.e.,
falling, poisoning, and electric) we only find weak evidence.
    In the case of non-accidental deaths, the interpretation of the results is not so straight-
forward. There are two plausible causal mechanism. First, the reduction of overall activity
during the Ghost Month may lead to lower levels of stress; reducing the mortality among
high-risk groups. Second, the negative effect on mortality may be related to adaptions in
health-care utilizations. We come back to the latter channel in Section 4.2.2, and examine
cause-specific mortalities to explore the former mechanism. We focus on the top five lead-
ing underlying cause of non-accidental deaths in our data: Diabetes mellitus; Malignant
neoplasm of liver and intrahepatic bile ducts; Malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus,
and lung; Acute but ill-defined cerebrovascular disease; and Chronic liver disease and
cirrhosis. We suggest to interpret deaths by diabetes mellitus predominantly as caused
by cerebro-cardiovascular diseases.16 Our estimations results are summarized in columns
(6) to (10) of Table 5. We find a significant effect of the Ghost Month for two (out of five)
cause-specific deaths: cerebrovascular disease and diabetes mellitus. Both categories can
  15
      In the Death Certificates, there are about 1.9 percent of cases with an unknown cause of death (i.e.,
the ICD-9 code is missing, see Table 3). We also examine the effects of the Ghost Month on the incidence
of these cases. We find no statistically significant coefficients.
   16
      First, one has to acknowledge that the reporting practice of one cause does not capture the reality
of many deaths having multiple causes. Our data follows ICD-9, which defines the underlying cause of
death (UCD) as “the disease [. . . ] which initiated the train of morbid events leading directly to death”.
In the case of diabetes, it is generally difficult to unambiguously determine one UCD, since most diabetic
patients suffer from multiple conditions. Importantly, patients with diabetes are almost twice as likely
to have a heart attack or a stroke as people who do not have diabetes. Second, it is documented that
Taiwanese physicians tend to choose diabetes as the UCD if multiple diseases coexist. The latter fact
is discussed in a report published (in Mandarin) by the Department of Health, Executive Yuan (Chen,
2005), which has access to Death Certificates with richer information. This report compares Taiwanese
physicians with their peers from Sweden and the US. It offers three explanations why Taiwanese physicians
“favor” diabetes as UCD if multiple diseases coexist: (i) it is a habit of local physicians, (ii) it is due
to medical training in filing the death certificates, or (iii) it is the location of filling diabetes on the
Taiwanese certificates paperwork. Third, we have checked our suggested interpretation with a physician.


                                                    12
be associated with a decreased number of deaths due to strokes and heart attacks. We
suggest that the negative effect on non-accidental deaths, can be explained by a reduced
risk-exposure due to the avoidance of activities such as traveling, going-out at night and
major events.17

4.1.1    Treatment Effect Heterogeneity

Our survey data analysis suggests that female, younger and less educated individuals
tend to be more superstitious (see Table 2). Given that the Death Certificates include
individual-level information on sex, age and educational attainment, we can test whether
these differences in stated preferences translate into differences in revealed preferences.
Put differently, we check whether behavioral adjustment due to superstitious beliefs and
the resulting effects on mortality vary significantly across different sub-samples defined
by these socio-demographic characteristics. Figure 3 depicts the estimation results using
our main model described by eq. (2) by these group and place of occurrence. We find no
significant differences between the sexes or educational groups. The same holds true for
residents in urban and rural areas. With respect to age, we find (in line with the stated
preferences) stronger effects for younger individuals. Teenagers, a group which is prone to
risky behavior, seem to benefit the most from behavioral adjustments during the Ghost
Month. If we distinguish between accidental and non-accidental deaths and apply our
heterogeneity analysis on these two sub-sample (not shown), we learn that the effects for
teenagers indeed exclusively comes from accidental deaths. In contrast, the reduction in
non-accidental deaths is driven by individuals above 60.

Overall, our analysis of mortality provides evidence that behavioral adaptions to the
Ghost Month — such as a reduction in risky activities and overall activity — save lives by
reducing accidental and non-accidental deaths.


4.2     Health-care Utilization: Hospital Admissions
We now turn to the effect of the Ghost Month on health-care utilization. There are
four potential causal channels: (i) the reduction in risky activities may not only reduce
mortality, but also lead to a decline in hospital admissions; (ii) the reduction in overall
activity may reduce related admissions, such as strokes or heart attacks; (iii) superstitious
patients may want to avoid hospital admissions during the Ghost Month and schedule
  17
     One potential causal pathway is reduced exposure to pollution. We have tried to test the hypothesis
that pollution levels are lower during the Ghost Month. Our analysis was based on a data-set on different
pollutants in the period between 1982 and 2001 covering up to 71 monitoring stations operated by the
Environmental Protection Administration, Executive Yuan. While we found mostly negative effects of
the Ghost Month on pollution levels, we consider these findings not robust. Detailed estimation output
is available upon request.



                                                   13
their appointments accordingly; (iv) superstitious doctors may reduce their labor supply
during the Ghost Month. While all mechanism would lead to a reduction of health-care
utilization during the Ghost Month, we expect for the former two channels a quantum
effect, and for the latter two channels a tempo effect.
    Our first outcome variable is the daily number of hospital admissions. Column (1) of
Table 6 shows that hospital admissions are significantly lower during the Ghost Month.
The effect size varies somewhat over the course of the period with an average of about
minus 3.8 percent. However, unlike the quantum effect we observed in the case of mortal-
ity, the evidence for health-care utilization points to a tempo effect. We find significant
effects for an increased number of admissions in the period just after the Ghost Month
of about 6 percent. Since the time span for postponing surgeries is unknown, it is hard
to assess whether the total effect is mere tempo or also some quantum. Thus while we
cannot rule out the presence of the causal channels iii. and iv, we can conclude that
channel i. and/or ii. are in place.
    This results suggest that the main causal driver of this effect is a lower demand (or
supply) for medical services. It seems plausible that believers of the Ghost Month only
try to avoid potentially risky health-care services. To test this hypothesis, we distinguish
in columns (2) and (3), between patients who undergo surgery during the hospital stay,
and those who do not. As expected, the effect is driven by the more risky admissions
with surgery. We find a significant reduction in this category, during the Ghost Month of
about 9 percent and important increases just before and after of about 3 and 8 percent,
respectively. This result confirms the interpretation of a tempo effect, with believers pre-
and postponing surgeries. Since the effect of the postponement is comparably larger, we
conclude that it is easier for patients to defer a hospital visit rather than schedule an
earlier one. In the case of admission without surgeries, there is only some evidence for an
increased number right after the Ghost Month.
    Given this clear evidence that patients distinguish between different types of health-
care utilization, we provide further tests exploiting the degree of “deferability” of admis-
sions. To approximate the deferability of an admission, we follow a procedure suggested by
Card et al. (2009). They exploit the fact that hospitals typically schedule planned admis-
sions for “deferrable” conditions on weekdays, when more staff is available. In contrast,
unplanned admissions for “non-deferrable” conditions should have very similar weekend
and weekday admission rates. Following this logic, the fraction of weekend admissions in
the case of absolutely “non-deferrable” conditions should be close to 2/7. We compute
the fraction of weekend admissions at the diagnosis-level using data in the period between
1982 and 1992.18 This gives us a distribution of fractions of weekend admissions rates
  18
     We do not use data from the years 1993 and 1994, since many observations have missing diagnosis
codes. This is probably related to the introduction of the National Health Insurance in March 1995 (see
footnote11. In the course of this, Taiwan has changed its classification system of diagnostic codes (from
so-called “A-codes”) to ICD-9. We speculate that in the two years prior to NHI some hospitals already


                                                   14
across all diagnosis, reflecting a decreasing degree of “deferability” as one moves from the
left to the right tail. We then compute quartiles for fraction of weekend admissions and
split the diagnosis codes into four groups.
    In Table 7 we present results on the effect of the Ghost Month on the daily number
of hospital admissions with surgeries in these four sub-samples of diagnosis with varying
degree of “deferability”. A comparison of estimated coefficients across columns, clearly
shows that the effect of the Ghost Month increases with the “deferability” of conditions.
In the case of the “most-deferrable” conditions, the number of admissions decreases during
the Ghost Month on average by almost 20 percent. This highlights how widespread the
adaptions due to superstitious beliefs are. In contrast, for the category of the “least-
deferrable” conditions, we observe a comparable small reduction of 4 percent. Coefficient
estimates on the period before and after the Ghost Month illustrate that the patients
defer surgeries, but do not have them early.

4.2.1    Treatment Effect Heterogeneity

We check again for heterogenous effects across different parts of the population. The
Inpatient Hospitalization Records allow us to split the sample by sex, age and location.
We focus here on the number of admissions with surgery (see Figure 4). We do not
find any statistically significant differences across age groups or regions. In contrast, our
analysis reveals a significant differences across sexes. Women are much more likely (about
12 percent) to postpone surgeries as compared to men (about 4 percent). This gradient
is in line with our survey-based evidence suggesting that women are on average more
superstitious and are more likely to believe in ghosts (plus 10 percentage points).

4.2.2    Health Consequences due to Adaptions in Health-care Utilization

So far, we have evidence that a significant number of patients — in particular among those
with “deferrable” conditions — avoid surgeries during the Ghost Month. We now test the
hypothesis whether this adaption due to superstitious beliefs has consequences for health.
There are two potential causal mechanism. First, the post-ponement per se may have a
negative impact on health. Second, the higher level of hospital occupancy right before or
after the Ghost Month may decrease the quality of health-care services.
    Our estimation strategy to gauge health consequences is examining subsequent mor-
bidity and mortality of pre- and post-Ghost Month hospital admissions. Our measure for
morbidity is the 30-day re-admission rate. We estimate again a model as described by
eq. (2), but mainly focus on the parameters τ pre and τ post . Methodologically, we face here
the challenge that we cannot identify the patients, who defer their surgery due to the
Ghost Month, on an individual-level. We only know that a certain share of patients, who
switched to the ICD-9 codes, which resulted in missing information on A-codes.


                                                 15
are admitted to the hospital just before, and in particular, just after the Ghost Month
adapted the timing of their surgery. Put differently, our sample comprises two types of
patients in this period. First, those who have a surgery in this period, because they
re-scheduled it in order to avoid a surgery during the Ghost Month. Second, there are
patients who have their surgery in this period according to a regular (supposedly optimal)
timing. Thus, if we test whether patients admitted during this period have different sub-
sequent morbidity and mortality outcomes, we have a measurement error in our treatment
of interest “adapted timing of surgery”. This leads to an attenuation bias and we have a
higher risk of making a Type-II error.

Morbidity To examine morbidity, we construct an individual-level dataset tracking the
full hospitalization records of all patients, who were admitted to a hospital between 1982
and 1992. This dataset comprises 861,591 admissions. For each admission we define
a binary variable equal to one if the patient readmits to hospital within 30 days after
hospitalization. We obtain an average readmission rate of 0.085. Based on findings in the
previous section, we are particularly interested in the morbidity of patients, who either
pre- or postpone their hospital admissions due to the Ghost Month. We here follow
our previous estimation strategy, but include control variables for patients’ sex, age, and
diagnosis at the initial admission. Our results provide no evidence for significant changes
in the probability of readmission of post-Ghost Month admissions (i.e., the coefficient
on gm+5 ). This holds for cases with and without surgery during their initial admission,
as well as in sub-samples of initial diagnosis with a varying degree of “deferability” (see
Appendix Table A.3). In contrast, we find evidence for a higher likelihood of readmission
for pre-Ghost Month admissions (i.e., the coefficient on gm−5 ). The estimated effect of
0.3 percentage points is equivalent to an increase by 6 percent.

Mortality In a final step, we consider an effect from shifting hospital admissions due to
Ghost Month on subsequent mortality. Therefore, we use a match between the Inpatient
Hospitalization Records of all admissions with surgeries in the period between 1982 and
1992 and Death Certificates. For each admission we define a binary variable equal to one
if a patient dies within 30 days after hospitalization. The estimation strategy is equiva-
lent to the case of readmissions. Our results show no discernible evidence of a different
30-day mortality rate for pre- or post-Ghost Month admissions (see Appendix Table A.4).
This holds for all cases with surgery (during their initial admission), as well as for initial
admissions with different degrees of “deferability”.

In sum, we find some evidence for adverse health consequences due to preponing surg-
eries. In contrast, there is no discernible evidence in the case of postponing surgeries.
The coefficients on post-Ghost Month admissions are all precisely estimated zero effects.


                                             16
However, since this set of results likely suffers from attenuation bias, the latter finding
has to be interpreted with caution.


4.3    Fertility
Our results on the effect on fertility are summarized in Table 8. In column (1) the outcome
variable is the number of daily live births. We find that the number of newborns decreases
significantly during the Ghost Month. The effect varies somewhat over the course of the
Ghost Month with reductions between 2.4 and 4.7 percent. In contrast, shortly before
and after the Ghost Month the number of newborns increases by about 5 percent. This
U-shaped pattern suggests that a significant number parents adjust the timing of birth in
order to avoid a delivery during the Ghost Month.
    There are two potential adjustment mechanism: parents could either manipulate the
date of birth or the date of conception. The former mechanism would mean that women
with an expected due date during the Ghost Month decide to deliver either early or
late. The latter mechanism requires forward looking parents, who create a particular
seasonality in conception; with a lower rate of conceptions in the period corresponding
with expected due dates during the Ghost Month, and with higher conception rates in
periods with expected due dates shortly before and after the Ghost Month.
    There are several ways to assess the relative importance of the two adjustment mech-
anism. First, we contrast the scope of planning births with the U-shaped pattern. Re-
sponsible obstetricians would not plan a delivery in the absence of medical reasons that
is very far away from the due date. By contrast we observe reductions in live births also
in the middle of the Ghost Month, which would require a shift of up to 14 days. Second,
postponing birth is harder than inducing it. Therefore, we should see a larger peak before
as compared to after the Ghost Month. Our estimates, however, show equally sized peaks.
Third, the manipulation of the date of birth, would alter gestational length. In column
(2), we use individual-level data and examine gestational length. This estimation indeed
shows a statistically significant shorter (longer) gestational length for children born right
before (after) the Ghost Month; however the estimates are quantitatively very small. The
observed changes of about 0.2 days (≈ 0.0007 × 39.2 × 7), remain small even if we take
into account that only about 5 percent of births in this period have manipulated date of
births. In a final step, we provide direct evidence on the manipulation of conception dates.
Therefore, we use individual-level information on the date of birth and gestational length
to approximate the date of conception. We then calculate for each case the expected due
date assuming a regular gestational length of 40 weeks. We then generate a data set on
the daily number of births, which would have been observed in case all newborns, would
have been born on their expected due date. The estimates summarized in column (3) show
a comparable U-shaped pattern albeit with a lower magnitude. This is direct evidence


                                             17
for a manipulation in conception dates. In sum, this evidence suggest that both types
of manipulation take place. The dominant form are forward looking parents avoiding a
delivery during the Ghost Month by timing the conception right.

4.3.1    Treatment Effect Heterogeneity

The individual-level information included in the Birth Certificates allows us to check for
several dimensions of heterogeneity. In Figure 5, we summarize estimation results by
selected mother (age, educational attainment, place of birth) and child (sex and parity)
characteristics. For most sub-groups we find very comparable effects. Maternal age
is the exception. While we see the same qualitative pattern across all age-groups, the
magnitude increases significantly with age. The sample-splits by other characteristics,
which are correlated with age (parity and education) do not show an equivalent pattern.
We conclude that this heterogeneity reflects a “true” age effect. One possible explanation
is that older women are more forward looking in their conception behavior.

4.3.2    Birth outcomes

Lastly, we consider an effect on children’s health at birth.19 Manipulations of the date of
birth may have direct consequences for birth outcomes; however, given our evidence that
this type of manipulation is less prevalent and rather mild, we expect this channel to be
of minor importance. In contrast, manipulations of the date of conception should have
no health consequences. Children may also be affected by fluctuations in the number of
admissions to maternity units or to the hospital in general. Children delivered shortly
before or after the Ghost Month could be negatively affected by the higher number of
hospital admission during these periods. Conversely, children delivered during the Ghost
Month could benefit from the hospitals’ reduced work-load. A final channel could be
the maternal behavior. Children born towards the end of the Ghost Month (or shortly
thereafeter) could benefit, from a reduction in maternal activity related to stress. Thus, for
deliveries shortly before the Ghost Month we expect (either due to a manipulation of birth
dates or high levels of hospital occupancy) negative effects. For deliveries shortly after
the Ghost Month the effect is unclear. Both, behavioral adaptions by mothers during the
Ghost Month and the post-ponement of births (such as later scheduled caesarean sections)
may be positive. In contrast, the hospital occupancy should be negative if at all.
    Our results are summarized in Table 9. We use the available information on gestational
age and birthweight to define binary variables capturing a preterm birth (below 37 weeks),
  19
    A recent paper using Taiwanese data is interested in the causal effects of shortened gestation on birth
outcomes. Chiang et al. (2017) aim to exploit manipulations in the date of birth due to the Ghost month
within an instrumental variable (IV) approach. Their binary IV is defined as an expected due date during
the Ghost Month, which increases the likelihood of an induced birth with a shortened gestation. For this
IV to be valid, the authors have to assume that parents do not account for the Ghost Month in their
conception behavior. Our estimation results challenge this identifying assumption.


                                                    18
a low birth weight birth (LBW; below 2,500 grams), and a very low birth weight birth
(VLBW; below 1,500 grams). For children born right before the Ghost Month, we do
not find any robust evidence. For children delivered right after the Ghost Month, we
find on average better birth outcomes. The children have a longer gestation and a higher
birth weight. Both effects are also presented a medically critical margins, with a reduced
likelihood of a preterm birth and a (very) low birth weight. These positive effects could
result from lower levels of prenatal stress maternal activity during the Ghost Month.20


5      Conclusions
In this paper, we empirically examine the impact of superstition on health-related behavior
and health outcomes. We study the case of the Taiwanese Ghost Month. During this
period, which is believed to increase the likelihood of bad outcomes, we observe substantial
adaptions in health-related behavior. These lead to reductions mortality, lower levels of
health-care utilization, and a lower number of births. While the impact on mortality is a
quantum effect, the latter two adaptions represent mere tempo effects. The re-scheduling
of health-care utilization is stronger among deferrable conditions and increases 30-day
readmission rates. The adaption in fertility is mainly achieved by adaptions in conception
behavior and to a smaller extent by manipulations of the time of birth.
    Our findings show that superstition is an important case of bounded rationality of
economic agents. This type of false believes has far-reaching consequences not only for
health-related behavior, but also for health outcomes and even for mortality. While our
evidence is based on the specific case of superstition, these findings point more generally
to potential benefits of including emotional and cultural factors in public health policy.




  20
    The estimated effects are not driven by the compositional changes in mother’s age, which we observe
around the Ghost Month (see Figure 5). The inclusion of control variables for age does not alter the
estimated effects and the effects are very comparable across age groups (results not shown).


                                                  19
References
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder (2011), ‘Health Capital and the Prenatal En-
  vironment: The Effect of Ramadan Observance during Pregnancy’, American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 3(4), 56–85.

Almond, Douglas, Bhashkar Mazumder and Reyn Van Ewijk (2015), ‘In Utero Ramadan
  Exposure and Children’s Academic Performance’, Economic Journal 125(589), 1501–
  1533.

Almond, Douglas, Christine P. Chee, Maria M. Sviatschi and Nan Zhong (2015), ‘Auspi-
  cious Birth Dates among Chinese in California’, Economics & Human Biology 18, 153–
  159.

Anson, Jon and Ofra Anson (2001), ‘Death Rests a While: Holy Day and Sabbath Effects
 on Jewish Mortality in Israel’, Social Science & Medicine 52(1), 83–97.

Bennett, Daniel, Asjad Naqvi and Wolf-Peter Schmidt (2018), ‘Learning, Hygiene and
  Traditional Medicine’, Economic Journal 128(612), F545–F574.

Borra, Cristina, Libertad González and Almudena Sevilla (forthcoming), ‘The Impact of
  Scheduling Birth Early on Infant Health’, Journal of the European Economic Associa-
  tion .

Card, David, Carlos Dobkin and Nicole Maestas (2009), ‘Does Medicare Save Lives?’,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2), 597–636.

Chamberlain, Trevor W., C. Sherman Cheung and Clarence C.Y. Kwan (1991), ‘The
 Friday the Thirteenth Effect: Myth or Reality?’, Quarterly Journal of Business and
 Economics 30(2), 111–117.

Chang, Lenias V. (2018), ‘Information, Education, and Health Behaviors: Evidence from
 the MMR Vaccine Autism Controversy’, Health Economics 27(7), 1043–1062.

Chen, Li-Hua (2005), ICD-10 and Multiple Causes of Death: An Example of Diabetes (in
 Chinese), Research report, Department of Health, Executive Yuan, Taiwan.

Chiang, Chun-Fang, Elliott Fan and Chen-Yu Hsiao (2017), Chased by Ghosts: Exploring
 the Economic Factors and Health Consequences of Shortened Gestational Age, Unpub-
 lished manuscript, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Chiu, Shin-Lin, Mei-Jih Gee, Chih-Hsin Muo, Chiao-Lee Chu, Shou-Jen Lan and Chiu-
 Liang Chen (2018), ‘The Sociocultural Effects on Orthopedic Surgeries in Taiwan’, PloS
 one 13(3), e0195183.


                                          20
Chou, Shin-Yi, Michael Grossman and Jin-Tan Liu (2014), ‘‘The Impact of National
 Health Insurance on Birth Outcomes: A Natural Experiment in Taiwan’’, Journal of
 Development Economics 111, 75–91.

Coutts, Andrew (1999), ‘Friday the Thirteenth and the Financial Times Industry Ordi-
  nary Shares Index 1935–94’, Applied Economics Letters 6(1), 35–37.

Dickert-Conlin, Stacy and Amitabh Chandra (1999), ‘Taxes and the Timing of Births’,
  Journal of Political Economy 107(1), 161–177.

Dyl, Edward A. and Edwin D. Maberly (1988), ‘The Anomaly That Isn’t There: A
 Comment on Friday the Thirteenth’, Journal of Finance 43(5), 1285–1286.

Fortin, Nicole M., Andrew J. Hill and Jeff Huang (2014), ‘Superstition in the Housing
  Market’, Econmic Inquiry 52(3), 974–993.

Fudenberg, Drew and David K. Levine (2006), ‘Superstition and Rational Learning’,
  American Economic Review 96(3), 630–651.

Gans, Joshua S. and Andrew Leigh (2009), ‘Born on the First of July: An (Un)natural
 Experiment in Birth Tming’, Journal of Public Economics 93, 246–263.

Hira, Kenji, Tsuguya Fukui, Akira Endoh, Mahbubur Rahman and Munetaka Maekawa
  (1998), ‘Influence of Superstition on the Date of Hospital Discharge and Medical Cost in
  Japan: Retrospective and Descriptive Study’, British Medical Journal 317(7174), 1680–
  1683.

Hirshleifer, David, Ming Jian and Huai Zhang (2018), ‘Superstition and Financial Decision
  Making’, Management Science 64(1), 232–252.

Hussain, Azhar, Syed Ali, Madiha Ahmed and Sheharyar Hussain (2018), ‘The Anti-
 vaccination Movement: A Regression in Modern Medicine’, Cureus 10(7), e2919.

Kahneman, Daniel and Frederick Shane (2002), Representativeness Revisited: Attribute
 Substitution in Intuitive Judgment, in T.Gilovich, D.Griffin and D.Kahneman, eds,
 ‘Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment’, Cambridge University
 Press, New York, NY, pp. 49–81.

Kahneman, Daniel and Frederick Shane (2005), A Model of Heuristic Judgment, in
 K. J.Holyoak and R. G.Morrison, eds, ‘The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and
 Reasoning’, Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, pp. 267–293.

Kolb, Robert W. and Ricardo J. Rodriguez (1987), ‘Friday the Thirteenth: ‘Part VII’ –
 A Note’, Journal of Finance 42(5), 1385–1387.


                                           21
LaLumia, Sara, James M. Sallee and Nicholas Turner (2015), ‘New Evidence on Taxes and
  the Timing of Birth’, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(2), 258–293.

Leeson, Peter T. (2017), WTFI? An Economic Tour of the Weird, Stanford University
  Press, Stanford, CA.

Lin, Herng-Ching, Sudha Xirasagar and Yu-Chi Tung (2006), ‘Impact of a Cultural Belief
  about Ghost Month on Delivery Mode in Taiwan’, Journal of Epidemiology & Commu-
  nity Health 60(6), 522–526.

Lo, Joan C. (2003), ‘Patients’ Attitudes vs. Physicians’ Determination: Implications for
  Cesarean Sections’, Social Science & Medicine 57(1), 91–96.

Lucey, Brian M. (2001), ‘Friday the 13th: International Evidence’, Applied Economics
  Letters 8(9), 577–579.

Matjasko, Jennifer L., John H. Cawley, Madeleine M. Baker-Goering and David V. Yokum
 (2016), ‘Applying Behavioral Economics to Public Health Policy: Illustrative Examples
 and Promising Directions’, American Journal of Preventive Medicine 50(5S1), S13–S19.

Mocan, Naci and Luiza Pogorelova (2017), ‘Compulsory Schooling Laws and Formation
 of Beliefs: Education, Religion and Superstition’, Journal of Economic Behavior &
 Organization 142, 509–539.

O’Reilly, D. and M. Stevenson (2000), ‘The Effect of Superstition on the Day of Discharge
  from Maternity Units in Northern Ireland: ‘A Saturday Flit is a short sit’’, Journal
  Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 20(2), 139–142.

Oster, Emily (2018), ‘Does Disease Cause Vaccination? Disease Outbreaks and Vaccina-
  tion Response’, Journal of Health Economics 57, 90–101.

Panesar, Nirmal S. and William B. Goggins (2009), ‘Postponement of Death around
  Chinese Holidays: A Hong Kong Perspective’, Singapore Medical Journal 50(10), 990–
  996.

Pauls, Lynn A., Rebecca Johnson-Paben, John McGready, Jamie D. Murphy, Peter J.
  Pronovost and Christopher L. Wu (2017), ‘The Weekend Effect in Hospitalized Patients:
  A Meta-Analysis’, Journal of Hospital Medicine 12(9), 760–766.

Pokryshevskaya, Elena B. and Evgeny A. Antipov (2015), ‘A Study of Numerological
  Superstitions in the Apartments Market’, Economics Bulletin 35(1), 83–88.

Rice, Thomas (2013), ‘The Behavioral Economics of Health and Health Care’, Annual
  Review of Public Health 34, 431–447.


                                           22
Risen, Jane L. (2016), ‘Believing What We Do Not Believe: Acquiescence to Superstitious
  Beliefs and Other Powerful Intuitions’, Psychological Review 123, 182–207.

Schulkind, Lisa and Teny Maghakian Shapiro (2014), ‘What a Difference a Day makes:
  Quantifying the Effects of Birth Timing Manipulation on Infant Health’, Journal of
  Health Economics 33, 139–158.

Shum, Matthew, Wei Sun and Guangliang Ye (2014), ‘Superstition and ‘Lucky’ Apart-
  ments: Evidence from Transaction-Level Data’, Journal of Comparative Economics
  42(1), 109–117.

Tenkorang, Eric Y., Stephen O. Gyimah, Eleanor Maticka-Tyndale and Jones Adjei
  (2011), ‘Superstition, Witchcraft and HIV prevention in Sub-Saharan Africa: The Case
  of Ghana’, Culture, Health & Sexuality 13(9), 1001–1014.

Torgler, Benno (2007), ‘Determinants of Superstition’, Journal of Socio-Economics
  36, 713–733.

Vogt, Sonja, Nadia Ahmed Mohmmed Zaid, Hilal El Fadil Ahmed, Ernst Fehr and Charles
  Efferson (2016), ‘Changing Cultural Attitudes towards Female Genital Cutting’, Nature
  538, 506–509.

Wilches-Gutiérrez, José L., Luz Arenas-Monreal, Alfredo Paulo-Maya, Ingris Peláez-
 Ballestas and Alvaro J. Idrovo (2012), ‘A ‘Beautiful Death’: Mortality, Death, and
 Holidays in a Mexican Municipality’, Social Science & Medicine 74(5), 775–782.

Yang, Chiang-Hsing, Yu-Tung Huang, Craig Janes, Kuan-Chia Lin and Tsung-Hsueh
  Lu (2008), ‘Belief in Ghost Month Can Help Prevent Drowning Deaths: A Natural
  Experiment on the Effects of Cultural Beliefs on Risky Behaviours’, Social Science &
  Medicine 66(9), 1990–1998.




                                          23
6   Figures (to be placed in paper)




                          24
     Figure 1: Period of the Ghost Month according to Gregorian calendar, 1980-2000
25




        Notes: The period of the Ghost Month varies across years defined by the Gregorian
        calendar. This figure depicts the respective starting and end date across the years 1980
        to 2000. The earliest start date is the 27th of July. The latest end date is the 22nd of
        September. All calendar days within the interval defined by these two dates have, with
        the exception of 24th and 25th of August, variation in their Ghost Month status across
        years.
     Figure 2: Number of Daily Marriages Before, During, and After the Ghost Month in Taiwan, 1998-2006
26




             Notes: This figure depicts the aggregated number of daily marriages around the Ghost Month (GM)
             in Taiwan from 1998 to 2006. The data comes from Marriage Certificates, which covers the universe
             of marriages. Sixty days before and after the GM, the average number of daily marriages is 283,
             while the corresponding number during the GM is only 29. This is equivalent to a reduction of 90
             percent.
     Figure 3: The Effects of the Ghost Month on the Number of Deaths by Sex, Age, Education and Residence
27




          Notes: These figures depict sub-group analyses of the effect of the Ghost Month on the daily number of deaths summarized in
          column (1) of Table 4. Estimated coefficients can be interpreted as semi-elasticities.
Figure 4: The Effects of the Ghost Month on the Number of Surgeries by Sex,
Age and Location




      Notes: These figures depict sub-group analyses of the effect of the Ghost Month on the
      daily number of hospital admission summarized in column (2) of Table 6. Estimated
      coefficients can be interpreted as semi-elasticities.

                                                28
     Figure 5: The Effects of the Ghost Month on the Number of Births by Selected Mother and Child Characteristics
29




     Notes: These figures depict sub-group analyses of the effect of the Ghost Month on the daily number of births summarized in column (1) of Table 8. Estimated
     coefficients can be interpreted as semi-elasticities.
7   Tables(to be placed in paper)




                          30
     Table 1: Percentage of Taiwanese who believe in ghosts
                                             Year
                          1994     1999      2004     2009     2014     Overall

     Yes, very much       21.88 19.10 20.38 16.39 21.05                  19.65
31




     Yes, somewhat        47.34 43.13 43.55 48.10 47.55                  45.97
     No, not really       20.69 25.73 27.91 28.87 22.62                  25.37
     Not at all           10.10 12.04 8.16 6.64 8.78                     9.02
     Observations         1,426    1,586    1,752 1,867       1,777      8,408
     Notes: The exact survey question asked in the Taiwan Social Change
     Survey reads as follows “Do you believe that, spirits that are not offered
     any worship will wander around?”.
   Table 2: Socio-economic correlates of believing in ghosts
                                                Believing in ghosts
                                       Do you believe that, spirits that are
                                   not offered any worship will wander around?

Female                                 0.093∗∗∗         0.107∗∗∗          0.093∗∗∗
                                      (0.011)          (0.011)           (0.011)
Age (in years)                        −0.007∗∗∗       −0.005∗∗          −0.007∗∗∗
                                      (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Married                                0.026            0.040∗∗           0.027
                                      (0.017)          (0.017)           (0.017)
Employed                               0.033∗∗∗         0.036∗∗∗          0.033∗∗∗
                                      (0.013)          (0.013)           (0.013)
Educational attainment (Base group: less than elementary school)
 Junior high                          −0.070∗∗∗                         −0.068∗∗∗
                                      (0.019)                           (0.019)
 Senior high                          −0.107∗∗∗                         −0.104∗∗∗
                                      (0.017)                           (0.018)
 Some college                         −0.133∗∗∗                         −0.129∗∗∗
                                      (0.020)                           (0.020)
 College or above                     −0.229∗∗∗                         −0.224∗∗∗
                                      (0.020)                           (0.021)
Household income (Base group: less than 30k)
 30-70k                                               −0.032∗∗          −0.009
                                                      (0.016)           (0.016)
 70-100k                                              −0.052∗∗∗         −0.002
                                                      (0.019)           (0.020)
 100k+                                                −0.078∗∗∗         −0.010
                                                      (0.019)           (0.020)
 Refuse to answer/don’t know                          −0.018              0.003
                                                      (0.019)            (0.019)
Year fixed-effects                     Yes              Yes               Yes
County fixed-effects                   Yes              Yes               Yes
Adjusted R-squared                      0.041            0.027             0.040
Number of observations             8, 224           8, 366            8, 210
Mean of dependent variable              0.656            0.656             0.656
Notes: The data come from the Taiwan Social Change Survey. The survey
years are 1994, 1999, 2004, 2009, and 2014. The dependent variable is based
on the survey question “Do you believe that, spirits that are not offered any
worship will wander around?”. It is a binary variable equal to one if people
respond ‘Very much’ or ‘Somewhat believe’; and zero 0 if people respond ‘Not at
all’ or ‘Not really’. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, where
stars indicate statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                       32
                             Table 3: Descriptive Statistics

                         Panel A: Death Certificates, 1980-2001 a
County-level data                        Mean           S.D.      Min         Max           Obs.
 Daily number of deaths                   10.78          8.05      0          57           30,750
  Accidental death                         1.32          1.51      0          34           30,750
  Non-accidental death                     9.26          7.19      0          54           30,750
  Unknown cause                            0.20          0.54      0           8           30,750

                Panel B: Inpatient Hospitalization Records, 1982-1995 b
County-level data                        Mean           S.D.      Min         Max           Obs.
  Daily number of admissions              66.15         84.21      0         720           17,550
   With surgery                           27.32         37.44      0         327           17,550
   Without surgery                        38.82         48.29      0         393           17,550

                          Panel C: Birth Certificates, 1978-2006 c
County-level data                        Mean           S.D.      Min         Max           Obs.
 Daily number of births                   36.09         32.78      0         210           43,500

Individual-level data
 Gestation length                        39.22           1.61    24          44          1.537,170
 Premature birth                          0.049         −         0           1          1.537,170
 Birth weight                          3195.4          470.7    500        6000          1.537,170
 Low birth weight                         0.054         −         0           1          1.537,170
 Very low birth weight                    0.004         −         0           1          1.537,170
Notes: Taiwan is divided in 25 counties (to be precise, 18 counties and 7 city districts). To
derive our estimation samples, we use in each year the period from the earliest starting date of
the Ghost month to the latest end date (see Figure 1). These dates vary across Panels, since the
years with available data differ. a County refers to the county of birth. To derive our estimation
sample, we use in each year the period between the 27th of July and the 22nd of September.
We exclude the 24th and 25th of August, since these two calendar days were always within the
Ghost Month in the years 1980 to 2001. We further exclude two days with an extraordinarily
high number of deaths due to earthquakes (September 21 and 22, 1999). Thus, we have 30,750 (=
22 years×(58−2) calendar days×25 counties−2 days×25 counties) observations. b County refers to
the location of the hospital. To derive our estimation sample, we use in each year the period between
the 28th of July and the 22nd of September. We exclude 24th , 25th , and 26th of August, since these
three calendar days were always within the Ghost Month in the years 1982 to 1995. Thus, we have
17,550 (= 13 years×(57−3) calendar days×25 counties) observations. c County refers to the county
of birth. To derive our estimation sample, we use in each year the period between the 25th of July
and the 22nd of September. Thus, we have 43,500 (= 29 years × 60 calendar days × 25 counties)
observations in our county-level data set. In the case of the individual-level data, the sample is
restricted to mothers aged between 16 to 45. Gestation length is measured in weeks. Premature
birth is a binary indicator with value 1 if gestation length is shorter than 37 weeks. Low birth
weight is a binary indicator with value 1 if birth weight is below 2,500 gram. Very low birth weight
is a binary indicator with value 1 if birth weight is below 1,500 gram. We exclude outliers, defined
as follows: i. observations with a gestation length below 24 and above 44 weeks and ii. observations
with a birth weight below 500 and above 6000 grams.



                                                  33
 Table 4: The Effect of the Ghost Month on the Number of Deaths
                                                  (1)            (2)               (3)
                                                              Accidental      Non-accidental
                                               Deaths
                                                               deaths            deaths
Period before the GM
 gm−5                                          −0.006           −0.013            −0.007
                                                (0.008)         (0.023)            (0.009)
Period during the GM
 gm1−10                                        −0.048∗∗∗        −0.091∗∗∗         −0.042∗∗∗
                                                (0.007)         (0.019)            (0.007)
 gm11−20                                       −0.037∗∗∗        −0.098∗∗∗         −0.029∗∗∗
                                               (0.007)          (0.020)            (0.007)
 gm21−last                                     −0.031∗∗∗        −0.071∗∗∗         −0.026∗∗∗
                                               (0.006)          (0.019)            (0.007)
Period after the GM
 gm+5                                              0.007          0.014             0.006
                                                  (0.008)        (0.022)           (0.009)
Holidays controls
 weekend                                           0.001          0.092∗∗∗        −0.012∗∗∗
                                                  (0.004)        (0.012)           (0.004)
 M oon F estival                                   0.022          0.199∗∗∗        −0.005
                                                  (0.021)        (0.065)           (0.023)
 Qixi F estival                                    0.015          0.020             0.014
                                                  (0.016)        (0.043)           (0.018)
Gregorian calendar year fixed-effects            Yes             Yes                Yes
Gregorian calendar day fixed-effects             Yes             Yes                Yes
County fixed-effects                             Yes             Yes                Yes
R-squared                                       0.809           0.302             0.791
Number of observations                         30,750           30,750            30,750
Mean of (undivided) dependent variable         10.782           1.323              9.262
S.D. of (undivided) dependent variable          8.045           1.512              7.188
Notes: This table summarizes the estimated effect of the Ghost Month on the daily number
of deaths (column 1), accidental deaths (column 2), and non-accidental deaths (column 3).
Dependent variables are divided by their sample mean. Thus, estimated coefficients can be
interpreted as semi-elasticities. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, where
stars indicate statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Information on
data sources and sample definitions are provided in the notes to Table 3.




                                             34
                                             Table 5: The Effect of the Ghost Month on Cause-Specific Deaths
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)        (5)           (6)            (7)              (8)              (9)       (10)
                                                                            Accidental deaths                                                     Non-accidental deaths
                                                                                                                                        Neoplasm        Neoplasm          Cerebro-    Chronic
                                                   Traffic       Drowning        Falling        Poisoning   Electric     Diabetes
                                                                                                                                         of liver       of trachea        -vascular    liver
     Period before the GM
      gm−5                                          0.026          -0.003         -0.073          0.016      -0.005        0.022          -0.017           0.006            0.037      -0.029
                                                   (0.032)        (0.066)        (0.070)         (0.094)    (0.144)       (0.037)        (0.037)          (0.039)          (0.042)    (0.038)
     Period during the GM
      gm1−10                                      -0.067∗∗∗      -0.208∗∗∗        -0.074          -0.037     -0.085      -0.081∗∗∗        -0.032           -0.004         -0.132∗∗∗    -0.006
                                                   (0.026)        (0.050)        (0.056)         (0.076)    (0.118)       (0.031)        (0.030)          (0.031)          (0.033)    (0.032)
      gm11−20                                     -0.080∗∗∗      -0.248∗∗∗        -0.018          -0.021    -0.225∗∗       -0.030         0.002            -0.003         -0.076∗∗     0.024
                                                   (0.027)        (0.054)        (0.059)         (0.077)     (0.113)      (0.032)        (0.031)          (0.032)          (0.033)    (0.033)
      gm21−last                                   -0.076∗∗∗      -0.246∗∗∗        0.030           -0.095     -0.092       -0.054∗         -0.030           -0.040          -0.054∗     0.008
                                                   (0.026)        (0.047)        (0.058)         (0.075)    (0.113)       (0.030)        (0.030)          (0.031)          (0.032)    (0.032)
     Period after the GM
35




      gm+5                                          -0.039         0.066          -0.072          0.063      -0.099        -0.017        0.083∗∗           0.053            -0.027     0.020
                                                   (0.030)        (0.058)        (0.066)         (0.092)    (0.132)       (0.036)        (0.035)          (0.038)          (0.038)    (0.038)
     Holidays controls
      weekend                                     0.060∗∗∗       0.466∗∗∗        -0.068∗          0.000      -0.091      -0.039∗∗         -0.023           0.002            0.008      -0.015
                                                   (0.016)        (0.034)        (0.036)         (0.048)    (0.071)       (0.019)        (0.018)          (0.019)          (0.021)    (0.020)
      M oon F estival                             0.304∗∗∗         0.102          0.114           0.184      0.056         -0.131         -0.031           -0.092           0.158      0.008
                                                   (0.102)        (0.153)        (0.171)         (0.276)    (0.355)       (0.083)        (0.095)          (0.082)          (0.118)    (0.098)
      Qixi F estival                                0.032          0.190          -0.028          -0.065     0.064         -0.002         -0.008           0.033            -0.054     -0.020
                                                   (0.058)        (0.121)        (0.139)         (0.176)    (0.305)       (0.066)        (0.074)          (0.078)          (0.073)    (0.082)
     Gregorian calendar year fixed-effects            Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes         Yes
     Gregorian calendar day fixed-effects             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes         Yes
     County fixed-effects                             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes         Yes
     R-squared                                       0.203         0.078          0.060           0.037      0.013        0.251          0.209             0.233           0.166       0.150
     Number of observations                         30,750        30,750         30,750          30,750     30,750        30,750         30,750           30,750           30,750     30,750
     Mean of (undivided) dependent variable          0.654         0.201          0.124           0.071     0.031         0.481          0.473            0.433            0.400      0.398
     S.D. of (undivided) dependent variable          0.943        0.528           0.364           0.274     0.180         0.831          0.784             0.766           0.704       0.682
     Notes: This table summarizes the estimated effect of the Ghost Month on the daily number of cause-specific deaths. Dependent variables are divided by their sample mean. Thus,
     estimated coefficients can be interpreted as semi-elasticities. Method of estimation is ordinary least squares. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, where stars indicate
     statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Information on data sources and sample definitions are provided in the notes to Table 3. ICD-9 codes classification for
     cause-specific deaths are as follows. Motor vehicle traffic accidents: E810-E819 (column 1); Accidental drowning and submersion: E910 (column 2); Accidental falls: E880-E888 (column
     3); Accidental poisoning: E850-E869 (column 4); Accidents caused by electric current: E925 (column 5); Diabetes mellitus: 250 (column 6); Malignant neoplasm of liver and intrahepatic
     bile ducts: 155 (column 7); Malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus, and lung: 162 (column 8); Acute but ill-defined cerebrovascular disease: 436 (column 9); Chronic liver disease and
     cirrhosis: 571 (column 10).
Table 6: The Effect of the Ghost Month on the Number of Hospital Admissions
                                                     (1)              (2)            (3)
                                                  Admissions        Surgery       No surgery
      Period before the GM
       gm−5                                             0.024         0.034∗∗         0.016
                                                       (0.016)       (0.017)         (0.017)
      Period during the GM
       gm1−10                                         −0.028∗∗       −0.079∗∗∗        0.008
                                                       (0.013)        (0.014)        (0.014)
       gm11−20                                        −0.047∗∗∗      −0.101∗∗∗      −0.009
                                                       (0.013)        (0.014)        (0.015)
       gm21−last                                      −0.040∗∗∗      −0.102∗∗∗        0.004
                                                       (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.014)
      Period after the GM
       gm+5                                             0.060∗∗∗      0.084∗∗∗        0.043∗∗
                                                       (0.017)       (0.018)         (0.018)
      Holidays controls
       weekend                                        −0.394∗∗∗      −0.422∗∗∗      −0.375∗∗∗
                                                      (0.008)         (0.009)        (0.009)
       M oon F estival                                −0.543∗∗∗      −0.548∗∗∗      −0.540∗∗∗
                                                      (0.046)         (0.051)        (0.044)
       Qixi F estival                                 −0.062∗∗       −0.081∗∗∗      −0.048
                                                      (0.027)         (0.030)        (0.030)
      Gregorian calendar year fixed-effects            Yes           Yes             Yes
      Gregorian calendar day fixed-effects             Yes           Yes             Yes
      County fixed-effects                             Yes           Yes             Yes
      R-squared                                       0.847         0.854           0.814
      Number of observations                          17,550        17,550          17,550
      Mean of (undivided) dependent variable          66.145        27.322          38.823
      S.D. of (undivided) dependent variable          84.212        37.444          48.292
      Notes: This table summarizes the estimated effect of the Ghost Month on the daily
      number of hospital admissions (column 1), hospital admissions with undergoing surg-
      eries (column 2), and hospital admissions without undergoing surgeries (column 3).
      Dependent variables are divided by their sample mean. Thus, estimated coefficients
      can be interpreted as semi-elasticities. Method of estimation is ordinary least squares.
      Method of estimation is ordinary least squares. Robust standard errors are reported
      in parentheses, where stars indicate statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
      *** p < 0.01. Information on data sources and sample definitions are provided in the
      notes to Table 3.




                                                 36
Table 7: The Effect of the Ghost Month on the Number Hospital Admissions
by deferability
                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)
                                                           Hospital admissions by deferability
                                             1st quartile      2nd quartile   3rd quartile   4th quartile
                                                 Most                                           Least
                                                                   ...            ...
                                              deferrable                                      deferrable
 Period before the GM
  gm−5                                            0.038            0.042           0.005           0.038∗∗
                                                 (0.032)          (0.032)         (0.023)         (0.018)
 Period during the GM
  gm1−10                                        −0.159∗∗∗         −0.090∗∗∗      −0.041∗∗        −0.026∗
                                                 (0.026)           (0.025)        (0.018)         (0.014)
  gm11−20                                       −0.223∗∗∗         −0.158∗∗∗      −0.060∗∗∗       −0.044∗∗∗
                                                 (0.026)           (0.025)        (0.019)         (0.014)
  gm21−last                                     −0.199∗∗∗         −0.157∗∗∗      −0.055∗∗∗       −0.056∗∗∗
                                                 (0.025)           (0.024)        (0.018)         (0.013)
 Period after the GM
  gm+5                                            0.089∗∗∗         0.079∗∗         0.049∗∗         0.050∗∗∗
                                                 (0.034)          (0.031)         (0.022)         (0.018)
 Holidays controls
  weekend                                       −0.705∗∗∗         −0.592∗∗∗      −0.417∗∗∗       −0.208∗∗∗
                                                 (0.015)           (0.015)        (0.011)         (0.009)
  M oon F estival                               −1.003∗∗∗         −0.850∗∗∗      −0.550∗∗∗       −0.239∗∗∗
                                                 (0.099)           (0.088)        (0.065)         (0.042)
  Qixi F estival                                −0.067            −0.060         −0.073∗∗        −0.067∗
                                                 (0.063)           (0.055)        (0.036)         (0.036)
 Gregorian calendar year fixed-effects            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
 Gregorian calendar day fixed-effects             Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
 County fixed-effects                             Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
 R-squared                                      0.716            0.721          0.805            0.859
 Number of observations                         14,850           14,850         14,850           14,850
 Mean of (undivided) dependent variable         4.650            3.186          5.817            10.382
 S.D. of (undivided) dependent variable          7.762           5.124          8.198            13.537
 Notes: This table summarizes the estimated effect of the Ghost Month on the daily number of hospital
 admissions with undergoing surgeries by the degree of “deferability”. The latter is approximated by
 weekend admissions rates at the diagnosis-level as suggested by (Card et al., 2009). We compute the
 fraction of weekend admissions (of all admissions) for all diagnosis using data in the period between
 1982 and 1992. This gives us a distribution of fractions of weekend admissions rates across all diagnosis,
 reflecting a decreasing degree of “deferability” as one moves from the left to the right tail. We then
 compute quartiles for weekend admissions rates and split the diagnosis codes into four groups, where
 column (1) represents the most deferrable admissions and column (4) represents the least deferrable
 admissions. Dependent variables are divided by their sample mean. Thus, estimated coefficients
 can be interpreted as semi-elasticities. Method of estimation is ordinary least squares. Method of
 estimation is ordinary least squares. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, where stars
 indicate statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Information on data sources
 and sample definitions are provided in the notes to Table 3.



                                                    37
Table 8: The Effect of the Ghost Month on the Number of Birth, Gestational
Length, and Expected Number of Births
                                                      (1)             (2)             (3)
                                                                                    Expected
                                                  Births          Gestation
                                                                                     births
    Period before the GM
     gm−5                                           0.0518∗∗∗       −0.0007∗∗∗          0.0147∗∗∗
                                                   (0.0058)          (0.0001)          (0.0054)
    Period during the GM
     gm1−10                                        −0.0459∗∗∗       −0.0001           −0.0106∗∗
                                                   (0.0049)          (0.0001)          (0.0046)
     gm11−20                                       −0.0244∗∗∗         0.0002          −0.0045
                                                   (0.0050)          (0.0001)          (0.0047)
     gm21−last                                     −0.0472∗∗∗         0.0001          −0.0141∗∗∗
                                                   (0.0048)          (0.0001)          (0.0046)
    Period after the GM
     gm+5                                           0.0547∗∗∗         0.0008∗∗∗         0.0236∗∗∗
                                                   (0.0063)          (0.0001)          (0.0058)
    Holidays controls
     weekend                                       −0.0614∗∗∗         0.0001          −0.0607∗∗∗
                                                   (0.0030)          (0.0001)          (0.0029)
     M oon F estival                               −0.0262∗         −0.0003           −0.0118
                                                   (0.0159)          (0.0004)          (0.0149)
     Qixi F estival                                 0.0065            0.0003          −0.0051
                                                   (0.0105)          (0.0003)          (0.0107)
    Gregorian calendar year fixed-effects          Yes               Yes               Yes
    Gregorian calendar day fixed-effects           Yes               Yes               Yes
    County fixed-effects                           Yes               Yes               Yes
    R-squared                                     0.903             0.097             0.913
    Number of observations                        43,500          1,537,169           43,500
    Mean of (undivided) dependent variable        36.086           39.218             35.309
    S.D. of (undivided) dependent variable        32.783            1.609             31.889
    Notes: This table summarizes the estimated effect of the Ghost Month on the daily number
    of births (column 1), on gestational length in individual-level data (column 2), and daily
    number of expected births (column 3). The expected number of births are calculated in
    individual-level by combining the date of conception and a regular gestational length of 40
    weeks. This variable is used to infer on the adaption in conception behavior. Dependent
    variables are divided by their sample mean. Thus, estimated coefficients can be interpreted
    as semi-elasticities. Method of estimation is ordinary least squares. Robust standard errors
    are reported in parentheses, where stars indicate statistical significance: * p < 0.10, **
    p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Information on data sources and sample definitions are provided in
    the notes to Table 3.




                                                 38
             Table 9: The Effect of the Ghost Month on Birth Outcomes
                                                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
                                              Preterm            Birth
                                                                                   LBW              VLBW
                                               birth             weight
Period before the GM
 gm−5                                            0.0007          −0.0004           −0.0013∗          −0.0003
                                                (0.0007)          (0.0005)          (0.0008)          (0.0002)
Period during the GM
 gm1−10                                          0.0005          −0.0018∗∗∗          0.0010            0.0002
                                                (0.0006)          (0.0004)          (0.0007)          (0.0002)
 gm11−20                                       −0.0004           −0.0002           −0.0006           −0.0000
                                               (0.0006)           (0.0004)          (0.0007)          (0.0002)
 gm21−last                                       0.0013∗∗        −0.0004             0.0005            0.0005∗∗∗
                                                (0.0006)          (0.0004)          (0.0007)          (0.0002)
Period after the GM
 gm+5                                          −0.0033∗∗∗          0.0027∗∗∗       −0.0037∗∗∗        −0.0006∗∗∗
                                               (0.0007)           (0.0005)          (0.0008)          (0.0002)
Holidays controls
 weekend                                         0.0000          −0.0007∗∗∗        −0.0003             0.0002
                                                (0.0004)          (0.0003)          (0.0004)          (0.0001)
 M oon F estival                                 0.0029          −0.0029∗∗           0.0024            0.0000
                                                (0.0019)          (0.0013)          (0.0020)          (0.0006)
 Qixi F estival                                −0.0013           −0.0001           −0.0002             0.0009∗
                                               (0.0014)           (0.0010)          (0.0015)          (0.0005)
Gregorian calendar year fixed-effects           Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Gregorian calendar day fixed-effects            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
County fixed-effects                            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
R-squared                                      0.011             0.018             0.003             0.001
Number of observations                       1,537,169         1,537,169         1,537,169         1,537,169
Mean of (undivided) dependent variable         0.049           3195.432            0.054             0.004
S.D. of (undivided) dependent variable           -              470.671              -                 -
Notes: This table summarizes the estimated effect of the Ghost Month on preterm births (column 1), birth
weight (column 2), low birth weight (column 3), and very low birth weight (column 4). Dependent variable
for birth weight is divided by its sample mean. Thus, the estimated coefficient can be interpreted as a
semi-elasticity. Method of estimation is ordinary least squares. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses, where stars indicate statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Information
on data sources and sample definitions are provided in the notes to Table 3.




                                                   39
                         Web Appendix


This Web Appendix (not for publication) provides additional material dis-
cussed in the unpublished manuscript ‘The Effect of Superstition on Health:
Evidence from the Taiwanese Ghost Month’ by Martin Halla, Chia-Lun Liu,
and Jin-Tan Liu.




                                   A.1
   Table A.1: Share of Population with Different Superstitious Beliefs
                   Lucky charm (mascot or talisman)                      Horoscope
                            Share of respondents who:             Share of respondents who:
                           Think it         Definitely      Consult it             Take it into
                   Possess protects          think it        to know    Consult it account in
Country             one or helps            protects       about future every day   daily life

Austria             25.30      52.91           8.21            67.00        13.48        18.42
Belgium             13.98      31.27           4.06              .            .            .
Bulgaria            18.96      93.10          32.02            67.97        16.58          .
Belarus             16.62      64.11           4.97            61.02         0.82          .
Croatia             35.64      60.82          10.19            65.33         4.41        47.40
Czech Republic      33.84      55.57           3.75            78.13         6.05        33.63
Denmark             15.48      34.57           2.60              .            .            .
Estonia             21.13      71.16           4.93            74.54        12.27        47.76
Finland             11.67      42.28           1.60            71.21         3.29        24.98
France              16.78      34.93           2.43            58.61        11.37        41.02
Germany             24.96      51.51           2.71            62.18         7.64        53.88
Greece              36.35      71.10           6.29            41.64         3.87        32.62
Hungary             14.46      28.75           4.28              .            .            .
Iceland             13.41      52.95           3.22            61.62        11.10        14.86
Ireland             12.21      46.18           5.68              .            .            .
Italy               15.49      31.42           2.24            54.68         9.37        29.98
Latvia              19.98      70.15           9.76              .            .            .
Lithuania           16.75      61.94           6.26            72.14        10.72        51.51
Luxembourg          24.20      50.31           4.37              .            .            .
Malta                9.39      18.76           1.50              .            .            .
Netherlands         11.28      46.53           1.71              .            .            .
Poland              12.52      91.73          33.83              .            .            .
Portugal            12.03      47.44           3.37              .            .            .
Romania             18.84      86.99          45.91              .            .            .
Russia              20.15      57.83           7.50            62.50         4.02        41.47
Slovakia            23.70      56.49           5.58              .            .            .
Slovenia            18.96      46.43           4.94              .            .            .
Spain               11.00      44.35           1.91              .            .            .
Sweden              16.65      38.92           2.69              .            .            .
Turkey              20.35      40.39           5.54              .            .            .
Ukraine             18.59      52.86           6.29            68.63         2.74        47.59
Great Britain       15.20      48.78           1.38              .            .            .
Northern Ireland    10.93      41.76           2.46              .            .            .

Overall             18.93      49.18            5.70           64.16         7.71        36.81
Notes: These shares are calculated based on date from the World Values Survey. Do you have a
lucky charm such as a mascot or a talisman? Yes, no. Do you believe that a lucky charm such
as a mascot or a talisman can protect or help you? Definitely not (1) to Definitely yes (10). How
often do you consult your horoscope to know about your future? (1 ‘Every day’, 2 ‘Once a week’,
3 ‘Once a month’, 4 ‘Less often’, 5 ‘Never’). How often do you take this into account in your daily
life? 1 ‘Always’, 2 ‘Most of the time’, 3 ‘Sometimes’, 4 ‘Not very’.




                                                 A.2
                               Table A.2: Socio-economic Correlates of Superstitious Beliefs
                                              Lucky charm (mascot or talisman)                               Horoscope
                                                            Respondent                                        Respondent
                                                              thinks it       definitely     consults it                       takes it into
                                              possess         protects         think it       to know         Consult it        account in
                                               one            or helps        protects      about future      every day          daily life

      Female                                   0.059***          0.091***        0.019***         0.154***        0.043***          0.133***
                                              (0.007)           (0.011)         (0.006)          (0.011)         (0.009)           (0.017)
      Age                                     −0.003***        −0.004***       −0.000           −0.006***       −0.001*           −0.005***
                                              (0.000)           (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.001)         (0.000)           (0.001)
      Married                                 −0.049***        −0.037***       −0.007**           0.003         −0.008            −0.020
                                              (0.007)           (0.007)         (0.003)          (0.014)         (0.005)           (0.014)
      Employed                                 0.002             0.010         −0.003             0.051***        0.006             0.029***
                                              (0.005)           (0.006)         (0.003)          (0.009)         (0.005)           (0.009)
      Education (8 point-scale)               −0.004**         −0.010***       −0.005***        −0.001          −0.006**          −0.014**
A.3




                                              (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.006)         (0.002)           (0.005)
      Household income (10 point-scale)        0.002           −0.001          −0.001             0.006*        −0.000              0.001
                                              (0.001)           (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.003)         (0.001)           (0.003)
      Town size (3 point-scale)                0.016***          0.008         −0.001             0.013           0.007*          −0.009
                                              (0.005)           (0.005)         (0.002)          (0.010)         (0.003)           (0.008)
      Number of observations                  32,527           29,446          29,446           17,804          17,804            14,781
      R-squared                                0.05             0.12            0.11             0.12            0.04              0.11
      Mean of dependent var.                   0.19             0.50            0.06             0.64            0.08              0.37
      Notes: All estimations control for country and year fixed-effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country-level.
                                          Table A.3: The Effect of the Ghost Month on Hospital Readmissions
                                                       (1)                  (2)                   (3)               (4)                   (5)                 (6)                    (7)
                                                                                                        Outcome: Readmit in 30 days
                                                       All                Surgery             No Surgery                      Hospital admissions with surgeries by deferrability
                                                                                                                 1st quartile        2nd quartile        3rd quartile         4th quartile
                                                                                                                    Most                                                         Least
                                                                                                                                         ...                  ...
                                                                                                                  deferrable                                                   deferrable
      Period before the GM
       gm−5                                            0.0024∗∗              0.0033∗∗              0.0017              −0.0001            0.0054              0.0075∗∗               0.0020
                                                      (0.0012)              (0.0016)              (0.0018)             (0.0031)          (0.0045)            (0.0037)               (0.0023)
      Period during the GM
       gm1−10                                          0.0024∗∗              0.0009                0.0025∗              0.0031          −0.0009               0.0013                 0.0006
                                                      (0.0010)              (0.0013)              (0.0015)             (0.0029)         (0.0038)             (0.0030)               (0.0019)
       gm11−20                                         0.0006                0.0007              −0.0001                0.0026            0.0023            −0.0035                  0.0019
                                                      (0.0011)              (0.0014)             (0.0015)              (0.0030)          (0.0040)           (0.0030)                (0.0020)
       gm21−last                                       0.0015                0.0021                0.0002               0.0031            0.0011            −0.0018                  0.0041∗∗
A.4




                                                      (0.0010)              (0.0013)              (0.0015)             (0.0029)          (0.0039)           (0.0030)                (0.0019)
      Period after the GM
       gm+5                                          −0.0007               −0.0003               −0.0004               −0.0002            0.0008            −0.0003                 −0.0008
                                                     (0.0012)              (0.0015)              (0.0018)              (0.0032)          (0.0044)           (0.0036)                (0.0022)
      Holidays controls
       weekend                                         0.0040∗∗∗             0.0031∗∗∗             0.0040∗∗∗            0.0004            0.0088∗∗∗           0.0015                 0.0035∗∗∗
                                                      (0.0007)              (0.0010)              (0.0010)             (0.0023)          (0.0030)            (0.0021)               (0.0013)
       M oon F estival                                 0.0118∗∗∗             0.0073                0.0140∗∗            −0.0122            0.0188            −0.0017                  0.0132∗
                                                      (0.0042)              (0.0055)              (0.0060)             (0.0147)          (0.0235)           (0.0113)                (0.0071)
       Qixi F estival                                  0.0051∗               0.0050                0.0050              −0.0032            0.0109              0.0031                 0.0081
                                                      (0.0026)              (0.0034)              (0.0037)             (0.0069)          (0.0097)            (0.0078)               (0.0050)
      Gregorian calendar year fixed-effects           Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
      Gregorian calendar day fixed-effects            Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
      County fixed-effects                            Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
      Age and gender controls                         Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
      Diagnosis controls                              Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
      R-squared                                      0.038                 0.026                 0.043              0.035               0.044               0.018                0.019
      Number of observations                        861,591               356,774               504,817             69,029              47,275              86,323              154,099
      Mean of dependent variable                     0.085                 0.055                 0.105              0.085               0.114               0.097                0.061
      Notes: This table summarizes the estimated effect of the Ghost Month on hospital readmissions in 30 days (column 1), with undergoing surgeries (column 2), without undergoing
      surgeries (column 3), and by deferrability (columns 4-7). We compute the fraction of weekend admissions at the diagnosis-level using data in the period between 1982 and 1992 to
      approximate the deferability of an admission (Card et al., 2009). This gives us a distribution of fractions of weekend admissions rates across all diagnosis, reflecting a decreasing
      degree of “deferability” as one moves from the left to the right tail. We then compute quartiles for fraction of weekend admissions and split the diagnosis codes into four groups,
      where column 4 represents the most deferrable admissions and column 7 represents less deferrable admissions. Method of estimation is ordinary least squares. Robust standard
      errors are reported in parentheses, where stars indicate statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Information on data sources and sample definitions are
      provided in the notes to Table 3.
    Table A.4: The Effect of the Ghost Month on Post-discharge Mortality
                                           (1)                 (2)            (3)          (4)               (5)
                                                              Hospital admissions with surgeries
                                                                   Outcome: Die in 30 days
                                           All                                  by deferrability
                                                         st                nd
                                                         1  quartile       2    quartile 3rd quartile    4th quartile
                                                           Most                                             Least
                                                                                ...           ...
                                                         deferrable                                       deferrable
Period before the GM
 gm−5                                     −0.0004             −0.0016∗∗∗         0.0003      −0.0003       −0.0001
                                           (0.0003)            (0.0005)         (0.0013)      (0.0009)      (0.0004)
Period during the GM
 gm1−10                                   −0.0000              0.0001          −0.0014         0.0005        0.0001
                                           (0.0003)           (0.0006)          (0.0012)      (0.0008)      (0.0003)
 gm11−20                                    0.0003             0.0007            0.0009        0.0006      −0.0001
                                           (0.0003)           (0.0006)          (0.0014)      (0.0008)      (0.0003)
 gm21−last                                  0.0002             0.0006            0.0015        0.0001      −0.0002
                                           (0.0003)           (0.0006)          (0.0013)      (0.0008)      (0.0003)
Period after the GM
 gm+5                                     −0.0002              0.0000          −0.0005       −0.0007         0.0001
                                           (0.0004)           (0.0006)          (0.0014)      (0.0009)      (0.0004)
Holidays controls
 weekend                                    0.0000             0.0004            0.0002        0.0005      −0.0004∗
                                           (0.0002)           (0.0005)          (0.0009)      (0.0006)      (0.0002)
 M oon F estival                            0.0006            −0.0018∗∗          0.0051      −0.0007         0.0008
                                           (0.0012)            (0.0008)         (0.0080)      (0.0023)      (0.0015)
 Qixi F estival                             0.0000            −0.0013            0.0041        0.0004      −0.0009
                                           (0.0008)            (0.0012)         (0.0032)      (0.0022)      (0.0007)
Gregorian calendar year fixed-effects      Yes                 Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes
Gregorian calendar day fixed-effects       Yes                 Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes
County fixed-effects                       Yes                 Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes
Age and gender controls                    Yes                 Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes
Diagnosis controls                         Yes                 Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes
R-squared                                 0.028              0.018             0.062        0.014           0.010
Number of observations                   354,329             68,795            46,795       85,470         153,222
Mean of dependent variable                0.003               0.002            0.006        0.004           0.001
Notes: This table summarizes the estimated effect of the Ghost Month on mortality from shifting hospital
admissions with undergoing surgeries by the degree of “deferability”. We compute the fraction of weekend
admissions at the diagnosis-level using data in the period between 1982 and 1992 to approximate the deferability
of an admission (Card et al., 2009). This gives us a distribution of fractions of weekend admissions rates across
all diagnosis, reflecting a decreasing degree of “deferability” as one moves from the left to the right tail. We
then compute quartiles for fraction of weekend admissions and split the diagnosis codes into four groups,
where column 2 represents the most deferrable admissions and column 5 represents less deferrable admissions.
Method of estimation is ordinary least squares. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, where
stars indicate statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Information on data sources and
sample definitions are provided in the notes to Table 3.




                                                   A.5
