                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               WORKERS TRUST FUNDS AND THE LOGIC OF WAGE PROFILES




                                George A. Akerlof

                                 Lawrence F. Katz




                              Working Paper No. 2548




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 1988




We thank Katharene Abraham, William Dickens, Kevin Lang, Edward Lazear, Kevin
M. Murphy, Lawrence Sunaners, Andrew Weiss, Janet Yellen and participants in seminars
at Stanford, Chicago, and the NBER Sumer Institute for helpful coments. The
first author gratefully acknowledges generous support from the Sloan Foundation
and the NSF under research grant No. 86—005023. The research reported here is
part of the NBERs research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2548
                                                March 1988


             Workers'   Trust Funds and the Logic of Wage Profiles




                                    ABSTRACT



         This paper defines a concept, a worker's trust fund, which        is
useful     in analyzing optimal age-earnings profiles.        The trust fund
represents what a worker loses if dismissed from a job for shirking.
In considering whether to work or shirk, a worker weighs the

potential loss due to forfeiture of the trust fund if caught shirking

against the benefits from reduced effort.          This concept is used to
show that the implicit bonding in upward sloping age—earnings

profiles is not a perfect substitute for an explicit upfront

performance bond (or employment fee).          It is also shown that the

second—best optimal earnings profile in the absence of an upfront

employment fee pays total compensation in excess of market clearing
in   a   variety of stylized cases.




George A. Akerlof                              Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
University of California                       Harvard University
Berkeley, CA 94720                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                             I•   INTRODUCTION


    This paper concerns    the logic of age-earnings profiles and worker

incentives.   Alternative wage profiles yield different incentives in

principal-agent models with the employer as principal and the

employee as agent.    This paper introduces the concept of workers'

trust funds (as will be explained presently) and shows the relevance

of this concept in analyzing a standard efficiency wage model.

     In the most popular efficiency wage model, firms find it

profitable to pay wages above market clearing to provide workers with
ef fort incentjves)    These models have been criticized because

contracts in which workers pay employment fees (alternatively called

upfront bonds) would eliminate involuntary unemployment         (Carmichael,

1985).   The threat of forfeiting the bond generates work incentives

allowing the total terms of the equilibrium labor contract to adjust
to clear the labor market.    Such upfront bonds are rarely observed;

but, it has been argued that contracts with upward sloping earnings

profiles can act as a perfect substitute for contracts with explicit

upfront bonds.   Thus, the argument continues, the absence of upfront
bonds is not a sign of the failure of market clearing.

     To test the logic of the preceding argument, we assume that

contracts cannot utilize upfront bonds.          It will be seen that the

second—best contract with an upward sloping wage profile cannot be a

perfect substitute for the first-best contract with an upfront bond.
Consider the work—shirk decision of a worker facing an upward sloping

(but market clearing) compensation profile.         This worker can be
viewed as having a trust          of   deferred wages and accrued interest

which is maintained by the firm.        This   trust fund will be forfeited
if the worker is caught shirking and dismissed.                              In a continuous tine

                                                               at
setting, the value of this trust fund to a risk neutral worker
time   T   (where time 0 is the start of the contract) is


                                                   w(t)) er(T—t)
                                   *
(1)                         1    (w (t) -                           dt
                           Jo

             *
where (w         (t)      w(t)) is the difference between the worker's

opportunity            cost and current wage w(t) at t, and where r is the

interest rate.            This trust fund is the accumulated value of the
worker's deferred wages including accumulated interest.

       The worker in deciding whether to work or shirk compares the
                                                      from shirking.
expected loss if caught shirking to the expected gain
                                                                dt
Suppose that a worker who shirks for a short interval of length
will be caught and lose his trust fund with probability p dt, and let

v dt be the          value to the worker of shirking for such an
                       monetary
interval.          In this case, the worker will work at time                         T   if



                                                             w(t)) er(T-t'
                                         rT
(2)                         p   dt   [
                                               *
                                              (w   (t)
                                                         —                   at   ]       v   at.
                                         Jo

In    other words, if the expected cost of shirking, the probability of

being caught (p dt) times the value of the trust fund forfeited (the
term    in
        brackets in (2)), is at least as great as the expected gain

from shirking, v dt, he will work,                            Rearranging terms, one can easily

verify that the worker will work only if the value of his trust fund
exceeds (or equals) v/p.                      Note that v/p is       a   stock, and not a flow.
                                                            he must
 (To induce the worker to work for an instant of length dt,
 incur a loss if caught shirking which exceeds the ratio of the gain
                                    3

from shirking to the probability of being caught shirking.   The gain

from shirking for an instant of length dt (v dt) and the probability

of being caught shirking (p dt) are both proportional to dt and

small.   The ratio of these two quantities, which is the size of the
loss necessary to induce the worker not to shirk, is an order of

magnitude larger than either since the dt's cancel in the ratio.)
     The trust fund concept can be used to explain why market

clearing contracts that use upfront bonds and those that use only

implicit bonds through deferred payments are not perfect substitutes.
The risk neutral worker who posts an upfront performance bond of v/p

or larger (and who is paid his opportunity cost throughout his job

tenure) will never shirk. However, with a market clearing

compensation package based on implicit bonding, no matter how low the

(nonnegative) wage paid to the worker early in his job tenure, it

will take some finite time before the accumulated trust fund has
reached the stock level v/p.   (There is a bound on how fast this

trust fund can accumulate if there can be no      payments from the

worker to the firm).   And, as a result, with implicit bonds and a

market clearing wage package, there is some period of time before the
trust fund accumulates sufficiently to induce the worker not to

shirk.   During that time the worker will shirk rather than work.     In

other words, if a firm offers an employment package that does not

require an upfront bond and is no better than a worker's opportunity

costs, a worker will surely shirk at the beginning of his (or her)

career: there is no capital loss to the worker from losing the job,

but there is a gain due to the smaller effort in shirking.
                                       4

    We have thus seen the flaw in the commonly held belief that
market clearing upward sloping wage profiles, in the absence of

explicit upfront bonding, can act as an incentive against shirking

throughout a worker's career,      While such deferred payments can

prevent workers from shirking late in their careers, they do not

prevent workers from shirking early in their careers.2       It remains,

however, to show that paying a premium above market clearing wages
will be a cheaper way to hire effective labor units than paying

market clearing wage levels with workers shirking early in their

careers,    Such a proposition is not true in general.     But with a

rather wide variety of productivity patterns, the cost of shirking by

workers early in their careers with market clearing wage schedules

will be greater than the cost of paying wage premia in excess of

market clearing which prevent workers from shirking entirely.

      The next section constructs a simple model to illustrate why
labor markets fail to clear in the absence of employment fees even in

markets where firms are trustworthy.       In this model, workers have

discretion over their own effort and firms have imperfect abilities

to monitor shirking.     The model is the continuous time analogue of

the Becker-Stigler bonding model (Becker and Stigler, 1974) and is

closely related to the Shapiro-Stiglitz efficiency wage model

(Shapiro and Stiglitz,    l984).    Relative to Becker and Stigler, we

add one restriction; we do not permit upfront performance bonds         (or

entrance fees) to be paid by a worker at the beginning of a labor

contract.    Relative to Shapiro and Stiglitz, we model workers with

finite horizons (rather than infinite horizons), and, assume
                                           S

employers are honest and can commit not to falsely claim nalfeasance
and dismiss    a   nonshirking worker.
     This paper thus presents a synthesis between bonding models and

efficiency wage models.        When the models are set up symmetrically, it
turns out that the difference between the two models lies in the

assumed presence or absence of upfront bonds.4


                                 II.    BASIC MODEL


A.   The Modal's Assumptions

      The following assumptions fully describe the model.
      Time
      1.   A   worker has a work career beginning at time 0 and ending at

time n.
      2.   Time is continuous in the model.
      The Work-Shirk Decision and its Consequences
      3.   At each point of his career, the worker has a decision
whether to work or to shirk.           The worker makes this decision at each

point of tine to maximize expected lifetime utility.
      4.   A worker who shirks will supply 0 units of effective labor

to the firm.       A worker who works will supply e* units of effective

labor to the firm.5

      5.   e* is constant throughout the worker's career.

      6.   The monetary value of shirking to the worker for the short

length of time       dt   is   v dt.

      The Monitoring Process and Worker Djscthline/
      Finn Honesty in Dismissal
                                                6

       7.      A worker who shirks for the period         dt   is detected by the

firm with probability             p dt,
       8.      A   delay cannot occur between observation of shirking and a
worker's consequent dismissal.

       9.      Firms are totally honest in their dismissals.              Workers are

never dismissed unless caught shirking.

       Alternative Opportunities for Workers

       10.      A   worker has outside opportunities which pay a constant

wage      w,       for   0    t    n,     It is convenient to think of these

alternative opportunities as the secondary labor market.

       11.      Upon leaving the firm at t, the worker can immediately earn
 *
w (t).

       Workers' and Firms' Utilities and Discount Rates

       12.      Both firms and workers are risk neutral.
       13.      Both workers and firms have a zero rate of discount.
       14.      Workers      are homogeneous.

       Restrictions on Compensation Schedules

       15.      Workers do not pay firms an explicit bond or fee upon

joining the firm.             In other words, there are no net payments by

workers to firms.


8.    Derivation of the ODtimal waQe Path

       The firm in this model wishes to purchase labor efficiency units

at minimum unit cost.             We shall show that the cost minimizing wage

package involves total payments whose sum is w*n               +   v/p.    The

alternative opportunities (which are freely available to a worker)

pay   a   lifetime total of         wn.      Thus, total remuneration from the cost
                                              7

minimizing package is in excess of the total remuneration in the

secondary labor market by          v/p.
       It is intuitive that the firm will lose nothing by paying all of

the worker's remuneration at the worker's retirement date.                   This way
the firm's expenditure on worker remuneration will do the most work
in inducing workers not to shirk.             At each point in his career, the
worker has the inducement not to shirk of the payment at the end of

his career which is only received if he is never caught shirking.

      Given that we need only consider compensation schemes in which
all payments are made at the end of the worker's career, it is
                                                               only
necessary to discover the optimal total remuneration over the
worker's lifetime.          The worker must be paid at least          wn    at the end
of his career in order to be induced to join the firm.
                                                       Suppose that
the worker is paid w*n + x. What is the optimum value of the
premium (x) paid to the worker above the market—clearing wage stream
whose lifetime value is w*n?

      Given                  • •
                 that the firm is         •                   *
                                                     x at the end,
                                  paying the worker          w n +
we can view the worker's choice problem in the
                                               following way.
Suppose a worker has not previously been caught shirking at tine t.
He may choose to shirk over the interval            t   to    t +    dt.   This policy
has the gain         v dt   due to the added utility from shirking.
                                                             However,
if the worker gets caught shirking, his total compensation will be

w*(n —  t) from future earnings in the secondary sector rather than
the   w1'n   +   x   available at his firm for someone never caught

shirking.        Consequently, if the worker plans to work from time t +           dt
                                             8

to n, his potential gain from shirking is                  v dt,       and his potential

loss is

                                          — w * (n —
                             *
(3)                p dt((w n +       x)                t))
which simplifies to      p dt(w*t + x).6         At the point T where the worker
is just at the margin between working and shirking, we have

                             *
(4)                 p dt(w T +       x)   = V dt.


At later times, it will be more costly for the worker to be caught

shirking, and therefore the worker will work.                     And at earlier times

it is less costly to be caught shirking and therefore the worker will

shirk.

      As described above, equation (4) suggests the simple analogy of

the trust fund which underlies much of the logic of our argument.                             We

can pretend that the firm sets up a trust fund for its workers,                          It

puts up x in the beginning when the worker is initially hired and
later puts money into the trust fund at rate                  wi'.     At each point in

time t, the worker must decide whether to shirk, with the ill

consequence that he may be caught with probability                       p   dt   and give up

the accumulated trust fund of amount             u*t +       x.      The potential gain

from shirking is   v   dt.   consequently the worker is just indifferent
between working and shirking at time             T for which
(5)                 p dt     {w*Tx    + x]       V   dt.


What is the optimal value of x given that                  T obeys      (5)?      Equation (5)

yields the value of     T for each x,
                                                      9
                                                               *
                                 = max((v/p       -   x)/w         ,   0).
The firm's probleni is to choose                 x   to minimize unit labor costs which

are given by


                                                      *
                   wn+X
                    *
                                                     wn+x
                           —         *             V                    *         *
                  (n           T)e          (n — [(—       —
                                                               x)/w         J)e


over the range     0           x <   v/p.      It is easily shown that expression (7)

is minimized over this range if                   x =     v/p,         since the derivative of (7)
with respect to        x       is negative for all                  x       in the range     0   x I
v/p.
     As a result, the optimal (cost minimizing) wage package will pay

a premium x = v/p. This implies        = 0. There is never any
                                                      TX
shirking under the optimal compensation profile and the firm makes
total career payments of                 v/p    in excess of the market.
   Am explanation for this solution proceeds as follows.                                     For a

worker       to work, at the last instant worked he or she must

receive a surplus of at least                  v/p.       This          v/p        constitutes a fixed

cost to the firm.          At all previous moments worked, the worker must

also have a surplus of at least                  v/p, so that the firm pays a minimum
to the worker of       u*tw          +   v/p    for working a length of time                     t.    By
paying   w*n +   v/p       at the end of the

worker's career, the firm spreads the fixed cost                                      v/p over the
maximum working time (the worker's whole career n) and therefore unit

labor cost is minimized.7
                                   10
                                                           that a
     It has been seen that in the case without discounting
                                          in the presence of a
finn which minimizes its unit labor costs
                                         to collect upfront
shirking problem and without the ability
                                                    that exceeds the
employment fees from workers will pay a career wage
alternative career earnings available to workers in the secondary
                                                           substitute
sector by v/p. Upward sloping wage profiles cannot fully
                                                          the trust
for explicit employment fees in such a model. Only after

fund has an accumulated value v/p will the worker stop shirking.
                                                             below
And if Hbonding! occurs by workers' initial receipt of wages
                                                  the worker to stop
the secondary sector level, it takes too long for
                                      out are at the market clearing
shirking if total lifetime wages paid
level. It is better instead for the finn to pay an efficiency wage

premium of   v/p   in excess of market clearing at the end of the

worker's career and prevent shirking altogether.
Remark:
                                                          in the
     The model above has only one type of job for workers
                                          to the ease of monitoring,
primary sector. If jobs differ according
a firm's optimal strategy is to assign younger workers (recent hires)
to more easily monitored jobs. Indeed, if there are enough
                                           the equilibrium contract
 productive jobs with costless monitoring,
                                                          no shirking
 will be market clearing with workers placed in jobs with
                                            to more responsible jobs
 potential early in their careers and moved
 once their trust funds have built up sufficiently.8
               III.   XT!N8IONB   0? TH   RDI4ENTARY   I4ODEL


                                                        in some detail
      A longer paper (Akerlof and Katz (1987)) explores

 each of seven extensions of the rudimentary model of the previous
                                       11

section.     The logic of each of these extensions conforms to the

analysis of the previous section.      Here we will only give a brief

summary of these extensions.

       1.   Positive Discount Rates,   In the previous model the discount

rate is zero.    Adding a positive discount rate does not alter the
previous result regarding the desirability of wage premia.             The

analysis with positive discount rates is exactly analogous to the

analysis with zero discount rates.


       2.   Growing Worker Productivity.      In the rudimentary model

workers have constant productivity.         If workers have low productivity

in the early part of their careers then it does not much matter to

firms   if they shirk in that part of their careers.       As   a   consequence,
if worker productivity is growing sufficiently fast over workers'

careers, firms' best strategy will let workers shirk in the early

part of their careers while their trust funds are building up,               and   it
will   not be optimal to pay a wage premium.


       3.   Endooenous Productivity Gains.     The argument of the

preceding paragraph relating productivity gains and wage premia

assumes, however, that working workers and shirking workers are alike
in their productivity gains.     According to    a   more natural assumption

workers only have increasing productivity insofar as they are not

shirking.     In this case it is particularly important to avoid

shirking early in workers' careers, and it can be shown that wage

premia are again the second—best optimal policy.
                                       12

    4.   Positive Output by   Shirkin Workers.    In the rudimentary

model shirking workers produced zero output,     Kevin   14.   Murphy has

suggested a change in our model which permits workers to accumulate
an implicit bond in the form of output even if explicit upfront bonds

are prohibited. The modification is to suppose that shirking workers
                                                                 than
supply e0 efficiency units where e0 is strictly positive (rather
zero as assumed in our basic model). If the work horizon (n) is
                                                           will pay
sufficiently long, in the profit maximizing contract firms
                                                        *
workers a zero wage until retirement and a payment of nw at
retirement,   Aworker will shirk producing effort a0 until the value

of his or her trust fund reaches v/p. Thereafter the worker will

work producing effort e*,     I this   case, the firm will minimize labor

costs by allowing workers to shirk early in their careers and

dissipating all worker rents with a market clearing compensation
package. Such solutions with workers receiving market clearing

compensation packages and shirking early in their careers are
sensitive to our extreme assumption that workers are willing to

accept zero wages at the beginning of their careers provided lifetime
remuneration is sufficient.    If   workers must be   paid at each instant

a wage higher than the shirking productivity level e0,           a trust fund

of v/p can never be accumulated by shirking workers.           Furthermore,

since many forms of shirking may cause large damages to firms (e.g.,

the examples discussed in Mars (1982)), the assumption that shirking

workers produce e0 less than or equal to zero may not be unrealistic.

Other reasons for efficiency wages such as the effect of higher wages
                                            13

in facilitating recruiting and reducing turnover are added reasons

why firms will not dissipate all ex-ante rents in this fashion.

       5.    Higher Discount Rates for Workers Than Firms.         In the

rudimentary model workers and firms have the sane discount rate.                If
workers have a higher discount rate than firms, the second best

optimal policy will not pay workers at the end of the contract, but
rather pay a steady stream of wages over their working career with a

lump sum payment at the end.9           This strengthens the argument in favor
of wage premia at retirement, because the trust fund builds up more

slowly when wages are being paid out.             Consequently, in the absence
of wage premia paid to workers at retirement workers' relative myopia

makes the period of shirking longer.             Thus higher discount rates for
workers than firms increase the unit cost of effective labor when no

wage premia are paid and as a result, make it relatively more

advantageous to pay wage premia.

       6.    Endogenous Monitoring. The rudimentary model assumed that
the probability of catching        a   worker shirking in the interval      t   to
t +   dt    was fixed at   p dt.    It is surprisingly easy to extend the

model to the case where the probability of catching the working

shirking is proportional to the monitoring cost.            An optimal time
dependent path for      p can   then be derived.       Workers late in their
careers, who have more to lose, will be monitored less closely.

Again wage premia will be paid.

      7.     Stigma and Moving Costs.       If workers' employment histories
can be observed by potential employers, workers fired for shirking
                                      14

say be stigmatized and have a more difficult time gaining

reemployment or be offered reduced wages.         They may also incur moving
costs.    If the cost of stigma (or moving costs) is denoted s, the

worker will begin working when the value of his trust fund exceeds

v/p      s. If s exceeds v/p1 market clearing wages     will be paid. If a

is less than v/p, the presence of this stigma (or moving costs) will

not affect the decision whether to pay wages in excess of market

clearing or to let workers shirk until their trust funds are

sufficiently large to induce working.
                              IV.   CONCLUSION


      A method has been   proposed to analyze dynamic wage paths in the

second—best optimal case where for some reason or other workers

cannot or will not post upfront performance bonds or pay employment

fees to gain jobs.     Surprisingly, in    a   wide variety of cases these

second-best contracts without performance bonds involve wage premia

above the market clearing level of wages.

      Bonding models, such as in Becker and Stigler (1974), make the

unrealistic prediction that firms utilize employment fees or upfront

bonds to clear the labor market. Efficiency wage models with

untrustworthy firms and infinitely lived workers, such as in Shapiro
and Stiglitz (1984) and Bulow and Summers (1986), yield the
counterfactual prediction that firms cannot utilize deferred

compensation mechanisms.     On the other hand, the model analyzed in

this paper matches the observation that firms do not make workers

post upfront bonds but do utilize pensions and other deferred payment
schemes.
                                        15

     Finally, we emphasize the justification for our assumption of
the absence of upfront bonds and employment fees.        We have made this

assumption to explore the importance of upfront bonds for market

clearing when worker moral hazard problems are present.        This paper

has demonstrated the importance of this assumption: in the absence of

upfront bonds, simple models of work incentives may not yield market

clearing.     Why?   Because with   narket clearing compensation profiles

workers will shirk until the time when the value of their trust fund

equals v/p.     With many plausible career productivity patterns, firns

will find it less costly to prevent shirking throughout      a   worker's

career by paying a premium v/p above the market clearing level than

to suffer the lower output generated by workers shirking early in

their job tenures.
                                  16

                             FOOTNOTES


1. Models of this type have recently been examined by Bowles (1985),
Bulow and Summers (1986), Calvo (1985), Eaton and White (1983),
Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), Stoft (1982) and others. Yellen (1984)
and Katz (1986) provide surveys of alternative efficiency wage
models. Mars (1982) presents numerous examples of the importance of
worker discretion and the limited ability of firms to monitor worker
behavior.

2.  Market clearing packages without upfront fees may provide
sufficient incentive to prevent workers from shirking throughout
their careers if there are substantial costs associated with the
                                         there are substantial costs
stigma of being fired for shirking or ifunder
to moving between jobs. The conditions        which stigma or moving
costs eliminate the need for wage premia are discussed in section
III,

3. See Akerlof and Katz (1987) for a detailed comparison between the
model developed in this paper and the bonding model of Lazear (1981)

4. Examination of contracts without upfront bonds may be
particularly relevant since practical considerations may limit the
use of such devices. Bulow and Summers (1986), Dickens, Katz, Lang
and Summers (1987), and Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984) provide detailed
discussions of reasons why firms may be limited in their ability to
get workers to post performance bonds.
                                     functions are of the form
5. We assume that firms' production
                                of laborers who are supplying effort
fLe n) where n is the number
e    A worker who supplies 0 labor has no effect on output. It is
     .


said that a worker who shirks supplies 0 units of effective labor
while a worker who works supplies e    units of effective labor.

6.  If the firm could hide its knowledge of having detected a worker
shirking and wait till n before dismissing a worker for a shirking at
offense committed at ,   the worker's potential loss from shirking
t is instead p dt (w n + x) since a worker dismissed at n will
attain no outside earnings. In this case, the firm's optimal
strategy is to hide its knowledge of having caught a worker shirking
and wait till just prior to the worker's retirement date to fire the
worker. If the worker knows that he or she has been caught shirking
this strategy has no use. At that point, the worker will seek other
employment. Also, the delayed informing of the worker that he or she
has been caught shirking and in danger of disciplinary action may
leave a firm open to an unjust dismissal suit in some U.S. states and
would not be permissible under the dismissal rules in many European
countries.

7.  Hutchens (1986) shows in a shirking model in which workers are
assumed to be able to post upfront bonds that the specter of firm
                                  17

cheating on delayed payments introduces a form of fixed costs into
the employment relationship. Since a firm entails these fixed costs
each time it hires a new worker, firms prefer to hire young workers
with long potential tenures. Hutchens argues that firms with
reputations for honesty do not face these fixed costs and should be
indifferent between hiring young and old workers. In contrast, our
model shows that even honest firms face the fixed costs of generating
enough surplus to provide work incentives if upfront bonds are not
possible.
8.   Furthermore, if primary sector firms are paying above market
clearing wages because of monitoring difficulties, there is an
incentive for primary sector firms to merge with secondary sector
firms. In this case, workers would be positioned in the secondary
sector jobs that have little potential for shirking early in their
careers and optimal deferred payment schemes could potentially be
market clearing. The importance of job specific human capital
accumulation may limit the usefulness of such measures.

9. The generalized version of different discount rates has been
analyzed by Kuhn (1986).
                                  18

                             REFERENCES


Akerlof, George A. and Lawrence F. Katz. "Do Deferred Wages
Eliminate the Need for Involuntary Unemployment as a Worker
Discipline Device?" Harvard Institute of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 1325, June 1987.
Becker, Gary S. and George J. Stigler. "Law Enforcement,
Malfeasance, and the Compensation of Enforcers," Journal of Legal
Studies 3 (January 1974): 1—18.

Bowles, Samuel, "The Production Process in a Competitive Economy:
Walrasian, Neo—Hobbesian and Marxian Models." American Economic
Review 75 (March 1985): 16—36.

Calvo, Guillermo,  "The Inefficiency of Unemployment: The
Supervision Perspective." Qiarter1v Journal of Economics 100 (May
1985): 373—87.

Dickens, William T., Lawrence F. Katz, Kevin Lang, and Lawrence H.
Summers. "Employee Crime, Monitoring and the Efficiency Wage
Hypothesis." NBER Working Paper No. 2356, August 1987.

Eaton, Curtis and William D. White.  "The Economy of High Wages: An
Agency Problem." Economica (April 1983): 175—81.
Hutchens, Robert. "Delayed Payment Contracts and a Firm's Propensity
to Hire Older Workers." Journalof Labor Economics 4 (October 1986).

Katz, Lawrence F. "Efficiency Wage Theories:   A Partial Evaluation."
NBER Macroeconomics Annual (1), 1986.
Kuhn, Peter. "Wages, Effort, and Incentive Compatibility in Life—
Cycle Employment Contracts." Journal of Labor Economics 4 (January
1986): 28—49.

Lazear, Edward. "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours
Restrictions." American Economic Review 71 (September 1981): 606—
20.
Nars, Gerald.                   London:   Allen and Unwin, 1982.

Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Equilibrium Unemployment as a
Worker Discipline Device." American Economic Review 74 (June 1984):
433—44.

Stoft, Steven.   "Cheat Threat Theory: An Explanation of Involuntary
Unemployment."   Mimeo, Boston University, May 1982.

Yellem, Janet L. "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment."    American
Economic Review Proceedings 74 (May 1984): 200—5.
