                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MONETARY POLICY COMMUNICATIONS AND THEIR EFFECTS ON HOUSEHOLD
                     INFLATION EXPECTATIONS

                                       Olivier Coibion
                                     Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                       Michael Weber

                                      Working Paper 25482
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25482


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         January 2019, Revised September 2019




We thank the Fama-Miller Center and the Initiative on Global Markets, both at the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support for conducting the surveys. Coibion and
Gorodnichenko also thank the NSF for financial support. We are grateful to seminar and
conference participants at many institutions. We thank Jonas Dalmazzo and Mathieu Pedemonte
for excellent research assistance. We also thank Shannon Hazlett and Victoria Stevens at Nielsen
for their assistance with the collection of the PanelViews Survey. Results in this article are
calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing databases
provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. Information on availability and access to the data is available at http://
research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen. The randomized control trial is registered at the AER RCT
Registry (#AEARCTR-0003649). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy Communications and their Effects on Household Inflation Expectations
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 25482
January 2019, Revised September 2019
JEL No. C83,D84,E31

                                           ABSTRACT

We study how different forms of communication influence the inflation expectations of
individuals in a randomized controlled trial. We first solicit individuals’ inflation expectations in
the Nielsen Homescan panel and then provide eight different forms of information regarding
inflation. Reading the actual Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) statement has about the
same average effect on expectations as simply being told about the Federal Reserve’s inflation
target. Reading a news article about the most recent FOMC meetings results in a forecast revision
which is smaller by half. Our results have implications for how central banks should
communicate to the broader public.

Olivier Coibion                                   Michael Weber
Department of Economics                           Booth School of Business
University of Texas at Austin                     University of Chicago
2225 Speedway                                     5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Austin, TX 78712                                  Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                          and NBER
ocoibion@gmail.com                                michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA
and also NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3649
“Since I’ve become a central banker, I’ve learned to mumble with great incoherence. If I seem
unduly clear to you, you must have misunderstood what I said.”
                                                            Alan Greenspan, September 22, 1987

“[B]ecause monetary policy affects everyone, I want to start with a plain-English summary of how
the economy is doing, what my colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve are trying to do, and why.”
                                                                   Jerome Powell, June 13, 2018.1

1        Introduction
Central bank communications have changed a lot in the last thirty years, as illustrated by the
statements above from different chairmen of the Federal Reserve. Central bankers now announce their
policy decisions, explain their reasoning and describe their plans for the future. These new
communications strategies have been targeted primarily at financial markets, both to minimize
financial volatility as well as to shape longer-term interest rates to better achieve central banks’
objectives. In this respect, they seem to have been successful, as illustrated e.g. by the effects of
forward-guidance announcements on long-term interest rates (Swanson 2018).
         In terms of influencing the expectations of households or firms, central banks have had the
much more targeted goal of “anchoring” their inflation expectations. 2 Yet despite this modest
objective, central banks appear to have systematically failed in achieving it across most advanced
economies. Firms and households in low-inflation countries report beliefs about inflation that are far
from anchored, seem unaware of even dramatic monetary policy announcements, and more generally
display almost no knowledge of what central banks do (see e.g. Coibion et al. 2018a, D’Acunto et al.
2018a, and Binder 2017). This ignorance may be a sign of central banks’ success (since firms and
households have little incentive to worry about inflation or monetary policy), but it is unlikely to be
innocuous: some of the non-traditional policies at the zero lower bound (ZLB) are thought to operate
primarily through the inflation expectations of households and firms. If their expectations are
unresponsive to central bank announcements and communications, as they seem to be (Coibion et al.
2018a, D’Acunto et al. 2018b), then this class of policies cannot be effective. Understanding how




1
  The Greenspan quote is from Geraats (2007) who cites the Wall Street Journal. The Powell quote is from the press
conference          that        day,        transcripts         of          which          are          available        here:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20180613.pdf
2
  Janet Yellen stated the communications objective as “Put differently, the purpose of providing greater clarity about the
FOMC's longer-run inflation goal is to anchor inflation expectations more firmly. These more firmly anchored expectations
in turn free the Committee's hand to more actively and effectively stabilize short-run fluctuations in economic activity.”
                                                                                                                            1
central banks can better communicate with the general public to shape their expectations is therefore
of first-order importance for the implementation of policies at the ZLB. 3
         To better understand how central banks could communicate with the general public, we
combine a new large-scale survey of households with a range of randomized information treatments
to study how different types of communications affect the inflation expectations of consumers. While
randomized control trials (RCTs) have recently begun to be applied in macroeconomics (e.g. Armona,
Fuster and Zafar 2018, Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar 2018, Binder and Rodrigue 2019), our
approach is unique in the magnitude of the survey. Approximately 20,000 consumers responded to
our survey, more than ten times the size of the New York Federal Reserve of Bank’s Survey of
Consumer Expectations or the size of other household surveys used for RCTs. This unprecedented
scale allows us to consider simultaneously a wide range of different information treatments (eight
different treatments and a control group) as well as to explore how different characteristics of
respondents might affect their response to the treatment, both immediately as well as in subsequent
months in which we deploy follow-up surveys. The subsequent surveys take place three and six
months later, so we can measure the persistence of the information effect much more systematically
than previous work relying on rapid follow-ups. It also allows for a much more precise identification
of the size of these effects than possible otherwise, and through this precision we are able to identify
some unexpected differences across treatments.
         Our approach yields a novel set of facts about which types of information are most effective
at influencing the beliefs of households, both immediately as well as over longer periods. We find
that providing households with simple statistics about inflation, such as the most recent rate of
inflation, the Fed’s inflation target or the FOMC’s inflation forecast, has statistically and
economically significant effects on inflation expectations: this type of information reduces
households’ average forecast of inflation by 1.0-1.2 percentage points. The implied change in the
perceived real interest rate from this adjustment of inflation expectations dwarfs the estimated effects
of quantitative easing or forward guidance on nominal (as well as real) interest rates (see Bhattarai
and Neely 2018 for a survey of these estimates). Evidence suggests that individuals adjust their
consumption plans to changes in inflation expectations as predicted by the consumer Euler equation
(D’Acunto et al. 2016 and Crump et al. 2015), so the large effects on perceived real interest rates


3
  Improved central bank communication with the public would also serve to enhance the credibility of those institutions.
Since households and firms in low-inflation countries are largely unaware of the central bank’s policy objectives or of recent
inflation rates, informing them of both could only improve the credibility of these institutions in the eyes of the public.
                                                                                                                            2
imply that the management of inflation expectations could be a very powerful policy tool if central
banks were better able to reach consumers with their communication. The fact that pre-treatment
inflation expectations are dispersed and substantially differ from the Fed’s inflation target of 2% also
implies that the current focus of central bank communication on financial market participants and
professional forecasters limits its power to affect real decisions of households and firms, and
ultimately the overall economy. Several central banks have realized the limited power of conventional
monetary policy communication tools and have started to explore more unconventional
communication such as music videos on inflation targeting by the Central Bank of Jamaica or the
extensive use of Twitter to discuss and explain monetary policy decisions as exemplified by Olli
Rehn, the Governor of the Bank of Finland.
       The effect on households’ inflation expectations from these simple pieces of information is
also mildly persistent: when interviewed in follow-up interviews three months after the information
treatment, households’ inflation expectations had only converged half-way back to their original
average levels but fully converge within six months. These results suggests central banks cannot rely
on one-off messages but have to develop a repeated communication strategy to the extent central
banks intend to manage consumer expectations through communication.
       While these information treatments seem to have large effects on expectations, we find that not
all information is processed in the same way. For example, a random subset of households was instead
provided with the entire post-meeting statement of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
Despite its length and detail, the effect of this treatment was no larger than simply providing households
with the FOMC inflation forecast, reducing the average inflation expectation by about 1.2 percentage
points. Another subset of households was given a news article from the USA Today covering the same
FOMC meeting. Strikingly, this easy-to-read summary of the Fed’s decision and motivation had a much
smaller effect on inflation expectations: about half of the other treatments. Despite being written
explicitly for the general public, this media transmission of the FOMC’s decision and motivation seems
to have either dissipated the message or, more likely given that the article is much clearer than the FOMC
statement, been discounted by households because of its origin. Indeed, survey respondents indicate that
newspapers are generally viewed as less credible than friends and co-workers, direct communication
from the government, or even social media. This suggests one reason why monetary policy-makers have
had so little success affecting the inflation expectations of households: relying on the conventional media
to diffuse their message to the public can be ineffective because many households no longer read
newspapers and even if they do, individuals discount reports from the news media.
                                                                                                         3
        Exploiting the micro-level heterogeneity underlying these results sheds additional insight.
First, there is in general little variation in terms of how different types of consumers respond to most
signals: conditional on their initial beliefs (which do differ across groups), the way they respond to a
common signal is broadly similar. This pattern in updating yields declines in disagreement across
agents after each treatment. Consistent with this homogeneity in how people respond to a common
signal, we find that the average responses of beliefs to each treatment are not driven by large changes
in the beliefs of a subgroup within the treatment, i.e. little extensive margin adjustment exists in the
response to treatments across subgroups and almost all of the variation is coming from the intensive
margin. The one exception to these otherwise fairly systematic responses to information treatments
lies in the USA Today treatment: we find that low-income low-education individuals
disproportionately downweigh the article from this news source, although all groups tend to discount
the news report from USA Today. One explanation might have to do with political perspective, but
the USA Today is a non-partisan newspaper and we find similar responses across political
orientations. Our results point toward the need for more research toward understanding how
consumers interpret news from the media, such as whether all newspapers would be treated alike (e.g.
Wall Street Journal vs. USA Today vs. New York Times), the role that the media plays in
communicating news about the economy and policy to households, and which individuals acquire
news via traditional media outlets. Moreover, more researcher is needed to understand which medium
is most effective for policy communication and whether the sender of the message affects the response
of the broader population.
        This paper builds on a growing literature focusing on how economic agents form their
expectations and process information (see Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kamdar (2018) for a survey, and
Bordalo et al. 2018 for a recent example). It is most closely related to recent work using randomized
information treatments to characterize how agents learn and respond to new information.4 Randomized
information treatments applied to firms in New Zealand, for example, suggest that managers respond
strongly to information about recent inflation or the inflation target (Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar
2018) as well as to the higher-order beliefs of other managers (Coibion et al. 2018b). Coibion,
Gorodnichenko and Ropele (2018) document similarly large responses of firm expectations in Italy to
information about recent inflation or the inflation target, as do Humziker et al. (2018) for firms in


4
 This approach builds on an earlier (and ongoing) literature in development using RCTs described in Banerjee, Duflo
and Kremer (2016). See Cavallo et al. (2017) for an application of RCTs to inflation expectations households in the U.S.
and Argentina and Fuster et al. (2019) for an RCT studying the spending response to unanticipated spending shocks.
                                                                                                                      4
Switzerland. Additional results have also been documented for households: Roth and Wohlfart (2018)
consider how households respond to professionals’ opinions about the likelihood of a recession while
Armona et al. (2018) assess how households respond to news about housing prices. In related work,
Haldane and McMahon (2018) use randomized treatments to explore how/whether changing the
presentation of the Bank of England’s statements alters the public’s understanding of their message.
Finally, Binder and Rodrigue (2018) document that households revise their long-run inflation forecasts
when presented with information about recent inflation or the central bank’s inflation target.
       Relative to this prior work, we make a number of contributions. First, the scale of our
randomized information treatment is simply unprecedented in this literature, which among other
things allows for much more precise identification of estimated effects. Second, we are able to
consider a much wider range of information treatments simultaneously than in prior work, including
not just the provision of simple facts about inflation but also more original treatments like the FOMC
statement or a newspaper description of FOMC decisions. This is important because ex ante it is
unclear whether households react more in their inflation expectations to information about past
inflation, inflation forecasts, or detailed discussions also about the state of the economy. Third, we
have a more systematic follow-up of individuals than in prior work on household expectations that
allows us to rule out experimenter demand effects. Fourth, we provide a placebo treatment to
disentangle genuine learning from anchoring affects and spurious learning. Finally, our larger cross-
section allows us to examine micro-heterogeneity in expectations and updating in exceptional detail.
       Our work also speaks to a broader literature on central bank communication. While much of this
work focuses on financial markets, as does central bank communication (see e.g. Blinder et al. 2008),
there has been growing concern about the ability of central banks to communicate with the broader public.
Blinder (2009), for example, was an early voice advocating for more focus on communicating with an
audience beyond experts and financial markets. Recent work has documented the shortcomings of current
communications strategies. Carvalho and Nechio (2014) find that few households in the U.S. form
macroeconomic expectations that are consistent with how the Federal Reserve makes policy, a finding
largely confirmed in Drager et al. (2016). Binder (2017) shows that most households do not know the
names or objectives of U.S. monetary policy-makers. Not only do we provide more (and larger-scale)
evidence on U.S. households’ lack of knowledge about monetary policy, we also document a novel
possible source of this: a dismissal of news reports about monetary policy.




                                                                                                       5
2.      Data and Survey Design

This section describes the survey design we use to elicit inflation expectations, the various treatments, and
provides descriptive statistics of individual inflation expectations. We first detail the Nielsen Homescan
panel on which we run the survey and then provide more information on the structure of the survey.


2.1 Nielsen Panel
In June, September, and December of 2018, we fielded three waves of the Chicago Booth Expectations
and Communications Survey inviting participation by all household members in the Kilts-Nielsen
Consumer Panel (KNCP). The KNCP represents a panel of approximately 80,000 households that
report to AC Nielsen (i) their static demographic characteristics, such as household size, income, ZIP
code of residence, and marital status, and (ii) the dynamic characteristics of their purchases, that is,
which products they purchase, at which outlets, and at which prices. Panelists update their demographic
information at an annual frequency to reflect changes in household composition or marital status.
        Nielsen attempts to balance the panel on nine dimensions: household size, income, age of
household head, education of female household head, education of male household head, presence of
children, race/ethnicity, and occupation of the household head. Panelists are recruited online, but the
panel is balanced using Nielsen’s traditional mailing methodology. Nielsen checks the sample
characteristics on a weekly basis and performs adjustments when necessary.
        Nielsen provides households with various incentives to guarantee the accuracy and
completeness of the information households report. They organize monthly prize drawings, provide
points for each instance of data submission, and engage in ongoing communication with households.
Panelists can use points to purchase gifts from a Nielsen-specific award catalog. Nielsen structures the
incentives to not bias the shopping behavior of their panelists. The KNCP has a retention rate of more
than 80% at the annual frequency. Nielsen validates the reported consumer spending with the scanner
data of retailers on a quarterly frequency to ensure high data quality. The KNCP filters households that
do not report a minimum amount of spending over the previous 12 months.

2.2 Chicago Booth Expectations and Communication Survey
Nielsen runs surveys on a monthly frequency on a subset of panelists in the KNCP, the online panel,
but also offers customized solutions for longer surveys. Retailers and fast-moving consumer-good
producers purchase this information and other services from Nielsen for product design and target-
group marketing.

                                                                                                           6
        In spring 2018, we designed a customized survey consisting of 37 questions in total in
cooperation with Nielsen, the Chicago Booth Expectations and Communication Survey. The survey also
contains eight different information treatments as well as one control group. To reduce the burden of
participating in the survey, some questions were asked only of a subset of respondents. We report the
full survey of the first wave in the online appendix. Our survey design builds on the Michigan Survey
of Consumers, the New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations, the Panel on Household Finances
at the Deutsche Bundesbank as well as D’Acunto et al. (2018).
        Nielsen fielded the first wave of the survey in May-June of 2018. The survey sample was 83,061
households. 24,510 individuals responded for a response rate of 26.50% and an average response time
of 15 minutes. The second and third waves were shorter, consisting mostly of follow-up questions, with
median response times of about 10 minutes and 32,658 unique respondents for the second wave and 13
minutes and 29,348 unique respondents for the third wave. Nielsen provides weights to ensure
representativeness of the households participating in the survey.
        The initial wave of the survey covers a wide range of questions. First, respondents are presented
with a series of questions about their demographic characteristics, which are more detailed relative to
the basic demographic information the KNCP provides. We collect information on employment status,
current occupation, financial constraints, savings and portfolio choice, gas prices and expectations, past
spending behavior in various categories including expenses that are not covered in the KNCP, and we
identify the primary shopper of the household among all the responding members. Participants are then
asked a sequence of questions about their perceptions and expectations of inflation. We follow the
design in the recent New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE) and ask specifically about
inflation, because asking about prices might induce individuals to think about specific items whose
prices they recall rather than about overall inflation (see Crump et al. (2015) for a recent paper using
the SCE data). We first ask individuals about their perception of past inflation, that is, inflation over the
previous 12 months. We then ask them about their expectations for 12-month-ahead inflation. We elicit
a full probability distribution of expectations by asking participants to assign probabilities to different
possible levels of the inflation rate. In addition, we also ask about the perception of the current
unemployment rate and the expected unemployment rate in twelve months.
        Subsequent waves largely follow the same structure but in a much shorter form. Demographic
characteristics are assumed to be time invariant. Hence, the follow-up surveys are primarily used to
measure individuals’ perceptions and expectations of inflation over time.


                                                                                                           7
2.3 Treatments
After respondents answered the initial set of questions in the first wave, they were assigned to one of
nine groups: a control group and eight treatment groups. We designed the treatments to disentangle the
effects of different possible types of monetary policy communication, especially ones that provide some
simple statistics that might help individuals update their inflation expectations. In addition, we also
provided a placebo treatment to differentiate true learning from spurious learning possibly due to
anchoring effects. Each group consists of 1/9th of the total sample that received the survey and the
treatments are randomly assigned. Appendix Table 6 confirms that the different treatment groups are
comparable along all major observable characteristics.
       Specifically, the treatments are (i) the actual CPI inflation rate over the last twelve month
(2.3%); (ii) the inflation target of the Federal Reserve of 2% per year; (iii) the FOMC forecast for
inflation in 2018 of 1.9% (we informed participants that the FOMC is responsible for setting short
term interest rates); (iv) the most recent FOMC statement; (v) the coverage of the most recent FOMC
decision in USA Today. We were also interested to see whether participants might have a Philips
curve in mind and provided the most recent unemployment numbers as treatment (vi); D’Acunto et
al. (2018) document individuals extrapolate from salient price changes to overall inflation and, hence,
we informed one of the treatment groups that the national average gas price inflation over the previous
three months of 6.4% as treatment (vii), and as placebo treatment we provided the actual fact that the
U.S. population grew by 2% over the last two years. We report the treatments as part of the overall
survey in the Online Appendix. Ex-ante it is not clear whether individuals might react more to
information about current inflation, the inflation target, or inflation forecasts. Some households might
extrapolate from current inflation to future inflation and providing them with accurate information
about current inflation might be most effective in shaping expectations. Other individuals instead
might have fully forward-looking information and providing these households with information on
the forecasts of professionals or the official information target might be more relevant for shaping
expectations. Finally, some individuals might form expectations about inflation jointly with
expectations about other economic variables such as the unemployment rate and providing these
households information about these variables could result in the largest revision in inflation
expectations (Andre et al. 2019). No research exists that has systematically compared the
effectiveness of different information treatments for households and different central banks follow
different communication strategies to the extent they have any systematic communication with the
ordinary people.
                                                                                                      8
         Following each treatment (as well as for the control group), respondents were again asked about
their inflation forecasts and perceptions, but this time in the form of a point estimate to avoid them
having to answer the exact same question twice. This allows us to measure the instantaneous revision
in expectations (if any) after the information treatments compared to the control group. The treatments
were only applied in the first wave of the survey. In subsequent waves, respondents were again asked
for their inflation expectations and perceptions, but questionnaires were identical across all respondents
in the two follow-up waves. The first follow-up was after three months and the second after six months.


2.4 Preliminary Facts and External Validity
We present in Table 1 average 12-month ahead inflation expectations and perceptions of all individuals
in the survey prior to any information treatment being applied, as well as these same facts along a
number of observable characteristics of the individuals. The average inflation expectation across all
households is 2.5% with a standard deviation of 2.6%.5 For comparison, the average 12-month ahead
inflation expectation in the Michigan Survey of Consumers in May 2018 was 3.3% (with a standard
deviation of 2.9%). Hence, our results are broadly in line with other surveys of households taking place
at the same time, both in terms of the first and second moments of the inflation expectation distribution.
         We find that the perceived inflation rate of households in our sample was 2.5%, at a time when
the annual CPI inflation rate was 2.3% (May 2018). While the average perceived inflation was therefore
quite close to the actual inflation rate, this masks profound levels of disagreement across households
about recent inflation: the cross-sectional standard deviation of perceived inflation was 2.7%, about the
same amount of disagreement as for inflation forecasts. This points toward significant levels of
inattention on the part of many individuals toward aggregate inflation. As documented in Jonung (1981)
for Swedish households, there is a high correlation between households’ perceptions of recent inflation
and their expectations of future inflation at 0.79. D’Acunto et al. (2018) document in a preceding survey
of U.S. households that individuals’ perceptions of recent inflation are disproportionately shaped by the
recent price movements of goods they purchase frequently. The associated inattention to recent
aggregate inflation suggests that information treatments focusing on actual values of recent inflation
might lead to significant revisions in households’ expectations of future inflation.




5
  Here and in what follows we use a Huber estimator to compute moments and estimate regression coefficients. This
approach allows us to remove outliers and influential observations automatically. Descriptive statistics for unfiltered data
are reported in Appendix Table 4. We apply sampling weights everywhere.
                                                                                                                          9
        The inattention of households extends beyond inflation to monetary policy more generally. For
example, respondents were also asked what inflation rate the Federal Reserve was trying to achieve in
the long-run. The results of this question are displayed in Figure 1. Less than twenty percent of
respondents correctly answered 2%. Barely 50% answered a number ranging from 0% to 5%.
Strikingly, almost forty percent answered that the Federal Reserve was targeting an inflation rate of
10% or more, which suggests a pervasive lack of knowledge on the part of households about the
objectives of the Federal Reserve. This is consistent with previous evidence on the knowledge of
households and firms in low-inflation environments about monetary policy (Binder 2017, Kumar et al.
2015, Cavallo et al. 2017).
        Other features of the survey are also consistent with previously documented evidence. For
example, we find that men have lower and less dispersed inflation expectations than women on average
(as in Bryan and Venkatu 2001 and D’Acunto et al. 2019), higher-income households also have lower
and less dispersed inflation expectations (as in Binder 2015) as do households with higher stocks of
savings and higher savings rates, where the latter is consistent with D’Acunto et al. (2018). Taken
together, these results suggest that our survey replicates the main cross-sectional stylized facts of
households’ inflation expectations and therefore supports the validity of our survey as a measure of
individuals’ beliefs about inflation.



3       Treatment Effects of Different Communication Tools
In this section, we present and discuss how different treatments affect the inflation expectations of
individuals

3.1 Average Effects on Beliefs
To characterize how information treatments affect expectations, we first regress, for each treatment
group combined with the control group, the change in the inflation expectations of agents from before
to after the information treatment on a dummy variable for their treatment group (equal to zero if in the
control group and one otherwise), that is,
                         𝐸     𝜋−𝐸       𝜋 = 𝑎 + 𝑏 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 + 𝜷𝑿 + 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 ,                  (1)
where 𝐸       𝜋 is the posterior forecast of individual i, 𝐸   𝜋 is their prior average belief, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
is the dummy variable, and 𝑿 is a vector of individual-specific controls. These include a quadratic
polynomial in the respondent’s age and a rich set of dummy variables for a respondent’s gender,

                                                                                                       10
employment status, household income, household size, race, census region, spectra life style, and
spectra behavior stage.6 For the posterior forecasts of individuals, we use the forecast provided
immediately after the treatment as well as the forecasts provided three and six months later in follow-
up waves. In Table 2, we report estimated values of b for each treatment group with and without these
individual controls.7 Note that b identifies the average change in expectations of agents in the
treatment group relative to the average change in the control group. Including the control group is
important because inflation expectations before and after the treatment are measured using questions
with different wording to elicit inflation expectations, so the control group serves to capture any effect
driven by wording. Because initial beliefs about inflation are biased upwards prior to the treatment,
this baseline specification focusing on the average revision provides a simple benchmark for assessing
the power of each treatment on expectations. We also study convergence in beliefs below. In each
regression, we use sampling weights in the regressions and use Huber regressions to control for
outliers and influential observations.
         Consider first the placebo treatment. In this case, individuals were told that the population
growth of the U.S. was 2% over the last three years, a statement of little relevance to inflation but
which included the number 2%. This placebo helps identify the potential importance and size of
anchoring effects. We find very mild evidence for contemporaneous anchoring effects: the average
respondent in this group reduces their inflation forecast by 0.2-0.3%, or less than one-tenth of the
cross-sectional standard deviation of inflation expectations. These small anchoring effects have
completely dissipated by the first follow-up, and the inflation expectations of individuals in this group
are no different from those in the control group three and six months after the treatment.
         We now turn to the direct treatments about inflation applied to three of the groups. One group
was told the most recent 12-month CPI inflation rate (2.3%), one group was told that the Federal
Reserve targets an inflation rate of 2%, and the third group was told that the FOMC was forecasting
an inflation rate of 1.9% over the next twelve months. The effects across these three groups are very
similar. On impact, all three reduce the average inflation forecast by 1.0-1.1% relative to the control
group. Hence, these very simple information treatments have large effects on the beliefs of
individuals. The responses are larger for individuals whose pre-treatment inflation expectations are

6
  The last two variables are constructed by Nielsen to classify households into several types. Spectra life style has the
following categories: Cosmopolitan Centers; Affluent Suburban Spreads; Comfortable Country; Struggling Urban Cores;
Modest Working Towns; Plain Rural Living. Spectra behavior stage includes the following categories: Start Up Families;
Small Scale Families; Younger Bustling Families; Older Bustling Families; Young Transitionals; Independent Singles;
Senior Singles; Established Couples; Empty Nest Couples; Senior Couples
7
  We find no evidence of nonlinear effects depending on the prior beliefs of respondents (see Appendix Figure 1).
                                                                                                                      11
greater than 2% (Appendix Table 3). These effects are mildly persistent. Three months later, the
average expectations of these treated individuals are still lower than those of the control group, with
the effect having dissipated by about 75%, and the effects have fully dissipated after six months.8
This persistence of information treatments is consistent with those observed in previous work
(Coibion et al. 2018b, Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar 2018, Coibion, Gorodnichenko and
Ropele 2018, and Cavallo et al. 2017). Importantly, this persistence effect is not driven by a changing
composition across waves: we find nearly identical results when we restrict our attention to
individuals that participate in all waves (Appendix Table 5). 9 Furthermore, these results indicate that
all three treatments seem to convey broadly similar information to respondents, in that they adjust
their beliefs in a comparable manner despite the treatments being conceptually distinct.
         The transitory nature of the effect of these treatments on inflation expectations reflects the
fact that the treatment itself seems to have only transitory effects on underlying knowledge. For
example, when some respondents were told about the Fed’s inflation target in the first wave as their
treatment, their recall of this information in subsequent waves was relatively low. We illustrate this
by running the same regression as before but using changes in beliefs about the FOMC’s target in the
two follow-up waves as dependent variables:
                          ,
                   𝐸          𝐹𝑒𝑑𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 − 𝐸             𝐹𝑒𝑑𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 = 𝑎 + 𝑏 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 + 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 .                        (2)
The results are reported in Table 3. Within three months, being treated with the Fed’s inflation target
leads to modest revisions in beliefs about the target relative to priors before treatment. By six months,
the effect of the treatment has dissipated and the recall of this information is close to zero. Similar
results obtain for other treatments for which we measured the prior belief of respondents, which
includes the contemporaneous rate of inflation and the contemporaneous rate of unemployment. Table
3 shows that respondents similarly seem to forget the provided information about each within three
to six months. The very transitory nature of information treatments on inflation expectations therefore
seems to reflect the fact that respondents are unable to remember the information for more than a few
months. Therefore, policymakers that aim to influence inflation expectations of individuals might
have to engage in a more persistent form of communication given that simple, one-off messages are
not effective in moving expectations persistently.



8
  The effect of being treated with the recent inflation rate is positive after six months, whereas we cannot reject the null
of zero effect for all other treatments. We conjecture that this positive effect is a statistical aberration, given little reason
exists why the treatment effect should become positive over time and no such effect exists for any other treatment group.
9
  We also find no evidence of differential attrition rates across information treatments.
                                                                                                                              12
        Going beyond these simple information treatments, the next treatment group was presented
with the entire statement released by the Federal Reserve following FOMC meetings. 10 Respondents
in May 2018 received the FOMC statement from the March 21 st 2018 FOMC meeting whereas those
who took the survey in June 2018 received the FOMC statement from the May 2 nd 2018 FOMC
meeting. Both statements describe recent developments in the economy similarly, including that
inflation had approached 2%, as well as the broader objectives of the Federal Reserve including its
symmetric 2% objective for the inflation rate. We describe differences in the two in more detail in the
next section. The statements, while not exceedingly long, are written in the dense language that is
typical of central bank communications. On impact, reading the statement from the FOMC has
approximately the same effect on inflation expectations as the previous three treatments, reducing the
average forecast by 1.2% relative to the control group. The effect of reading the FOMC statement
dissipates a little more rapidly, however, having no discernible effect on expectations relative to the
control group after three or six months.
        Another treatment group was presented with a news article from the USA Today covering the
same FOMC meeting as the statement provided to the previous treatment group. 11 Those participating
in May 2018 were given an article summarizing the March FOMC decision while those participating
in June received an article summarizing the May FOMC decision. We describe differences between
the two in more detail in section 3.2. Both articles, each published the day after FOMC meetings, are
written in a much more accessible (and shorter) style that still transmits information about inflation
and the central bank’s objective. For example, the second sentence of the second article reads “The
Fed held its key interest rate steady Wednesday but noted that inflation has climbed closer to its 2%
goal, paving the way for another rate hike in June.” Participants who read this article reduced their
inflation expectations by only 0.5% points relative to the control group, less than half the effect of
any of the other inflation-related treatments. Despite the fact that the articles seemingly transmits the
same information about the central bank’s inflation objective as the FOMC statement or our
information treatment on the central bank’s target (as well as information about the most recent
inflation rate), this information appears to be discounted by households. With approximately the same
objective information content but only the source of the information varying, it seems that households
view information coming from the news media as being less reliable, leading them to place less weight

10
      The   FOMC       statements   are    available  in    Appendix     1    as    well    as     at    this    link:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. They are discussed in more detail in section 3.2.
11
   The USA Today article from March 21, 2018 can be found in the appendix and, for example, at this link:
https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2018/03/21/fed-powell-hikes-interest-rates-consumer-loans/444986002/.
                                                                                                                   13
on it when they revise their views.12 However, its effect is relatively longer-lived, in that three months
after reading the article, the average effect on expectations remains half of its instantaneous effect,
but it too dissipates fully within six months after the information treatment.
         Of course, households can form and change their beliefs about inflation using many different
types of information. To assess how other forms of information affect their views, we consider two
other types of information treatments. The first tells individuals that national gasoline prices rose 11%
over the previous three months.13 As documented in Table 2, this information about salient prices
leads to an immediate upward revision in households’ inflation expectations of approximately 1.4-
1.5% relative to the control group, a pass-through of about 10%, well above the average expenditure
share of gasoline in consumption of 5% (Binder forthcoming). This excess sensitivity of individuals’
inflation expectations to gasoline prices is consistent with the evidence provided in Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2015). However, this effect is relatively transitory. Within three months, individuals
in this treatment group have slightly lower inflation expectations than the control group and the effect
is again fully dissipated within six months. The extrapolation from salient prices like gas and groceries
to overall inflation expectations poses a challenge to central banks because their conventional policy
tools have little direct effect on these prices which is the reason why many central banks target
measures of core inflation that exclude these price series.
         Second, we provide individuals with information about the most recent rate of unemployment.
All respondents in the first wave were initially asked what they thought was the current
unemployment rate in the U.S. Their average answer was 6.3% with a standard deviation of 3.9%.
Only 12 percent of respondents report unemployment rates less than or equal to 3.9%. Hence, when
respondents in this group were told the actual value of the unemployment rate in the previous month
of 3.9%,14 they were almost always being told that the unemployment rate was significantly lower
than what they believed. The result was an immediate downward revision in their inflation


12
   We picked the USA Today as the article source to avoid the fact that other news sources like the New York Times or the
Wall Street Journal are often perceived to have partisan leanings which might lead some to discount the quality of the
information they provide. The USA Today, to the best of our knowledge, has no particular political association. Until
2016, the USA Today had never endorsed any presidential candidate. In the 2016 election, the Editorial Board declared
that it considered Donald Trump unfit for the presidency but did not explicitly endorse Hillary Clinton
(https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2016/09/29/dont-vote-for-donald-trump-editorial-board-editorials-
debates/91295020/).
13
   Respondents participating in the May 2018 (June 2018) part of the survey were informed in this treatment that the actual
price of gasoline increased by 6.4% (11%). Consistent with this difference in the size of the treatment, we find that the
average change in beliefs of households surveyed in June was approximately twice as large as for those surveyed in May
conditional on being treated with the information about gasoline prices.
14
   Respondents participating in the May 2018 wave were told that unemployment rate was 4.1%.
                                                                                                                        14
expectation, albeit a relatively small one, of 0.3%. This is the opposite of what one would expect if
households were perceiving this as a movement along a Phillips curve, in which case the reduction in
unemployment would have been associated with higher inflation. Instead, they seem to hold a supply-
side view of unemployment and inflation, associating higher levels of one with the other. This is the
same pattern as that observed in Italian firms (Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ropele, 2018) or in U.S.
households (Kamdar 2018). This information effect is still somewhat visible in inflation expectations
after three months but is also fully dissipated within six months.
        Jointly, these results indicate that simple messages provided to households can have remarkably
powerful, albeit transient, effects on their expectations. We find no evidence that the complicated and
detailed information from FOMC statements have effects that are any more powerful than simply telling
households what inflation has been or what inflation rate the central bank is targeting. This means
communication strategies targeting households could potentially focus on presenting them with basic facts
about inflation and monetary policy without resorting to “Fed-speak”. The major caveat is that relying on
the media to transmit the central bank’s message is unlikely to be very successful: not only do many
households not follow news about monetary policy but even when exposed to news articles focusing
explicitly on monetary policy decisions, these news articles seem to be heavily discounted by the public
due to their source. The mild persistence in the treatment effects after three and six months also alleviates
concerns of experimenter demand effects. Moreover, de Quidt et al. (2018) show in settings similar to
ours that these effects are plausibly small.

3.2 Interpreting the USA Today Treatment Effects
The most striking feature of Table 2 is probably the fact that the USA Today treatment has a much
smaller effect than either simple messages about recent inflation, the Fed’s inflation target, or the
corresponding FOMC statement. To better understand this effect, we first exploit the fact that two
different versions of both the FOMC and USA Today treatments were presented in May and June.
The two FOMC statements are broadly similar, with the most noticeable difference being the language
with respect to inflation. In May 2018, it read
        “On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy
        have continued to run below 2 percent… Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to move
        up in coming months and to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the
        medium term.”
whereas the June 2018 version is



                                                                                                          15
        “On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food or energy
        have moved close to 2 percent. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to run near the
        Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective.”
The latter makes clear that inflation was close to and expected to remain around 2 percent whereas the
former points to recent inflation being lower but expected to rise to 2 percent.
        To assess whether this difference in language about inflation matters, we consider whether the
revision in beliefs of households differs depending on which of these two treatments they received. The
results in Table 4 suggests that this language has little discernible effect: inflation expectations fell by
1.1% on average for those surveyed in May and 1.3% on average for those in June.
        The language of the USA Today articles covering these FOMC decisions is also somewhat
different given the changing inflation outlook. In the article provided to households surveyed in May,
the FOMC decision is described as
        “Citing a brighter economic outlook, the Federal Reserve raised its key short-term interest
        rate Wednesday but maintained its forecast for a total of three hikes this year amid still-modest
        inflation... [The federal funds rate] is still low by historical standards but it marks the central
        bank’s fourth increase in the past 12 months and another vote of confidence in an economy
        that’s picking up steam nearly nine years after the Great Recession ended. ‘We’re trying to
        take that middle ground’ on rate hikes, boosting rates enough to head off an eventual spike in
        inflation without derailing the economic expansion, Fed chairman Jerome Powell said at a
        news conference.”
This article identifies that inflation is “modest” but emphasizes the upside potential to the economy and
the possibility of an eventual spike in inflation raised by Chairman Powell. The June article, following the
FOMC’s May 2nd decision to hold rates steady, takes a somewhat more ominous note:
        “Inflation is creeping higher, and that’s making the Federal Reserve more confident about
        raising interest rates. The Fed held its key interest rate steady Wednesday but noted that
        inflation had climbed close to its 2% goal, paving the way for another rate hike in June… Fed
        policymakers have forecast two more rate increases this year, according to their median
        estimate, but faster inflation could trigger three additional moves.”
Like the corresponding FOMC statement, this article makes clear that recent inflation was close to 2%
and that its rise justified an expected path of rising interest rates.
        Table 4 then considers whether the two different USA Today articles had differential effects on
inflation expectations. We find mild differences between the two: participants in the May sample revised
their inflation expectations downward by 0.6-0.7% on average while those in the June sample revised
their expectations by 0.3-0.4%, about half. While the darker language about rising inflation in the June
article therefore seems to have some effect on how individuals revise their beliefs, it remains the case that
revisions due to the USA Today treatment are much smaller than corresponding ones from the FOMC
                                                                                                          16
treatments.15 Given that the FOMC statements and USA Today articles broadly conveyed the same
information and the USA Today article did so using less jargon, the stronger effect from FOMC statements
suggests that respondents discounted some of the information in the newspaper article.
         To investigate the source of this discounting, we asked questions to participants in subsequent
(and unrelated) surveys of Nielsen households in June 2019. These individuals were asked to rate how
credible they viewed different news outlets as sources of information about the economy on a scale of 1
(very credible) to 5 (not credible). Results from more than 28,000 respondents presented in Table 5
indicate that U.S. households on average view newspapers as somewhat less reliable than television, the
government, and friends/coworkers as a source of news, with social media being reported as the most
credible news source of them all. We find smaller differences in the relative credibility of various
newspapers: the USA Today is perceived as more credible than the New York Times, Washington Post
or Wall Street Journal, but less credible than the Chicago Tribune or the Los Angeles Times.16 The
discounting of the USA Today by our survey respondents therefore does not appear to reflect the fact that
they view this particular newspaper as unreliable but rather a more widespread skepticism that traditional
media such as newspapers and television serve as a reliable source of news.

3.3 Convergence in Beliefs
While the results above describe the average change in beliefs after an information treatment, this does
not fully characterize how these treatments affect beliefs. For example, if agents act like Bayesians, their
beliefs after the information treatments should be a weighted average of their initial beliefs and the
treatment. If their initial beliefs were symmetrically distributed around the signal, one could observe no
change in average belief after a treatment, even though all households actually changed their beliefs in the
expected way. However, one would still expect to see a reduction in the cross-sectional post-treatment
dispersion of beliefs, since everyone moved toward the signal.
         To assess whether this is the case in our experiment, we compare the cross-sectional dispersion of
beliefs across treatment groups both before and after the application of treatments. Unfortunately, the
presence of outliers makes the measurement of higher moments sensitive. Given this, we estimate the
dispersion of inflation expectations using robust methods. Specifically, we estimate the cross-
sectional standard deviation within each treatment group as 𝜎 = 1.4826 × 𝑀𝐴𝐷 where 𝑀𝐴𝐷 ≡

15
   The other treatments regarding recent inflation, the inflation target and the Fed’s inflation forecast have similar effects
in May and June waves.
16
   However, respondents chose “do not know” option for the Chicago Tribune and the Los Angeles Times much more
frequently than for the other four newspapers. This may reflect a more regional nature of the Chicago Tribune and the
Los Angeles Times.
                                                                                                                           17
𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑛 𝑋 − 𝑋          and 𝑋 ≡ 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑛(𝑋 ). We then normalize the standard deviation in each
treatment group and survey wave by the corresponding value from the control group in that same
wave. Hence, Table 6 reports robust 𝜎 by treatment group relative to control group for various stages
of the experiment. Note that we use the probability distribution question to compute mean inflation
prediction in columns (1), (3) and (4) and we use point predictions in column (2).
        With the exception of the population growth treatment and the USA Today treatment, we find
large reductions in disagreement among each treatment group after being presented with information.
The declines are in the order of about 50% for each group, with some groups being even higher (e.g.
the inflation target or the FOMC statement lead to reductions in disagreement of about 70%). These
effects then dissipate in subsequent months. When looking at either the population growth or USA
Today treatments, we find much smaller declines in disagreement upon being presented with
information, approximately 15% declines on impact. Hence, as with the mean effects, we find much
more pronounced effects on the distribution of beliefs from simple messages involving inflation or
presentation of an actual FOMC statement than from news summaries of monetary policy decisions.
        Another way to assess whether beliefs are converging after receiving common signals is to
directly quantify the weight that agents assign to signals they receive versus the weight they assign to
their priors beliefs. If they act as Bayesians, the weight they assign to the signal in updating their beliefs
should be the Kalman gain, and this weight should be increasing in the perceived precision of the signal.
The weight they assign to their prior belief should then be one minus the Kalman gain. We assess this
framework by regressing individuals’ posterior beliefs on their prior beliefs. We allow for both the
intercept and the slope coefficient to vary across groups since different signals have different values
and are likely to have different perceived precisions, leading to different gains associated with each.
        The results of these regressions, across different horizons, are presented in Table 7. When
looking at the control group, one would expect an intercept of zero and a slope coefficient of one
since these individuals are receiving no additional information. However, because posterior beliefs
are measured using point forecasts while prior beliefs are measured using distributional questions, the
associated measurement error naturally leads to a coefficient on priors of less than one, and these
coefficients fall over time. This provides the benchmark relative to which we can measure the weight
assigned to different signals.
        Consider first the results when individuals are presented with the inflation forecast of the
FOMC, a signal directly comparable to their own inflation forecast. The associated weight on their prior
belief is only around 0.2, meaning that they place a very high weight on this signal, i.e. it is perceived
                                                                                                           18
as being very informative. These effects taper off over time however. These results explain why we
observe a strong and immediate decline in disagreement across the individuals who are presented with
this common source of information. Given that average priors are significantly higher than this signal,
this updating also accounts for the large average decline in expectations documented in Table 2 when
the treatment is received. Very similar results obtain when households are presented with information
about recent inflation, the Fed’s inflation target, or the FOMC statement. Strikingly, the weight on the
prior is significantly higher when presented with the USA Today article, consistent with households
treating this as a less informative signal. Information about gasoline prices, unemployment and
population growth also receive much less weight upon treatment, consistent with households either
perceiving these as less informative about inflation or something that is already largely known to them.
       Jointly, these results confirm that consumers respond to signals about inflation in the expected
way. They systematically place weight on informative signals, leading to convergence in their beliefs
upon receiving common information. They also assign more weight to signals that are perceived as
more informative. While previous evidence for households has also largely been consistent with
Bayesian updating, we are the first, to the best of our knowledge, to find these results for such a large
group of households as well as being able to compare across a wide range of signals.

3.4 Heterogeneity
Do information treatments affect everyone equally? D’Acunto et al. (2016) find large differences in
how individuals adjust consumption plans to their inflation expectations by demographics. In this
section, we investigate this question in two ways. First, we decompose changes in beliefs within each
group into an extensive margin and an intensive margin. Second, we consider whether the effects of
information treatments on inflation forecasts differ along observable characteristics of respondents.
Such heterogeneity can be useful for policy-makers if they aim to affect the actions of specific subsets
of the population or if they are interested in maximizing the effects of communications on beliefs by
targeting specific subgroups that are more responsive.
       We begin by decomposing average treatment effects on expectations into an extensive margin and
an intensive margin. A significant role for an extensive margin of expectations adjustment would suggest
that information treatments disproportionately affect subsets of agents. Because prior beliefs are measured
using distributional questions while posterior beliefs are measured using point forecasts, we cannot
identify the extensive margin through a zero change in forecast after treatments. Instead, we define an
individual as having a discrete change in expectations (i.e. participating along the extensive margin), if

                                                                                                        19
their forecast changes by more than a specific threshold. As a benchmark, we use a 2% point change in
expectations as the threshold but alternative values ranging from 1% to 4% yield the same qualitative
results. This threshold applies to just over 50% of all respondents in the control group. We regress whether
an individual’s belief changed by more than the threshold on dummy variables for each treatment to
quantify the importance of the extensive margin. As illustrated in columns (3) and (4) of Table 8, the
extensive margin is almost never statistically significant and never economically significant.
         Consistent with this, we can quantify the intensive margin by looking at the change in
expectations of individuals conditional on those changes exceeding the threshold. As illustrated in
columns (5) and (6) of Table 8, those changes are significantly larger in absolute value for the treatment
groups than in the control groups, generally by 2% points for most inflation-related treatments. Given
that the extensive margin applies to about 50% of respondents, this implies that the intensive margin can
effectively account for all of the post-treatment differences in average beliefs across groups.17 The results
in Table 8 also document that the difference in the treatment effect for the USA today treatment compared
to the other treatments is fully driven by the intensive margin. The fact we don’t find a difference in the
extensive margin across treatments suggests that it is less likely that the USA today treatment has less of
an effect than the other treatments because parts of the sample discounts this newspaper as an information
source but rather suggests that the content of the article was perceived as less informative.
         The importance of the intensive margin of adjustment implies that we should focus on the size
of forecast revisions across agents rather than which respondents adjusted and which did not. We
therefore regress respondents’ revisions across treatment groups on a range of observable characteristics
along which they differ including gender, income (by tercile), education, race, access to and amount of
available credit, purchasing plans, wealth, savings behavior, and shopping behavior (e.g. if they are the
main person in the household that does the shopping or frequency of purchasing gasoline). The full set
of results are presented in Appendix Tables 1 and 2, and summary results for observable heterogeneity
are in Table 9. In each case, we focus on the specification which includes individual-specific controls
and uses the contemporaneous response of inflation forecasts as the dependent variable, but similar
results obtain at longer horizons.
         There is surprisingly little heterogeneity in how respondents change their beliefs in response to
new information on average. For example, white and non-white individuals respond to information
treatments similarly. So do young, middle-aged and senior respondents. There is little variation between

17
  Columns (7) and (8) verify that, for those individuals’ whose expectation revisions fall below the threshold used to identify
the extensive margin, differences in revision size relative to the control group have little statistical or economic power.
                                                                                                                            20
those who are planning to purchase big durable goods (cars, house, or other big-ticket items) and those
who are not. Political party does not seem to matter much, nor do we find systematic differences in
responses to information treatments based on shopping behavior. We also consider whether there are
systematic differences in responses to information depending on whether respondents have ready access
to credit, have any savings or wealth, and their savings rate: we again find little variation along these
dimensions. Gender, however, does seem to matter. Women respond more strongly to every information
treatment including the placebo treatment of population growth, with information about gasoline prices
being the only exception. The differences across the two groups are large in economic terms: women’s
responses are two to three times bigger than men’s to information treatments. This may reflect the fact
that men report more confidence in their beliefs about inflation, which should tend to lead toward less
weight being placed on new information. Income also matters for how individuals respond to
information. We find that those in the middle of the income distribution of respondents (income between
$40,000 and $100,000) respond significantly more to information about recent inflation or
unemployment, the Federal Reserve’s inflation target, the FOMC’s inflation forecast, FOMC
statements, as well as news reports about the FOMC’s decisions than either lower-income or higher-
income respondents. Strikingly, lower-income individuals do not respond at all, on average, to the USA
Today news report about the FOMC meeting even though they respond strongly to most other
treatments. We find a similar result when we decompose households by education: those with no more
than a high school degree do not respond at all to the USA Today news report treatment, even though
they respond strongly to other information treatments.
       Low-income and less-educated individuals are, on average, systematically less well-informed
about inflation and monetary policy. For example, in our survey, both low-income and less-educated
individuals have higher average beliefs about the Fed’s inflation target. Hence, one might think that
monetary policy-makers might be able to have the largest effects on the beliefs of these individuals by
providing them with information about inflation and monetary policy. What our results indicate,
however, is that these are also the individuals that are least likely to incorporate information about
inflation from the news media. This implies that traditional communications strategies of central banks,
which rely largely on the transmission of information via standard news outlets, are unlikely to be
successful and raises the concern that purely relying on these transmission channels results in
redistributive effects of monetary policy (see also Coibion et al. (2017) and D’Acunto et al. (2018b)).




                                                                                                      21
4       Discussion
The narrative around inflation expectations that is commonly promoted by central bankers is that 1)
inflation expectations are important for inflation dynamics, 2) they are anchored to the inflation target
as a result of the credibility of the central bank, and 3) this anchoring is a source of economic stability.
The first point was most clearly illustrated by Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell when he said
in Congressional testimony that inflation expectations were the most important driver of inflation.18
The second point was emphasized by the President of the San Francisco Federal Reserve, Mary Daly:


        “Once inflation was under control, the Fed committed to keeping it that way. This
        commitment became a well-known and accepted position that people could depend on. And
        it ushered the conditions that dominate today –the era of well-anchored expectations…”

The third step in their argument is summarized by Mary Daly simply as “when the Fed is credible,
it’s easier for the economic system to absorb shocks…” while the mechanism underlying it is
described in more detail by Chairman Powell in the following:


        “Anchored [inflation] expectations give a central bank greater flexibility to stabilize both
        unemployment and inflation. When a central bank acts to stimulate the economy to bring
        down unemployment, inflation might push above the bank's inflation target. With expectations
        anchored, people expect the central bank to pursue policies that bring inflation back down,
        and longer-term inflation expectations do not rise. Thus, policy can be a bit more
        accommodative than if policymakers had to offset a rise in longer-term expectations. … I am
        confident that the FOMC would resolutely "do whatever it takes" should inflation expectations
        drift materially up or down.”

        Our results, using one of the largest surveys of U.S. households’ expectations ever conducted,
contradict this comforting narrative along a number of dimensions. We find little evidence that people
know and accept the Fed’s commitment to a low inflation target. Many individual respondents are
unwilling to even guess what the Fed’s inflation target is, and of those that do few answer correctly.
Households’ average perceptions of recent inflation are quite different from actual inflation and their
inflation forecasts bear little resemblance to those of the FOMC. When presented with the most basic
facts about inflation or monetary policy, their views change dramatically. The limited evidence on U.S.
firms’ inflation expectations closely resembles that of households and available evidence from other
advanced economies yields similar messages for both households and firms (see Coibion,

18
   See https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-03-15/fed-puts-inflation-expectations-at-heart-of-major-policy-
review.
                                                                                                                22
Gorodnichenko and Pedemonte 2018 for a review). The notion that most U.S. citizens, those individuals
signing the wage and rental agreements at the heart of the mechanism described by Chairman Powell,
have well-anchored expectations therefore flies in the face of the available evidence.
         We view this as having a number of potentially important implications that call both for future
work as well as renewed consideration by policy-makers. First is the notion of the credibility of the
Federal Reserve and comparable central banks. In an era where central banks in advanced economies
are coming under intense criticism from politicians and populist movements, they should not assume
that their credibility with the broader public will help protect their independence. While professional
forecasters and some financial market participants may have embraced the Fed’s inflation target, the
broader public has not. The lack of public understanding of just how successful modern central banking
has been in the last thirty years makes central banks an easy target for populist leaders. Communication
campaigns that describe, in easy to understand messages, what inflation rate the central bank targets
and how close to that target inflation has been on average could boost not only the average knowledge
about inflation of the broader population but also, as a result, the credibility of central banks. Central
banks, however, should not stop here but should also explain in detail the benefits of stable prices and
the implications of changes in inflation expectations for economics choices. Many households in the
US perceive persistent deflation as desirable and have little knowledge about basic economic concepts
such as the consumer Euler equation (D’Acunto et al. 2018a).
         A second implication of our results, and one that is more positive for central banks, is the scope
for how potentially powerful communications policies toward the broader public could be. We find that
simple information treatments that reach the public can easily move inflation expectations by over one
hundred basis points. Relative to quantitative easing policies or forward guidance, this suggests that
policy-makers may be able to change perceived real interest rates of households and firms in a
quantitatively important way through new communications strategies, a feature that could be immensely
useful at the zero bound on nominal interest rates. Doing so will require much more systematic evaluation
of how different types of information affect the expectations of economic agents as well as formal models
that characterize how these signals affect expectations and decisions as well as their general equilibrium
implications. Intuitively, the decline in both the level and volatility of inflation since the early 1980s has
lowered the benefit of being informed about inflation for households, leading to pervasive inattention on
their part.19 To offset this force, policy-makers would need to reduce the price of collecting and

19
  This is consistent with the fact that households in higher and more volatile inflation environments are more informed
about inflation and monetary policy than those in living in low and stable inflation environments. It is also consistent with
                                                                                                                          23
processing this information for households, which would require simpler communication strategies that
reach individuals in a more direct and systematic manner. The simple messages about inflation resulted
in an average revision in forecasts of more than 1%. According to estimates in Bhattarai and Neely
(2018), the first quantitative-easing program (QE1) of the Federal Reserve Bank amounted to $1.725
trillion and resulted in a reduction in interest rates of only 0.34 percentage points. Crump et al. (2015)
estimate an average subjective intertemporal elasticity of substitution of around 0.5 using expectations
data from the New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations. Hence, our estimates imply that the
change in inflation expectations of 1.2% would translate into a change in real consumption growth of
0.6%. This is twice the growth in current dollars personal consumption expenditure in June 2019 from
the previous months and amounts to about $82.0 billion.20
         A third implication for central banks has to do with the policy framework to use: e.g. inflation
targeting vs price level targeting. The Federal Reserve system is beginning a process of reviewing its
policy objectives and procedures in which, in particular, it is considering whether to adopt price level
targeting in lieu of inflation targeting. The rationale for doing so is that, when the economy is facing
the zero bound on interest rates, a price level targeting regime entails that inflation must be higher
than the target after the zero bound ends, as this will be necessary to make up for the low inflation
that occurs during the zero bound period. The expectation of higher future inflation while at the zero
bound is predicted to be stimulative in New Keynesian models since higher expected inflation implies
lower perceived real interest rates and therefore higher demand on the part of households. Price level
targeting can therefore help stabilize economic outcomes during zero bound episodes relative to
inflation targeting regimes. However, these effects hinge on households’ inflation expectations
correctly incorporating the effects of the regime and the zero bound such that they anticipate higher
inflation than the target after the zero bound period ends. The absence of knowledge of what the target
rate even is (documented in Figure 1) as well as the disconnect between household inflation
expectations and recent inflation suggests that such a mechanism is unlikely to be effective as long
as U.S. households remain as uninformed about inflation and monetary policy as they have been. Any
change in regime on the part of U.S. policymakers should be accompanied by a massive and persistent
communication campaign aimed at the broader public if it is to deliver any of the putative gains
associated with price level targeting.


the evolution of inflation expectations over time in the U.S. as inflation went from high and volatile in the 1970s to low
and stable in the 1980s. See Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Pedemonte (2018).
20
   https://www.bea.gov/news/2019/personal-income-and-outlays-june-2019
                                                                                                                       24
5      Conclusion
In times of low interest rates, central banks have increasingly turned to forward guidance and other
communications strategies to affect economic activity. However, these strategies have focused
primarily on communicating with financial markets rather than the broader public. Since many
expectations channels run through households and firms, central banks could also aim to affect
economic conditions via direct communications to the public. In this paper, we present new evidence
that such communications can change expectations by economically significant magnitudes: simple
messages about the central bank’s inflation target have implications about real interest rates that dwarf
those typically found for monetary policy announcements. However, we find that the effectiveness of
these messages to the public is significantly dampened when transmitted via news media: households
effectively dismiss much of the information content when presented to them in the form of a news
article. This suggests that, if central banks want to add direct communications to the public as a new
policy tool, they will have to find new ways to reach the public without relying on traditional media.


References
Andre, Peter, Carlo Pizzinelli, Chris Roth, and Johannes Wohlfahrt, 2019. “Subjective Models of the
       Macroeconomy: Evidence from Experts and a Representative Sample,” manuscript.
Armona, Luis, Andreas Fuster, and Basit Zafar, 2018. “Home Price Expectations and Behavior: Evidence
       from a Randomized Information Treatment,” forthcoming in Review of Economic Studies.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Michael Kremer, 2016. “The Influence of Randomized
       Controlled Trials on Development Economics: Research and on Development Policy.” The
       State of Economics, the State of the World Conference at the World Bank.
Bhattarai, Saroj and Christopher J. Neely, 2018. “An Analysis of the Literature on International
       Unconventional Monetary Policy,” manuscript.
Binder, Carola and Alex Rodrigue, 2018. “Household Informedness and Long-Run Inflation
       Expectations: Experimental Evidence,” forthcoming in Southern Economic Journal.
Binder, Carola, 2015. “Whose Expectations Augment the Phillips Curve?” Economics Letters 136,
       35-38.
Binder, Carola, 2017. “Fed speak on main street: Central bank communication and household
       expectations,” Journal of Macroeconomics 52(C): 238-251.
Binder, Carola, 2017. “Inflation Expectations and the Price at the Pump.” Forthcoming in Journal of
       Macroeconomics.
                                                                                                      25
Blinder, Alan S. 2018. “Through a Crystal Ball Darkly: The Future of Monetary Policy
       Communication.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 108: 567-571.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018. “Overreaction in
       Macroeconomic Expectations.” Manuscript.
Bryan, Michael F., and Guhan Venkatu, 2001 “The Demographics of Inflation Opinion Surveys.”
       Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Carvalho, Carlos and Fernanda Nechio, 2015. “Do people Understand Monetary Policy?” Journal of
       Monetary Economics 66, 108-123.
Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia, 2017. “Inflation Expectations,
       Learning, and Supermarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments,” American Economic
       Journal: Macroeconomics 9(3): 1-35.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015. “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All?
       Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,” American Economic Journal:
       Macroeconomics 7: 197-232.
Coibion, Olivier, Serafin Frache, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Rodrigo Lluberas, 2018. “Causal Effects
       of Information Treatments for Uruguayan Firms,” Manuscript.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Rupal Kamdar, 2018. “The Formation of Expectations,
       Inflation and the Phillips Curve,” Journal of Economic Literature 56(4): 1447-1491.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Lorenz Kueng, and John Silva, 2017. “Innocent Bystanders?
       Monetary policy and inequality,” Journal of Monetary Economics 88: 70-89.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar, 2018a. “How Do Firms Form their
       Expectations? New Survey Evidence,” American Economic Review 108(9): 2671-2713.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Tiziano Ropele, 2018. “Inflation Expectations and Firm
       Decisions: New Causal Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 25412.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Jane Ryngaert, 2018b. “Do you know that I
       know that you know…? Higher order beliefs in survey data,” NBER Working Paper w24987.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar and Mathieu Pedemonte, 2018. “Inflation
       Expectations as a Policy Tool?” NBER Working Papers 24788.
Crump, Richard, Stefano Eusepi, Andrea Tambalotti, and Giorgio Toppa, 2015 “Subjective
       Intertemporal Substitution,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports N 734.
D’Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber, 2018a. “IQ,
       Expectations, and Choice,” manuscript.
                                                                                               26
D’Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber, 2018b. “Human
       Frictions to the Transmission of Economic Policy,” manuscript.
D’Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber, 2016. “The Effect of Unconventional
       Fiscal Policy on Consumption Expenditure,” NBER Working Paper 22563.
D’Acunto, Francesco, Ulrike Malmendier, and Michael Weber, 2019. “Traditional Gender Norms
       Distort Women’s Economic Expectations,” manuscript.
D’Acunto, Francesco, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber, 2018. “Salient Price
       Changes, Inflation Expectations, and Household Behavior,” manuscript.
de Quidt, Jonathan, Johannes Haushofer, and Christopher Roth, “Measuring and Bounding
       Experimenter Demand,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (11), 3266–3302.
Drager, Lena, Michael J. Lamla and Damien Pfajfar, 2016. “Are Survey Expectations Theory
       Consistent? The Role of Central Bank Communication and News,” European Economic
       Review 85, 84-111.
Fuster, Andreas, Greg Kaplan and Basit Zafar, 2019. “What Would You Do with $500? Spending
       Responses to Gains, Losses, News and Loans,” manuscript.
Geraats, Petra M., 2007. “The Mystique of Central Bank Speak.” International Journal of Central
       Banking 3(1): 1-44.
Haldane, Andrew, and Michael McMahon. 2018. “Central Bank Communications and the General
       Public.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 108: 578-583.
Humziker, Hans-Ueli, Christian Raggi, and Rina Rosenblatt-Wisch, 2018. “The impact of guidance,
       short-term dynamics and individual characteristics on firms’ long-term inflation
       expectations,” manuscript.
Jonung, Lars, 1981 “Perceived and Expected Rates of Inflation in Sweden,” American Economic
       Review 71(5): 961-968
Kamdar, Rupal, 2018. “The Inattentive Consumer: Sentiment and Expectations” Manuscript.
Kumar, Saten, Hassan Afrouzi, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Inflation
       Targeting Does Not Anchor Inflation Expectation: Evidence from Firms in New Zealand,”
       Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 46(Fall): 151-225.
Roth, Christopher and Johannes Wohfart, 2018. “How do expectations about the economy affect
       personal expectations and behavior?” manuscript.
Swanson, Eric T., 2018. “Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset
       Purchases on Financial Markets,” NBER WP 23311.
                                                                                            27
             Figure 1: Households’ Beliefs about the Federal Reserve’s Inflation Target




                       .4       .3
             share of responses
                    .2 .1
                       0




                                     <0   [0,1) [1,2) [2,3) [3,4) [4,5) [5,6) [6,7) [7,8) [8,9) [9,10) 10+


Notes: The figure plots the distribution of responses from individuals about what inflation rate they thought the Federal
Reserve was trying to achieve in the long-run. This figure includes only respondents from the May 2018 part of survey wave
1, which did not have a “do not know” option for the question eliciting perceptions of the inflation target.




                                                                                                                       28
                                . Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of the Survey

                                                                                                 Pre-treatment
                                              Pre-treatment            Pre-treatment
                                                                                              perceived inflation
 Sample                                     expected inflation       perceived inflation
                                                                                               target of the Fed
                                             Mean      St.Dev.        Mean      St.Dev.        Mean       St.Dev.
                                              (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)
 All                                          2.47       2.57          2.46       2.66          3.37        2.72
 Male                                         2.43       2.12          2.50       2.10          2.89        2.08
 Female                                       2.49       2.75          2.44       2.90          3.60        2.96
 White                                        2.49       2.59          2.54       2.71          3.36        2.74
 Non-white                                    2.38       2.50          2.17       2.45          3.39        2.67
 Income: tercile 1 (low)                      2.41       2.83          2.32       2.96          3.53        3.10
 Income: tercile 2                            2.58       2.85          2.58       2.97          3.61        3.11
 Income: tercile 3                            2.45       2.22          2.49       2.27          3.18        2.29
 Enough credit                                2.54       2.44          2.61       2.52          3.28        2.57
 Not enough credit                            2.55       2.73          2.38       2.86          3.55        2.90
 HTM: less than 1 month in savings            2.55       2.61          2.50       2.75          3.51        2.78
 HTM: 1-6 months in savings                   2.63       2.35          2.70       2.36          3.21        2.40
 HTM: 6+ months in savings                    2.62       2.15          2.65       2.16          3.01        2.11
 Plan to buy durable                          2.53       2.46          2.52       2.56          3.33        2.62
 No plan to buy durable                       2.45       2.60          2.44       2.69          3.38        2.75
 No financial wealth                          2.21       2.82          2.12       2.90          3.48        3.06
 Positive financial wealth                    2.60       2.43          2.63       2.52          3.31        2.53
 Saving rate: 0                               2.57       2.76          2.36       2.90          3.60        2.93
 Saving rate: 0-10                            2.58       2.43          2.68       2.55          3.36        2.57
 Saving rate: 10+                             2.56       2.33          2.63       2.41          3.20        2.43
 Do grocery: me/self                          2.54       2.58          2.54       2.66          3.42        2.78
 Do grocery: share                            2.45       2.56          2.43       2.66          3.36        2.70
 Education: high school or less               2.22       2.52          2.06       2.59          3.52        2.84
 Education: some college                      2.48       2.62          2.44       2.76          3.44        2.76
 Education: college or more                   2.59       2.55          2.66       2.61          3.28        2.66


Notes: The table reports average values and cross-sectional standard deviations of expected inflation over the next
twelve months (columns 1-2), perceived inflation over the previous twelve months (columns 3-4) and beliefs about
the Federal Reserve’s inflation target (columns 5-6). Rows indicate which subset of the sample is used. HTM
stands for “hand to mouth” and indicates the amount of savings measured in monthly spending for a given
household. All means and standard deviations are constructed from Huber robust regressions on a constant using
sampling weights. Each row captures an observable characteristic of the respondent on which we condition.
                              Table 2: Average Household Responses to Treatments

                                                               Outcome: forecast revision
Treatments                         Immediate revision            Revision after 3 months         Revision after 6 months
                                    (1)          (2)                (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)

T5 (pop growth)                 -0.218**       -0.269**           -0.074         -0.097            0.086          0.096
                                (0.105)        (0.109)            (0.090)        (0.093)          (0.102)        (0.104)
T6 (UE)                         -0.337***      -0.330***          -0.231**       -0.250***        -0.116         -0.115
                                (0.104)        (0.109)            (0.093)        (0.096)          (0.101)        (0.103)
T4 (gas prices)                  1.491***       1.430***          -0.169*        -0.190**         -0.121         -0.117
                                (0.114)        (0.119)            (0.092)        (0.095)          (0.102)        (0.103)
T2 (past inflation)             -1.039***      -1.111***          -0.014         -0.067            0.276***       0.251**
                                (0.104)        (0.109)            (0.091)        (0.094)          (0.102)        (0.104)
T3 (inflation target)           -0.996***      -1.034***          -0.329***      -0.394***         0.032         -0.017
                                (0.102)        (0.109)            (0.091)        (0.095)          (0.101)        (0.103)
T7 (Fed inflation forecast)     -1.071***      -1.143***          -0.220**       -0.240**          0.162          0.142
                                (0.102)        (0.108)            (0.093)        (0.095)          (0.101)        (0.103)
T8 (FOMC statement)             -1.197***      -1.213***          -0.138         -0.163*           0.078          0.075
                                (0.103)        (0.108)            (0.092)        (0.095)          (0.104)        (0.107)
T9 (USA today coverage)         -0.444***      -0.528***          -0.196**       -0.211**          0.117          0.104
                                (0.105)        (0.109)            (0.092)        (0.095)          (0.101)        (0.103)

Remove outliers                    Yes             Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
Using sampling weights             Yes             Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
Controls for demographics          No              Yes               No             Yes              No             Yes
Observations                     19,269          17,629            13,339         12,553           11,716         11,223
R2                                0.048           0.061             0.002          0.012            0.002          0.015


   Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative
   to those in the control group. Columns (1) and (2) consider the immediate change in expectations after the
   treatment, columns (3) and (4) consider the changes in beliefs after three months, columns (5) and (6) report
   changes in beliefs over a six month horizon. In each case, differences in beliefs are measured relative to initial
   beliefs from the first wave measured before all treatments. Treatments are described in detail in the text. For each
   time horizon, the second column uses the same specification as in the first column but augmented with respondent-
   specific controls. Results are from Huber robust regressions to control for outliers and influential observations.
   Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
        Table 3: Average Effects of Treatments over Time on Specific Variables being Treated

        Treatments                                     Outcome: forecast revision
                                      Revisions after 3 months            Revision after 6 months
                                         (1)             (2)                (3)              (4)
        Panel A: Treatment effect on perceptions of the Fed’s inflation target
        T3 (inflation target)          -0.219***       -0.290***          -0.161           -0.184*
                                       (0.084)         (0.097)            (0.099)          (0.105)
        Panel B: Treatment effect on perceptions past inflation
        T2 (past inflation)            -0.239***       -0.221**           -0.106           -0.107
                                       (0.089)         (0.097)            (0.099)          (0.103)
        Panel C: Treatment effect on perceptions of unemployment rate
        T6 (UE)                        -0.192**        -0.208*            -0.120           -0.149
                                       (0.096)         (0.109)            (0.106)          (0.112)

        Controls for demographics              No              Yes                  No              Yes


Notes: The table reports the average changes in beliefs about variables being treated after 3 months (columns 1-2)
and 6 months (3-4) relative to changes reported in the control group. In Panel A, we report how respondents in the
group that received information about the Fed’s inflation target revised their beliefs about the inflation target over
time. In Panel B, we report how respondents in the group that received information about recent inflation revised
their beliefs about recent inflation rates over time. In Panel C, we report how respondents in the group that received
information about recent unemployment revised their beliefs about the unemployment rate over time. For each
time horizon, the second column uses the same specification as in the first column but augmented with respondent-
specific controls. Results are from Huber robust regressions to control for outliers and influential observations.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
               Table 4: Sensitivity to Differential Language in FOMC and USA Today Treatments

                                                                    Outcome: immediate forecast revision
Treatments                                  Pooled sample                       May sample                                  June sample
                                          (1)          (2)                    (3)          (4)                            (5)          (6)

T8 (FOMC statement)                   -1.197***         -1.213***             -1.094***          -1.090***            -1.298***        -1.297***
                                      (0.103)           (0.108)               (0.150)            (0.162)              (0.141)           (0.145)
T9 (USA today coverage)               -0.444***         -0.528***             -0.586***          -0.696***            -0.320**         -0.387***
                                      (0.105)           (0.109)               (0.152)            (0.163)              (0.145)           (0.149)

Remove outliers                           Yes               Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes              Yes
Using sampling weights                    Yes               Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes              Yes
Controls for demographics                 No                Yes                   No                Yes                  No               Yes
Observations                            19,269            17,629                 8,992             7,851               10,277            9,778
R2                                       0.048             0.061                 0.037             0.052                0.060            0.074


   Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative to those in the control
   group. Columns (1) and (2) consider the immediate change in expectations after the treatment, columns (3) and (4) consider the changes in
   beliefs for those taking the survey in May of 2018, columns (5) and (6) report changes in beliefs for those participating in June 2018.
   Differences in information treatments between May and June waves are described in detail in section 3.2. For each time horizon, the second
   column uses the same specification as in the first column but augmented with respondent-specific controls. Results are from Huber robust
   regressions to control for outliers and influential observations. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                              Table 5: Credibility of Different News Sources

                                                             Score               Share of people
                                                                                choosing “do not
                                                      mean           st.dev.
                                                                                     know”
                                                       (1)            (2)              (3)
               Credibility of news sources
                 Newspapers                           3.07            1.16             0.11
                 TV                                   2.87            1.12             0.08
                 Social media                         2.12            1.08             0.09
                 Friends and coworker                 2.83            1.02             0.10
                 Government                           2.84            1.14             0.11

               Credibility of newspapers
                 New York Times                       3.20            1.42             0.36
                 Wall Street Journal                  3.45            1.31             0.35
                 USA Today                            3.05            1.26             0.36
                 Washington Post                      3.14            1.40             0.39
                 Chicago Tribune                      2.91            1.34             0.48
                 Los Angeles Times                    2.92            1.36             0.47


Notes: The table reports scores to questions about the credibility of news sources (top panel) and the credibility
of specific newspapers (bottom panel). In each case, respondents were asked to rate credibility on a scale of 1
(very credible) to 5 (not credible). Column (1) reports mean credibility scores across all respondents, column (2)
reports the standard deviation of those scores across respondents, while column (3) reports the fraction of
respondents who claimed that they did not know about the credibility of each source. 28,507 respondents provided
their assessments.




                                                                                                               33
                                Table 6: Effect of Treatments on Disagreement

                                                Outcome: one-year ahead inflation expectation
                                                                        Post-treatment
                                         Pre-treatment
          Treatments                                       Immediate       3 months       6 months
                                               (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)

          T5 (pop growth)                      1.150             1.000          0.842          0.914
                                              (0.142)           (0.040)        (0.056)        (0.075)
          T6 (UE)                              1.400             1.000          0.979          0.943
                                              (0.144)           (0.034)        (0.052)        (0.068)
          T4 (gas prices)                      1.600             1.000          0.905          0.914
                                              (0.127)           (0.061)        (0.047)        (0.064)
          T2 (past inflation)                  1.000             0.500          0.921          0.800
                                              (0.115)           (0.044)        (0.059)        (0.060)
          T3 (inflation target)                1.750             0.750          0.737          0.943
                                              (0.123)           (0.064)        (0.055)        (0.075)
          T7 (Fed inflation forecast)          1.500             0.500          0.979          0.857
                                              (0.135)           (0.029)        (0.053)        (0.056)
          T8 (FOMC statement)                  1.600             0.500          0.842          0.800
                                              (0.135)           (0.025)        (0.055)        (0.058)
          T9 (USA today coverage)              1.000             0.850          0.842          0.914
                                              (0.101)           (0.141)        (0.052)        (0.059)



Notes: The table reports robust measures of dispersion in inflation forecasts within each treatment group relative
to dispersion within control group, as well as standard errors in parentheses. Column (1) reports these using
inflation forecasts elicited prior to any treatment while column (2) uses inflation forecasts elicited immediately
after information treatments. Columns (3) and (4) use forecasts from 3 and 6 months after information treatments
respectively. Dispersion is measured using robust methods as described in text. Standard errors (bootstrap) are in
parentheses.




                                                                                                               34
                                Table 7: Average Household Responses to Treatments

                                                                 Outcome: forecast revision
                                      Immediate revision           Revision after 3 months          Revision after 6 months
Treatments
                                   Intercept       Slope           Intercept        Slope            Intercept       Slope
                                       (1)          (2)               (3)            (4)                (5)           (6)

T1 (control)                        2.231***      0.664***           2.205***       0.290***          2.216***      0.283***
                                   (0.088)       (0.021)            (0.074)        (0.017)           (0.082)        (0.018)
Relative to control group
 T5 (pop growth)                    0.289**      -0.229***          -0.658***       0.244***         -0.374***      0.180***
                                   (0.121)       (0.029)            (0.103)        (0.024)           (0.115)        (0.026)
  T6 (UE)                           0.407***     -0.278***          -0.204*         0.067***         -0.435***      0.140***
                                   (0.120)       (0.027)            (0.107)        (0.024)           (0.115)        (0.027)
  T4 (gas prices)                   2.190***     -0.211***          -0.174          0.081***         -0.146          0.027
                                   (0.131)       (0.028)            (0.106)        (0.024)           (0.114)        (0.026)
  T2 (past inflation)               0.411***     -0.507***           0.113         -0.099***          0.168         -0.033
                                   (0.110)       (0.025)            (0.102)        (0.022)           (0.111)        (0.024)
  T3 (inflation target)             0.247**      -0.445***          -0.303***      -0.002            -0.283**       0.124***
                                   (0.108)       (0.025)            (0.103)        (0.023)           (0.112)        (0.025)
  T7 (Fed inflation forecast)       0.103        -0.460***          -0.194*         0.091***          0.064         0.109***
                                   (0.107)       (0.025)            (0.108)        (0.024)           (0.119)        (0.027)
  T8 (FOMC statement)               0.047        -0.490***          -0.077         -0.071***          0.115         -0.021
                                   (0.110)       (0.026)            (0.102)        (0.023)           (0.113)        (0.025)
  T9 (USA today coverage)           0.291**      -0.371***          -0.136          0.029            -0.136         0.105***
                                   (0.114)       (0.028)            (0.104)        (0.024)           (0.118)        (0.026)

Remove outliers                               Yes                              Yes                             Yes
Using sampling weights                        Yes                              Yes                             Yes
Controls for demographics                     No                               No                              No
Observations                                18,942                           13,604                          11,853
R2                                           0.270                            0.278                           0.289


Notes: The table reports the slope and intercept in the following regression: 𝐸             𝜋 = 𝑎 + 𝑏 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡 + 𝛾 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡 ∗
𝐸 𝜋 + 𝜓 ∗ 𝐸 𝜋. Columns (1) and (2) consider the immediate change in expectations after the treatment, columns (3)
and (4) are for beliefs after three months, columns (5) and (6) are for beliefs after six months. Results are from Huber robust
regressions to control for outliers and influential observations. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                                            35
                                                    Table 8: Extensive and Intensive Margins of Treatment Effects

                                                                            Outcome: forecast revision
                                             Immediate revision              Extensive margin (2% or              Intensive margin (2% or             Intensive margin (less
       Treatments
                                                                                      more)                                more)                              than 2%)
                                              (1)              (2)               (3)           (4)                    (5)           (6)                   (7)          (8)

       T5 (pop growth)                     -0.218**        -0.269**            -0.010           -0.029             -0.387**        -0.365**           -0.006            0.007
                                           (0.105)         (0.109)             (0.022)          (0.022)            (0.176)         (0.183)            (0.057)          (0.059)
       T6 (UE)                             -0.337***       -0.330***           -0.009           -0.024             -0.609***      -0.502***           -0.037            0.011
                                           (0.104)         (0.109)             (0.022)          (0.022)            (0.176)         (0.183)            (0.058)          (0.060)
       T4 (gas prices)                      1.491***        1.430***            0.184***         0.162***           1.327***       1.368***            0.150**        0.178***
                                           (0.114)         (0.119)             (0.021)          (0.022)            (0.157)         (0.165)            (0.064)          (0.066)
       T2 (past inflation)                 -1.039***       -1.111***            0.006           -0.006             -2.109***      -2.094***           -0.036           -0.049
                                           (0.104)         (0.109)             (0.021)          (0.022)            (0.183)         (0.191)            (0.058)          (0.060)
       T3 (inflation target)               -0.996***       -1.034***           -0.020           -0.034             -2.047***      -2.042***            0.035            0.075
                                           (0.102)         (0.109)             (0.021)          (0.022)            (0.186)         (0.197)            (0.057)          (0.059)
       T7 (Fed inflation forecast)         -1.071***       -1.143***           -0.048**         -0.062***          -2.136***      -2.161***            0.015            0.020
                                           (0.102)         (0.108)             (0.021)          (0.022)            (0.193)         (0.202)            (0.056)          (0.059)
       T8 (FOMC statement)                 -1.197***       -1.213***           -0.032           -0.051**           -2.305***      -2.235***           -0.100*          -0.060
                                           (0.103)         (0.108)             (0.021)          (0.022)            (0.190)         (0.200)            (0.056)          (0.058)
       T9 (USA today coverage)             -0.444***       -0.528***           -0.030           -0.048**           -0.735***      -0.767***           -0.033           -0.019
                                           (0.105)         (0.109)             (0.022)          (0.022)            (0.184)         (0.192)            (0.058)          (0.060)

       Remove outliers                       Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes
       Using sampling weights                Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes
       Controls for demographics              No              Yes                  No             Yes                 No             Yes                 No              Yes
       Observations                         19,269           17,629              19,269          17,629             11,502          10,498              7,767           7,131
       R2                                   0.048            0.061               0.016           0.040              0.067           0.087               0.004           0.020


Notes: Columns (1) and (2) reproduce average effects of different information treatments on inflation expectations relative to control groups from Table 2, with controls for observable
characteristics of households in column (2). Columns (3) and (4) assess the extensive margin of treatment effects, defined as the probability of a change in each household’s inflation
expectation exceeding a threshold defined as a change in inflation expectation of 2% for each treatment group, relative to control group, with column (4) conditioning on observable
characteristics of the individual. Columns (5) and (6) assess the intensive margin of treatment effects, defined as the size of the change in a household’s inflation expectation,
conditional on that change in expectation exceeding a threshold defined as a change in inflation expectation of 2% for each treatment group, relative to control group, with column
(6) conditioning on observable characteristics of the individual. Columns (7) and (8) assess the average size of change in expectations for those individuals whose change in
expectation was below the threshold used to define the extensive margin, (i.e. 2% for each treatment group, relative to control group, with column (6) conditioning on observable
characteristics of the individual.

                                                                                                                                                                                     36
                                                                 Table 9: Heterogeneity in Treatment Effects
    Breakdown of Sample:                    By Gender                        By Income                                By Education                          Political affiliation
                                                                                                                         Assoc.
                                                                                                            High
                                                                   Bottom      Middle      Highest                     degree or     College
                                       Female        Male                                                 school of                              Democrat       Republican          Other
                                                                   Tercile     Tercile     Tercile                       some        or more
                                                                                                             less
                                                                                                                        college
    Treatment Group:                     (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)             (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)           (10)            (11)
    T5 (pop growth)                   -0.31**     -0.06           -0.05       -0.50**     -0.19           -0.08        -0.40**       -0.17       -0.93***      -0.15            -0.67***
                                      (0.13)      (0.17)          (0.21)      (0.23)      (0.14)          (0.24)       (0.20)        (0.14)      (0.31)        (0.31)           (0.19)
    T6 (UE)                           -0.55***     0.05           -0.20       -0.64***    -0.29**         -0.30        -0.29         -0.39***    -0.94***      -0.32            -0.73***
                                      (0.13)      (0.17)          (0.20)      (0.23)      (0.14)          (0.24)       (0.19)        (0.14)      (0.33)        (0.32)           (0.20)
    T4 (gas prices)                    1.52***     1.39***         1.63***     1.08***     1.58***         1.42***      1.58***       1.46***     1.33***       1.30***          1.19***
                                      (0.14)      (0.18)          (0.22)      (0.25)      (0.16)          (0.26)       (0.22)        (0.16)      (0.34)        (0.33)           (0.21)
    T2 (past inflation)               -1.31***    -0.53***        -1.12***    -1.57***    -0.76***        -0.97***     -1.38***      -0.86***    -2.30***      -1.59***         -2.25***
                                      (0.13)      (0.17)          (0.20)      (0.23)      (0.14)          (0.25)       (0.19)        (0.14)      (0.30)        (0.32)           (0.187)
    T3 (inflation target)             -1.28***    -0.47***        -0.83***    -1.67***    -0.80***        -0.66***     -1.20***      -1.03***    -1.87***      -1.51***         -1.90***
                                      (0.13)      (0.16)          (0.19)      (0.23)      (0.14)          (0.23)       (0.19)        (0.14)      (0.31)        (0.31)           (0.19)
    T7 (Fed inflation forecast)       -1.26***    -0.74***        -1.29***    -1.53***    -0.74***        -1.20***     -1.10***      -1.01***    -2.33***      -1.21***         -2.01***
                                      (0.13)      (0.16)          (0.20)      (0.22)      (0.14)          (0.24)       (0.19)        (0.14)      (0.31)        (0.30)           (0.19)
    T8 (FOMC statement)               -1.44***    -0.74***        -1.09***    -1.79***    -1.01***        -1.16***     -1.21***      -1.21***    -1.89***      -1.63***         -2.11***
                                      (0.13)      (0.17)          (0.19)      (0.23)      (0.14)          (0.24)       (0.19)        (0.14)      (0.31)        (0.31)           (0.19)
    T9 (USA today coverage)           -0.60***    -0.18           -0.231      -0.84***    -0.40***        -0.17        -0.53***      -0.52***    -0.99***      -0.92***         -0.97***
                                      (0.13)      (0.17)          (0.20)      (0.23)      (0.14)          (0.24)       (0.20)        (0.14)      (0.32)        (0.31)           (0.19)

    Observations                        14,257      5,012           5,914       5,689       7,666          2,756         5,190        11,323       2,354           2,230            6,432
    R-squared                           0.052       0.043           0.047       0.048       0.053          0.048         0.056        0.045        0.146           0.092            0.105


Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative to those in the control group, broken down along observable
characteristics of individuals. Columns (1) and (2) separate households by gender, columns (3) to (5) consider where individuals rank in the income distribution of all respondents
by tercile, columns (6) to (8) classify respondents using the highest level of education in the household, columns (9) to (11) classify respondents based on their political affiliations.
In each case, revisions in beliefs are measured using the inflation forecasts at the end of the first wave of the survey relative to initial beliefs from the first wave measured before all
treatments. Treatments are described in detail in the text. Results are from Huber robust regressions to control for outliers and influential observations. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                                            37
Appendices




             38
                                   Appendix 1: Surveys and Treatments
First wave of the survey: May-June 2018
This survey is about your household's finances and opinions about the economy. As with any of our surveys, the
information you provide is confidential and is only shared in an aggregate (not individual) level.
 Please tell us about yourself…
1. What is your date of birth?
2. What is your gender?
() Male           () Female
3. Do you have any credit cards?
() Yes () No () Prefer to not answer
ASK IF: Q3=YES
4. Suppose that you had to make an unexpected payment equal to one month of your income, would you have sufficient
credit on your credit card(s) to charge the entire amount?
() Yes () No () Don’t know/prefer to not answer
5. How much money did you have in your checking and savings accounts and in cash the day before your last regular
paycheck arrived? Please do not include fixed term deposits, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or retirement accounts, etc.
(Please enter dollars and cents)
         $__________________________                 [] Don’t know/prefer to not answer
6. Approximately how many times per month do you go to a gas station to buy gasoline or for other reasons? (Please
enter a number)                     ___________ times        [RANGE: 0-999]
7. Who typically does the grocery shopping in your household? (Select one)
         () I do all of the grocery shopping in the household
         () I share the grocery shopping with others in the household
         () Someone else does the grocery shopping in the household
8. Over the last three months on average, how much did your household spend (per month) on goods and services in total
and for each of the individual components listed below?
Please enter a number between 0 and 99,999 for each category. The sum of the expenditures for the individual categories
should add up to the total amount. (Enter a "0" if you did not purchase anything in a given category)
Total monthly spending TOTAL [AUTOSUM] [RANGE: 0-99,999]
 [HAVE THIS AUTOMATICALLY SUM]                                                                            $__________
Debt payments (mortgages, auto loans, student loans,…)                                     $__________
Housing (including rent, maintenance and home owner/renter insurance but not including mortgage payments) $_______
Utilities (including water, sewer, electricity, gas, heating oil, phone, internet)         $__________
Food (including groceries, dining out, and beverages)                                      $__________
Clothing, footwear, and personal care                                                      $__________
Gasoline                                                                                   $__________
Other regular transportation costs (including public transportation fares and car maintenance)            $__________
Medical care (including health insurance, medical bills, prescription drugs)               $__________
Travel, Recreation, and entertainment                                                      $__________
Education and child care                                                                   $__________
Furniture, jewelry, small appliances and other small durable goods                         $__________
Other (including gifts, child support or alimony, charitable giving, and other miscellaneous) $ __________
Prefer not to answer

9. Saving is income that is neither spent nor used to make payments on debt. Methods of saving include putting money
aside in, for example, a deposit account, a pension account, an investment fund, or as cash.
What percentage of your monthly income, on average, did you save during the last 12 months? (Please enter a number.
The number you enter should be greater than or equal to 0. If you did not save any money, please enter a “0”. If you went
into debt, enter a negative value)
         ______ (Please enter a percent) [RANGE: -100-100]                Prefer not to answer
10. What percent of your financial wealth (excluding housing) do you invest in the following categories? (enter a “0” if
you do not invest in a given category)

                                                                                                                       39
        Checking and Savings Account                ………… percent
        Cash                                        ………… percent
        US Bonds                                    ………… percent
        US Stocks                                   ………… percent
        Foreign Stocks and Bonds                    ………… percent
        Gold and precious metals                    ………… percent
        Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies          ………… percent
        Other                                       ………… percent
        % Total                                             __100____ PN: TOTAL FOR RESPONDENT
        [] I have no financial investments >EXCLUSIVE
11. Do you plan to buy a new home in the next 6 months?
        () Yes () No
ASK IF: Q12=YES
12. What price do you expect/plan to pay for a new house?
        $________________                  [] Don’t know/Won’t answer
13. Do you plan to purchase a car in the next 6 months?
        () Yes () No
ASK IF: Q13=YES
14. What price do you expect/plan to pay for this car?
        $__________________                [] Don’t know/Won’t answer
15. Do you plan to purchase any other big-ticket household items (TV, fridge, furniture, and similar items) over the next 6
months?
        () Yes            () No
ASK IF: Q15=YES
16. How much do you expect to spend on these big-ticket household items over the next 6 months?
        $__________________                         [] Don’t know/Won’t answer
17. How much higher or lower do you think your household’s total after-tax income will be over the next six months
compared to the last twelve months?
        Please provide an answer in percents. If you think that your household’s total after-tax income will decrease,
        please fill in a negative percent (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that your household’s total after-
        tax income will increase, please fill in a positive percent. If you think that your household’s total net income will
        not change, please fill in 0 (zero).
        __________%
18. In THIS question, you will be asked about the PERCENT CHANCE of something happening. The percent chance
must be a number between 0 and 100 and the sum of your answers must add up to 100.
        Nondurable goods and services include for instance food, tobacco, alcohol, gasoline, clothing, haircuts,
        transportation, and other small services and nondurable goods that do not last in time. What do you think is the
        percent chance that, over the next six months, your spending on non-durable goods and services will… (assign
        probabilities to each outcome; probabilities should sum to 100)

        Increase by 10% or more                                    ______
        Increase between 5% and 10%                                ______
        Increase between 2% and 5%                                 ______
        Increase by 2% or less                                     ______
        Stay the same                                              ______
        Decrease 2% or less                                        ______
        Decrease between 2% and 5%                                 ______
        Decrease between 5% and 10%                                ______
        Decrease by 10% or more                                    ______
        % Total                                                    __100____ PN: TOTAL FOR RESPONDENT

19. How many total hours per week do you and other members of your household work in a typical week? Please do not
include volunteer hours or hours that are unpaid.
                You:                              __________ hours per week

                                                                                                                            40
                 All others in household:         __________ hours per week
20. Do you expect the hours for you or other people in your household will be the same over the next 6 months or not?
Please do not include volunteer hours or hours that are unpaid.
        () Yes, the same over the next 6 months
        () No, not the same over the next 6 months
ASK IF: Q20=NO
23. How many hours per week do you expect to be working in 6 months and how many hours do you expect all other
members of your household to be working in 6 months? Please do not include volunteer hours or hours that are unpaid.
                 You:                             __________ hours per week
                 All others in household:         __________ hours per week
[Everyone who did not answer [] I have no financial investments in Q10 should get this question]
24. What do you think the rate of return will be on your financial investments over the next twelve months? Please
provide a quantitative answer in percentage terms.
        __________       %                        [] I have no financial investments

25. We would like to ask you about the rate of inflation/deflation (Note: inflation is the percentage rise in overall prices in
the economy, most commonly measured by the Consumer Price Index and deflation corresponds to when prices are
falling).
Please enter a number in the box below. If you do not think there was any inflation/deflation in the last 12 months, please
enter a “0”. If you think there was deflation, enter a negative value. If you think there was inflation, enter a positive value.
Over the last 12 months, the rate of inflation/deflation was
          __________percent
26. In THIS question, you will be asked about the PERCENT CHANCE of something happening. The percent chance
must be a number between 0 and 100 and the sum of your answers must add up to 100.
What do you think is the percent chance that, over the next 12 months…
          the rate of inflation will be 12% or more                                   ______
          the rate of inflation will be between 8% and 12%                            ______
          the rate of inflation will be between 4% and 8                              ______
          the rate of inflation will be between 2% and 4                              ______
          the rate of inflation will be between 0% and 2%                             ______
          the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 0% and 2% ______
          the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 2% and 4% ______
          the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 4% and 8% ______
          the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 8% and 12% ______
          the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be 12% or more           ______
          % Total                                                                     ______ [PN: TOTAL ANSWERS
          FROM ABOVE]

[Half of respondents get this question]
27. In THIS question, you will be asked about the probability (PERCENT CHANCE) of something being true. The
percent chance must be a number between 0 and 100 and the sum of your answers must add up to 100.
        What is the probability that the average American believes inflation or deflation over the next 12 months
        will be…

        The average American expects the rate of inflation will be 12% or more                    ______
        The average American expects the rate of inflation will be between 8% and 12%             ______
        The average American expects the rate of inflation will be between 4% and 8               ______
        The average American expects the rate of inflation will be between 2% and 4               ______
        The average American expects the rate of inflation will be between 0% and 2%              ______
        The average American expects the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 0% and 2%           ______
        The average American expects the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 2% and 4%           ______
        The average American expects the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 4% and 8%           ______
        The average American expects the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 8% and 12%          ______
        The average American expects the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be 12% or more                 ______

                                                                                                                             41
        % Total                                            ______ [PN: TOTAL ANSWERS FROM ABOVE]

[Other half of respondents get the next two question]
28. What do you think the current overall level of prices in the economy (as measured by the Consumer Price Index)
relative to the level of prices 5 years ago?
Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think there was deflation (that is, prices fell), enter a negative value.
If you think there was inflation (that is, prices rose), enter a positive value. If you do not think there was any
inflation/deflation in the last 5 years, please enter a “0”.
         ____________overall percent change for last 5 years           [RANGE: -100-100 Whole numbers only]
29. In THIS question, you will be asked about the probability (PERCENT CHANCE) of something happening. The
percent chance must be a number between 0 and 100 and the sum of your answers must add up to 100.
What do you think is the probability that, over the next 5 years, the overall level of prices in the economy (as measured
by the Consumer Price Index) relative to the current level of prices will…
         rise by 50% or more                                  ______
         rise from 25% to 50%                                 ______
         rise from 15% to 25%                                 ______
         rise from 5% to 15%                                  ______
         rise less than 5%                                    ______
         stay about the same                                  ______
         fall by less than 5%                                 ______
         fall from 5% to 15%                                  ______
         fall from 15% to 25%                                 ______
         fall from 25% to 50%                                 ______
         fall by 50% or more                                  ______
         % Total                                              ______ [PN: TOTAL ANSWERS FROM ABOVE]
[75% of respondents get this question]
30. What is your best guess about the annual inflation rate that the Federal Reserve tries to achieve on average over long
periods of time? Please use a percent between -100 and 100)
__________        % per year
[25% of respondents get this question instead]
30. What is your best guess about the annual inflation rate that the Federal Reserve tries to achieve on average over long
periods of time? Please use a percent between -100 and 100)
__________        % per year                [] Prefer to not answer

31. What is your best guess about the current unemployment rate in the U.S.? (Please use a percent between 0 and 100)
        __________      %
32. What is your best guess at the current unleaded gas price in your area? (Please enter dollars and cents)
        $____________
33. What is your best guess about the dollar change in gas prices over the next six months? (Please enter dollars and cents)
        $____________
34. In THIS question, you will be asked about the PERCENT CHANCE of something happening. The percent chance
must be a number between 0 and 100 and the sum of your answers must add up to 100.
What do you think the average unemployment rate will be over the next 12 months:

        The average unemployment rate will be 10% or more                           ______
        The average unemployment rate will be between 8.0% and 9.9%                 ______
        The average unemployment rate will be between 7.0% and 7.9%                 ______
        The average unemployment rate will be between 6.0% and 6.9%                 ______
        The average unemployment rate will be between 5.0% and 5.9%                 ______
        The average unemployment rate will be between 4.0% and 4.9%                 ______
        The average unemployment rate will be 4.0% or less                          ______
        % Total                                       ______ [PN: TOTAL ANSWERS FROM ABOVE]

[INFORMATION TREATMENTS]

                                                                                                                            42
[PN: RANDOMLY ASSIGN EACH RESPONDENT INTO EITHER THE “CONTROL GROUP” OR GROUPS 1 – 8
BASED ON LOWEST READS. ]
CONTROL
GROUP 1
GROUP 2
GROUP 3
GROUP 4
GROUP 5
GROUP 6
GROUP 7
GROUP 8
IF Control group: [SKIP TO Q35]
SHOW IF: GROUPS 1-8
You are almost done with the survey. We have just a few more questions. But before you give us your responses, we
would like you to know the following.

SHOW IF Group 1: Over the last twelve months, the inflation rate in the U.S. (as measured by the Consumer Price Index)
was 2.3%.
SHOW IF Group 2: The inflation target of the Federal Reserve is 2% per year.
SHOW IF Group 3: The price of gasoline (national average) rose by 6.4% over the last three months.
SHOW IF Group 4: The U.S. population grew 2% over the last three years.
SHOW IF Group 5: The current rate of unemployment in the U.S. is 4.1%.
SHOW IF Group 6: The U.S. Federal Open Market Committee (which sets short-term interest rates) forecasts 1.9%
inflation rate in 2018.
SHOW IF Group 7 [May 2018 version]: Please read the most recent policy statement by the U.S. Federal Open Market
Committee.
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates that the labor market has
continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been strong in recent
months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Recent data suggest that growth rates of household spending and
business fixed investment have moderated from their strong fourth-quarter readings. On a 12-month basis, both overall
inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have continued to run below 2 percent. Market-based
measures of inflation compensation have increased in recent months but remain low; survey-based measures of longer-
term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance.
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The
economic outlook has strengthened in recent months. The Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the
stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace in the medium term and labor market
conditions will remain strong. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to move up in coming months and to stabilize
around the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly
balanced, but the Committee is monitoring inflation developments closely.
In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target range for
the federal funds rate to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby
supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation.
In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will
assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international
developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric
inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further gradual
increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected
to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as
informed by incoming data.
SHOW IF Group 7 [June 2018 version]: Please read the most recent policy statement by the U.S. Federal Open Market
Committee.


                                                                                                                           43
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that the labor market has
continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been strong, on
average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Recent data suggest that growth of household
spending moderated from its strong fourth-quarter pace, while business fixed investment continued to grow strongly. On a
12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have moved close to 2 percent.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
expectations are little changed, on balance.

Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The
Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand
at a moderate pace in the medium term and labor market conditions will remain strong. Inflation on a 12-month basis is
expected to run near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Risks to the economic outlook
appear roughly balanced.

In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee decided to maintain the target
range for the federal funds rate at 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby
supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation.

In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will
assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international
developments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric
inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further gradual
increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected
to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as
informed by incoming data.

SHOW IF Group 8 [May 2018 version]: On March 21, 2018, USA Today summarized the most recent decision of the
U.S. Federal Open Market Committee (which sets short-term interest rates) as follows:

"Citing a brighter economic outlook, the Federal Reserve raised its key short-term interest rate Wednesday but maintained
its forecast for a total of three hikes this year amid still-modest inflation.

The move is expected to ripple through the economy, nudging consumer and business borrowing costs higher, especially
for variable-rate loans such as adjustable-rate mortgages and credit cards.

Investors cheered the unchanged rate forecast for 2018, pushing up the Dow Jones industrial average about 250 points
initially before stocks pared their gains.

The Fed’s policymaking committee, as widely anticipated, lifted the federal funds rate — what banks charge each other
for overnight loans — by a quarter percentage point to a range of 1½% to 1¾%.

That’s still low by historical standards but it marks the central bank’s fourth rate increase in the past 12 months and
another vote of confidence in an economy that’s picking up steam nearly nine years after the Great Recession ended.

"We're trying to take that middle ground" on rate hikes, boosting rates enough to head off an eventual spike in inflation
without derailing the economic expansion, Fed Chairman Jerome Powell said at a news conference. The meeting was the
first led by Powell, a Republican and Trump appointee, who took the reins from Democrat Janet Yellen last month."
SHOW IF Group 8 [June 2018 version]: On May 2, 2018, USA Today summarized the most recent decision of the U.S.
Federal Open Market Committee (which sets short-term interest rates) as follows:



                                                                                                                            44
WASHINGTON — Inflation is creeping higher, and that’s making the Federal Reserve more confident about raising
interest rates.

The Fed held its key interest rate steady Wednesday but noted that inflation has climbed close to its 2% goal, paving the
way for another rate hike in June.

As expected, the Fed kept its benchmark short-term interest rate at a range of 1½% to 1¾%. The central bank’s
policymaking committee lifted the rate by a quarter percentage point in March for the sixth time since late 2015 after
holding it near zero for years following the 2008 financial crisis and recession.

In a statement after a two-day meeting, the Fed reiterated that it plans to continue to raise rates gradually, a pace that
economists have interpreted as roughly every other meeting.
Fed policymakers have forecast two more rate increases this year, according to their median estimate, but faster inflation
could trigger three additional moves. Before the statement release, Fed fund futures indicated a 90% chance of a hike in
June, according to CME Group.

35. By how much do you expect prices in the economy (as measured by the Consumer Price Index) to change over the
next 12 months? Please provide an answer as a percentage change from current prices. Please use a percent between -100
and 100, if no change please enter a “0”. You may enter a percent)
         __________        %
[PN: ONLY THOSE THAT ANSWERED Q28 AND Q29 SHOULD ANSWER Q36]
36. By how much do you expect prices in the economy (as measured by the Consumer Price Index) to change over the
next five years? Please provide an answer as a cumulative percentage change from the current level of prices. Please use a
percent between -100 and 100, if no change please enter a “0”.)
         __________        %
[PN: ONLY THOSE THAT ANSWERED Q27 SHOULD ANSWER Q37]
37. What inflation rate do you think the average American would predict for the next twelve months? (Please enter a
number in one of the boxes below. If you think that the average American predicts no inflation or deflation, please enter a
“0”. If you think the average American expects deflation, enter a negative value. If you expect, inflation, enter a positive
value)
         __________        %
38. What do you think the unemployment rate in the U.S. economy will be in twelve months? Please provide a
quantitative answer in percentage terms. (Please use a percent between 0 and 100)
         __________        %
39. What do you think the rate of return will be on your financial investments over the next twelve months? Please
provide a quantitative answer in percentage terms.
         __________        %                [] I have no financial investments
40. How much higher or lower do you think your household’s total after-tax income will be over the next six months
compared to the last twelve months?
         Please provide an answer in percents. If you think that your household’s total after-tax income will decrease,
         please fill in a negative percent (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that your household’s total after-
         tax income will increase, please fill in a positive percent. If you think that your household’s total net income will
         not change, please fill in 0 (zero).
                  __________%

41. How much higher or lower do you think your household’s spending on non-durable goods and services will be over
the next six months compared to the last six months?
        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think that your household’s spending on non-durable goods
        and services will decrease, please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think
        that your household’s spending on non-durable goods and services will increase, please fill in a positive
        percentage. If you think that your household’s spending on non-durable goods and services will not change,
        please fill in 0 (zero). (You are able to enter a percent up to two decimal places)
                 __________%

                                                                                                                             45
Second wave of the survey: September 2018
This survey is about your household's finances and opinions about the economy. As with any of our surveys, the
information you provide is confidential and is only shared in an aggregate (not individual) level.
 Please tell us about yourself…

1. What is your date of birth? (Please select the month, day and year)
Month: January, February… December
Day: 1, 2, 3… 31
Year: 1916, 1917… 2000

2. Over the last three months on average, how much did your household spend (per month) on goods and services in total
and for each of the individual components listed below?
Please enter a number between 0 and 99,999 for each category. The sum of the expenditures for the individual categories
should add up to the total amount. (Enter a "0" if you did not purchase anything in a given category)

Total monthly spending TOTAL [AUTOSUM] [RANGE: 0-99,999]
[PN: HAVE THIS AUTOMATICALLY SUM]                                                                       $__________
Debt payments (mortgages, auto loans, student loans,…)                                     $__________
Housing (including rent, maintenance and home owner/renter insurance but not including mortgage payments)
                                                                              $__________
Utilities (including water, sewer, electricity, gas, heating oil, phone, internet)         $__________
Food (including groceries, dining out, and beverages)                                      $__________
Clothing, footwear, and personal care                                                      $__________
Gasoline                                                                                   $__________
Other regular transportation costs (including public transportation fares and car maintenance)
                                                                              $__________
Medical care (including health insurance, medical bills, prescription drugs)               $__________
Travel, Recreation, and entertainment                                                      $__________
Education and child care                                                                   $__________
Furniture, jewelry, small appliances and other small durable goods                         $__________
Other (including gifts, child support or alimony, charitable giving, and other miscellaneous)
                                                                                           $ __________
Prefer not to answer

3. What percent of your financial wealth (excluding housing) do you invest in the following categories? (Please enter a
whole number if you invest in a given category. Percents should total 100%.)
       Checking and Savings Account              ………… percent
       Cash                                      ………… percent
       US Bonds                                  ………… percent
       US Stocks                                 ………… percent
       Foreign Stocks and Bonds                  ………… percent
       Gold and precious metals                  ………… percent
       Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies        ………… percent
       Other                                     ………… percent
       % Total                                          __100____
       [] I have no financial investments

4. Did you buy a new home in the last 3 months?
        () Yes
        () No
ASK IF: Q4=YES
4a. What price did you pay for the new house?
        $__________________

                                                                                                                          46
        [] Don’t know/Won’t answer
ASK IF: Q4=NO
4b. Do you plan to buy a new home in the next 3 months?
        () Yes () No
ASK IF: Q4b=YES
4c. What price do you expect/plan to pay for a new house?
        $________________                        [] Don’t know/Won’t answer

5. Did you buy a new car in the last 3 months?
        () Yes () No
ASK IF: Q5=YES
5a. What price did you pay for this car?
        $__________________                      [] Don’t know/Won’t answer
ASK IF: Q5=NO
5b. Do you plan to purchase a car in the next 3 months?
        () Yes () No
ASK IF: Q5b=YES
5c. What price do you expect/plan to pay for this car?
        $__________________                      [] Don’t know/Won’t answer

6. Did you purchase any other big-ticket household items (TV, fridge, furniture, and similar items) in the last 3 months?
        () Yes () No
ASK IF: Q6=YES
6a. How much did you spend on these big-ticket household items over the last 3 months?
        $__________________                     [] Don’t know/Won’t answer

6b. Do you plan to purchase any other big-ticket household items (TV, fridge, furniture, and similar items) over the next 3
months?
        () Yes () No
ASK IF: Q6b=YES
6c. How much do you expect to spend on these big-ticket household items over the next 3 months?
        $__________________                      [] Don’t know/Won’t answer

7. How much higher or lower do you think your household’s total after-tax income will be over the next three months
compared to the last three months?
        Please provide an answer in percent. If you think that your household’s total after-tax income will decrease,
        please fill in a negative percent (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that your household’s total after-
        tax income will increase, please fill in a positive percent. If you think that your household’s total net income will
        not change, please fill in 0 (zero).
        __________%
8. How many total hours per week do you and other members of your household work in a typical week? Please do not
include volunteer hours or hours that are unpaid.
                 You:                               __________ hours per week
                 All others in household:           __________ hours per week
9. Do you expect the hours for you or other people in your household will be the same over the next 3 months or not?
Please do not include volunteer hours or hours that are unpaid.
        () Yes, the same over the next 3 months
        () No, not the same over the next 3 months
ASK IF: Q9=NO
10. How many hours per week do you expect to be working in 3 months and how many hours do you expect all other
members of your household to be working in 3 months? Please do not include volunteer hours or hours that are unpaid.
                 You:                               __________ hours per week
                 All others in household:           __________ hours per week


                                                                                                                            47
11. We would like to ask you about the rate of inflation/deflation (Note: inflation is the percentage rise in overall prices in
the economy, most commonly measured by the Consumer Price Index and deflation corresponds to when prices are
falling).
          Please enter a number in the box below. If you do not think there was any inflation/deflation in the last 12 months,
          please enter a “0”. If you think there was deflation, enter a negative value. If you think there was inflation, enter a
          positive value.

Over the last 12 months, the rate of inflation/deflation was
        __________percent

12. In THIS question, you will be asked about the PERCENT CHANCE of something happening. The percent chance
must be a number between 0 and 100 and the sum of your answers must add up to 100.
What do you think is the percent chance that, over the next 12 months…
        the rate of inflation will be 12% or more                                ______
        the rate of inflation will be between 8% and 12%                         ______
        the rate of inflation will be between 4% and 8                           ______
        the rate of inflation will be between 2% and 4                           ______
        the rate of inflation will be between 0% and 2%                          ______
        the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 0% and 2% ______
        the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 2% and 4% ______
        the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 4% and 8% ______
        the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 8% and 12% ______
        the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be 12% or more        ______
        % Total                                                                  ______

13. What is your best guess about the annual inflation rate that the Federal Reserve tries to achieve on average over long
periods of time? Please use a percent between -100 and 100)
__________      % per year

14. What is your best guess about the current unemployment rate in the U.S.? (Please use a percent between 0 and 100)
       __________       %

15. What is your best guess at the current unleaded gas price in your area? (Please enter dollars and cents)
      $____________

16. Are you? (Select one)
        ()Male                    ()Female

17. What is your first name?
    ___________________________________________________________________________

18. Are there any members of your household aged 18 or older who have not yet taken this survey?
       () Yes         () No




                                                                                                                              48
Third wave of the survey: December 2018
This survey is about your household's finances and opinions about the economy. As with any of our surveys, the
information you provide is confidential and is only shared in an aggregate (not individual) level.

Please tell us about yourself…

1. What is your date of birth? (Please select the month, day and year)

2. Which political party do you lean towards?

() Democrats
() Republication party
() Green party
() Libertarian party
() Other
() Prefer not to answer

3. Over the last three months on average, how much did your household spend (per month) on goods and services in total
and for each of the individual components listed below?

Please enter a number between 0 and 99,999 for each category. The sum of the expenditures for the individual categories
should add up to the total amount. (Enter a "0" if you did not purchase anything in a given category)

Total monthly spending TOTAL [AUTOSUM] [RANGE: 0-99,999]
[PN: HAVE THIS AUTOMATICALLY SUM]                                                                         $__________

Debt payments (mortgages, auto loans, student loans,…)                                     $__________
Housing (including rent, maintenance and home owner/renter insurance but not including mortgage payments)
                                                                              $__________
Utilities (including water, sewer, electricity, gas, heating oil, phone, internet)         $__________
Food (including groceries, dining out, and beverages)                                      $__________
Clothing, footwear, and personal care                                                      $__________
Gasoline                                                                                   $__________
Other regular transportation costs (including public transportation fares and car maintenance)
                                                                              $__________
Medical care (including health insurance, medical bills, prescription drugs)               $__________
Travel, Recreation, and entertainment                                                      $__________
Education and child care                                                                   $__________
Furniture, jewelry, small appliances and other small durable goods                         $__________
Other (including gifts, child support or alimony, charitable giving, and other miscellaneous)
                                                                                           $ __________
Prefer not to answer

4. What percent of your financial wealth (excluding housing) do you invest in the following categories? (Please enter a
whole number if you invest in a given category. Percents should total 100%.)

Checking and Savings Account             ………… percent
Cash                                     ………… percent
US Bonds                                 ………… percent
US Stocks                                ………… percent
Foreign Stocks and Bonds                 ………… percent
Gold and precious metals                 ………… percent
                                                                                                                          49
Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies        ………… percent
Other                                     ………… percent
        % Total                                     __100____

[] I have no financial investments

Consumption Plans:
5. Did you buy a new home in the last 6 months?
        () Yes
        () No

ASK IF: Q5=YES
5a. What price did you pay for the new house?
       $__________________ [PN: MAX=10,000,000]
       [] Don’t know/Prefer not to answer

6. Did you buy a new car in the last 6 months?
        () Yes
        () No

ASK IF: Q6=YES
6a. What price did you pay for this car?
       $__________________ [PN: MAX=100,000]
       [] Don’t know/Prefer not to answer

7. Did you purchase any other big-ticket household items (TV, fridge, furniture, and similar items) in the last 6 months?
        () Yes
        () No

ASK IF: Q7=YES
7a. How much did you spend on these big-ticket household items over the last 6 months?
       $__________________
       [] Don’t know/Prefer not to answer

8. How much higher or lower do you think your household’s total after-tax income will be over the next six months
compared to the last six months?

                Please provide an answer with a percent. If you think that your household’s total after-tax income will
                decrease, please fill in a negative percent (insert a minus sign before the number). If you think that your
                household’s total after-tax income will increase, please fill in a positive percent. If you think that your
                household’s total net income will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).

                 __________% [RANGE: (-100) to 100]

9. How many total hours per week do you and other members of your household work in a typical week? Please do not
include volunteer hours or hours that are unpaid. (Please enter a zero if you or others do not work)
                You:                              __________ hours per week
                All others in household:          __________ hours per week


;Inflation and Aggregate Expectations - DON’T SHOW
10. We would like to ask you about the rate of inflation/deflation (Note: Deflation is the opposite of inflation).

Over the last 12 months…
                                                                                                                              50
(Please enter a number in one of the boxes below. The number you enter should be greater than 0 or equal to 0. If you do
not think there was any inflation/deflation in the last 12 months, please enter a “0” in one of the boxes.)

The rate of inflation was                                 …… percent      [RANGE: 0-100]
The rate of deflation (the opposite of inflation) was     …… percent     [RANGE: 0-100]

11. In THIS question, you will be asked about the PERCENT CHANCE of something happening. The percent chance must
be a number between 0 and 100. Numbers like 2% or 5% indicate "almost no chance," 19% or so may mean "not much
chance," a 47% or 55% chance may be a "pretty even chance," 82% indicates a "very good chance," and 95% or 98% mean
"almost certain."

What do you think is the percent chance that, over the next 12 months…
[RANGE OF EACH OPTION BELOW: 0-100]
                the rate of inflation will be 12% or more                                  ______
               the rate of inflation will be between 8% and 12%                            ______
               the rate of inflation will be between 4% and 8                              ______
               the rate of inflation will be between 2% and 4                              ______
               the rate of inflation will be between 0% and 2%                             ______
               the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 0% and 2%     ______
               the rate of deflation(opposite of inflation) will be between 2% and 4%      ______
               the rate of deflation(opposite of inflation) will be between 4% and 8%      ______
               the rate of deflation(opposite of inflation) will be between 8% and 12%     ______
               the rate of deflation(opposite of inflation) will be 12% or more           ______
   % Total ______

12. What do you think is the probability that, in 10 years from now, the overall level of prices in the economy (as measured
by the Consumer Price Index) will…
[RANGE OF EACH OPTION BELOW: 0-100 ALLOW FOR UP TO 2 DECIMAL POINTS]
    fall by 50% or more                            ______
    fall by 25% to 50%                             ______
    fall by 15% to 25%                             ______
    fall by 5% to 15%                              ______
    fall but by less than 5%                       ______
    stay about the same                            ______
    grow but at less than 5%                       ______
    grow by 5% to 15%                              ______
    grow by 15% to 25%                             ______
    grow by 25% to 50%                             ______
    grow by 50% to 100%                            ______
    grow by 100% or more                           ______
    % Total                                        ______ [PN: TOTAL ANSWERS FROM ABOVE]

13. What is your best guess about the annual inflation rate that the Federal Reserve tries to achieve on average over long
periods of time? Please use a percent between -100 to 100)
        __________      % per year [RANGE: -100 to 100 Whole numbers]

14. What is your best guess about the current unemployment rate in the U.S.? (Please use a percent between 0 and 100,
may enter up to 2 decimal points)
       __________       % [RANGE: 0-100]

15. What is your best guess at the current unleaded gas price in your area? (Please enter dollars and cents)
      $____________ [PN: ADD two DECIMAL FOR DOLLARS AND CENTS]



                                                                                                                         51
                                                                      Appendix 2: Additional Results
                              Appendix Table 1: Heterogeneous Contemporaneous Effects of Treatments on Inflation Expectation
                                                         Less than
                                               Not                       1-6           6+         Plan to      No plan         No        Positive
                               Enough                    1 month                                                                                       Saving        Saving       Saving
                                             enough                   months in     months in       buy        to buy       financial    financial
                                credit                       in                                                                                        rate: 0      rate: 0-10   rate: 10+
                                              credit                   savings       savings      durable      durable       wealth       wealth
                                                          savings
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)          (11)         (12)
T5 (pop growth)                   -0.177       -0.219      -0.260        -0.129       -0.140      -0.383*       -0.173        -0.093      -0.277**       -0.048      -0.339*        -0.282
                                 (0.124)      (0.279)     (0.196)       (0.259)      (0.265)      (0.231)      (0.118)       (0.193)       (0.125)      (0.242)      (0.178)       (0.203)
T6 (UE)                         -0.310**       -0.370    -0.567***     -0.645**       0.010        -0.269     -0.362***       -0.030     -0.478***     -0.518**       -0.298      -0.429**
                                 (0.124)      (0.286)     (0.193)       (0.254)      (0.258)      (0.228)      (0.117)       (0.195)       (0.123)      (0.241)      (0.181)       (0.193)
T4 (gas prices)                1.498***     1.679***     1.356***     1.438***      1.363***     1.328***     1.536***      1.586***     1.444***     1.664***      1.423***     1.549***
                                 (0.135)      (0.315)     (0.211)       (0.272)      (0.280)      (0.251)      (0.128)       (0.212)       (0.135)      (0.255)      (0.201)       (0.217)
T2 (past inflation)            -0.987***    -1.148***    -1.167***    -1.129***     -0.697***    -0.982***    -1.055***     -0.919***    -1.096***    -1.257***     -1.100***    -0.938***
                                 (0.123)      (0.268)     (0.190)       (0.258)      (0.247)      (0.229)      (0.116)       (0.189)       (0.124)      (0.228)      (0.182)       (0.197)
T3 (inflation target)          -0.921***    -1.412***    -1.302***    -1.048***     -0.928***    -0.929***    -1.011***     -0.742***    -1.115***    -1.093***     -1.123***    -1.052***
                                 (0.121)      (0.277)     (0.187)       (0.255)      (0.253)      (0.226)      (0.114)       (0.191)       (0.120)      (0.224)      (0.181)       (0.192)
T7 (Fed inflation forecast)    -0.943***    -1.374***    -1.331***    -1.055***     -0.677***    -0.882***    -1.120***     -1.066***    -1.083***    -1.573***     -1.188***    -0.599***
                                 (0.121)      (0.270)     (0.187)       (0.248)      (0.246)      (0.228)      (0.114)       (0.197)       (0.119)      (0.224)      (0.176)       (0.193)
T8 (FOMC statement)            -1.247***    -1.127***    -1.349***    -1.391***     -0.960***    -1.262***    -1.179***     -0.825***    -1.377***    -1.254***     -1.525***    -1.101***
                                 (0.123)      (0.274)     (0.189)       (0.249)      (0.252)      (0.232)      (0.114)       (0.187)       (0.122)      (0.219)      (0.179)       (0.202)
T9 (USA today coverage)        -0.481***     -0.592**    -0.515***       -0.418      -0.455*     -0.632***    -0.390***       -0.273     -0.525***      -0.457*     -0.602***      -0.366*
                                 (0.123)      (0.285)     (0.189)       (0.263)      (0.260)      (0.223)      (0.119)       (0.195)       (0.124)      (0.243)      (0.177)       (0.202)

Observations                    13,160        2,845        5,904         3,084        2,507        3,860        15,409        6,025        13,244       4,224         6,474        4,417
R-squared                       0.051         0.053        0.050         0.062        0.048        0.043        0.050         0.038        0.054        0.058         0.057        0.052



 Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative to those in the control group, broken down along observable
 characteristics of individuals. Columns (1) and (2) differentiate respondents by whether they report having enough credit on their credit cards to make an emergency payment equal
 to one month of their salary. Columns (3)-(5) differentiate respondents by the amount of their total liquid savings (checking plus savings accounts) relative to their monthly income.
 Columns (6) and (7) differentiate respondents by whether they plan to buy a car, house or other big ticket item over the next six months. Columns (8) and (9) differentiate between
 households depending on whether they report having any positive financial wealth. Columns (10) to (12) differentiate between respondents depending on what fraction of their
 monthly income they report having saved each of the last 12 months on average. In each case, revisions in beliefs are measured using the inflation forecasts at the end of the first
 wave of the survey relative to initial beliefs from the first wave measured before all treatments. Treatments are described in detail in the text. Results are from Huber robust regressions
 to control for outliers. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                                           52
                        Appendix Table 1 (continued): Heterogeneous Contemporaneous Effects of Treatments on Inflation Expectation
                                                                                               Number of bins used in inflation             Time spent answering inflation
                                          Race                 Who does groceries:
                                                                                              expectations distribution question           expectations distribution question
                                White       Non-White          Just me       Shared            1 bin        2 bins       3+ bins          <20 sec.   20-120 sec.      120+ sec.
                                 (1)           (2)               (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)          (7)              (8)           (9)           (10)
T5 (pop growth)                 -0.193*         -0.315          -0.341        -0.195           -0.219        -0.207        -0.192           -0.019        -0.091          0.377
                                (0.116)        (0.245)          (0.208)      (0.123)           (0.134)       (0.256)       (0.225)         (0.285)       (0.171)         (0.615)
T6 (UE)                        -0.291**       -0.500**          -0.166      -0.444***         -0.270**       -0.264       -0.560**          -0.108        -0.266          0.007
                                (0.115)        (0.244)          (0.201)      (0.123)           (0.134)       (0.247)       (0.222)         (0.275)       (0.175)         (0.658)
T4 (gas prices)                1.516***       1.375***         1.554***     1.447***          1.424***      1.700***      1.587***        1.663***      1.934***        2.651***
                                (0.125)        (0.274)          (0.227)      (0.134)           (0.146)       (0.264)       (0.252)         (0.327)       (0.193)         (0.659)
T2 (past inflation)           -0.986***      -1.241***        -0.861***     -1.113***        -0.947***     -1.091***     -1.247***        -0.938***     -1.108***        -0.730
                                (0.114)        (0.242)          (0.200)      (0.122)           (0.135)       (0.236)       (0.221)         (0.281)       (0.169)         (0.611)
T3 (inflation target)         -1.034***      -0.857***        -1.191***     -0.951***        -0.904***     -1.022***     -1.227***        -0.992***     -1.003***        -0.794
                                (0.112)        (0.240)          (0.199)      (0.120)           (0.134)       (0.233)       (0.211)         (0.280)       (0.169)         (0.556)
T7 (Fed inflation forecast)   -1.102***      -0.957***        -1.210***     -1.049***        -1.012***     -0.853***     -1.389***        -0.770***     -1.090***        -0.813
                                (0.112)        (0.247)          (0.199)      (0.120)           (0.133)       (0.227)       (0.223)         (0.285)       (0.167)         (0.551)
T8 (FOMC statement)           -1.191***      -1.215***        -1.273***     -1.201***        -1.114***     -1.116***     -1.485***        -1.100***     -1.389***       -1.197**
                                (0.114)        (0.232)          (0.199)      (0.121)           (0.133)       (0.230)       (0.225)         (0.277)       (0.171)         (0.557)
T9 (USA today coverage)       -0.437***        -0.477*         -0.403**     -0.479***        -0.357***     -0.688***      -0.524**         -0.527*       -0.289*          0.299
                                (0.115)        (0.249)          (0.202)      (0.124)           (0.134)       (0.252)       (0.226)         (0.280)       (0.176)         (0.642)

Observations                    16,325           2,944          5,632         13,314           12,191        2,986         4,091            2,529         6,953           795
R-squared                       0.049            0.044          0.050         0.048            0.041         0.066         0.062            0.047         0.065          0.071



 Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative to those in the control group, broken down along observable
 characteristics of individuals. Columns (1) and (2) differentiate respondents by their race. Columns (3) and (4) differentiate respondents by whether they report being the sole shopper
 for their household or share the shopping with others. Columns (5) to (7) differentiate respondents by the number of bins on which they assign positive probabilities when completing
 the distributional inflation expectations question. Columns (8) to (10) differentiate respondents based on the amount of seconds it took them to complete the distributional inflation
 expectations question. In each case, revisions in beliefs are measured using the inflation forecasts at the end of the first wave of the survey relative to initial beliefs from the first
 wave measured before all treatments. Treatments are described in detail in the text. Results are from Huber robust regressions to control endogenously for outliers. Robust standard
 errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                                        53
                    Appendix Table 1 (continued): Heterogeneous Contemporaneous Effects of Treatments on Inflation Expectation



                                                                                                           Age
                                                                                               40 or                   61 or
                                                                                                          [41,60]
                                                                                                less                   more
                                                                                                 (1)        (2)         (3)
                                                           T5 (pop growth)                   -0.12       -0.32*      -0.17
                                                                                             (0.21)      (0.17)      (0.18)
                                                           T6 (UE)                           -0.51**     -0.30*      -0.24
                                                                                             (0.20)      (0.17)      (0.18)
                                                           T4 (gas prices)                    1.45***     1.52***     1.50***
                                                                                             (0.24)      (0.18)      (0.18)
                                                           T2 (past inflation)               -0.88***    -1.11***    -1.08***
                                                                                             (0.20)      (0.16)      (0.18)
                                                           T3 (inflation target)             -1.03***    -1.01***    -0.95***
                                                                                             (0.20)      (0.17)      (0.17)
                                                           T7 (Fed inflation forecast)       -0.95***    -1.15***    -1.07***
                                                                                             (0.20)      (0.16)      (0.17)
                                                           T8 (FOMC statement)               -1.34***    -1.12***    -1.18***
                                                                                             (0.20)      (0.16)      (0.17)
                                                           T9 (USA today coverage)           -0.57***    -0.47***    -0.30*
                                                                                             (0.20)      (0.17)      (0.18)

                                                           Observations                       3,808        7,238       8,223
                                                           R-squared                          0.05         0.05        0.04


Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative to those in the control group, broken down by age of the
respondent. Column (1) uses individuals aged 40 or less, column (2) uses individuals with ages from 41 to 60, and column (3) uses individuals aged 61 or more. In each case,
revisions in beliefs are measured using the inflation forecasts at the end of the first wave of the survey relative to initial beliefs from the first wave measured before all treatments.
Treatments are described in detail in the text. Results are from Huber robust regressions to control endogenously for outliers. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                                       54
                                Appendix Table 2: Heterogeneous Three-Month Effects of Treatments on Inflation Expectation
                                                         Less than
                                               Not                      1-6           6+         Plan to      No plan         No        Positive
                               Enough                    1 month                                                                                      Saving       Saving       Saving
                                             enough                  months in     months in       buy        to buy       financial    financial
                                credit                       in                                                                                       rate: 0     rate: 0-10   rate: 10+
                                              credit                  savings       savings      durable      durable       wealth       wealth
                                                          savings
                                 (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)         (10)          (11)         (12)
T5 (pop growth)                  -0.054       0.018        -0.013       -0.140        -0.093     -0.391*        -0.041        -0.243      -0.043       0.155        -0.048      -0.445**
                                (0.119)      (0.271)      (0.184)      (0.237)       (0.247)     (0.230)       (0.109)       (0.191)     (0.115)      (0.215)      (0.179)       (0.179)
T6 (UE)                          -0.163     -0.598**     -0.389**       -0.174        -0.208      -0.154      -0.255**       -0.354*      -0.179     -0.611***      0.021       -0.406**
                                (0.118)      (0.295)      (0.196)      (0.253)       (0.238)     (0.229)       (0.113)       (0.196)     (0.118)      (0.217)      (0.190)       (0.185)
T4 (gas prices)                 -0.211*       -0.011       -0.240       -0.112        -0.234      -0.261        -0.139        -0.166      -0.164       -0.303       -0.093       -0.325*
                                (0.120)      (0.282)      (0.191)      (0.248)       (0.223)     (0.233)       (0.112)       (0.198)     (0.116)      (0.212)      (0.184)       (0.185)
T2 (past inflation)              0.025        -0.047       -0.053       -0.094        -0.210      -0.313        0.056         0.082       -0.065       0.021        0.072        -0.337*
                                (0.116)      (0.298)      (0.188)      (0.241)       (0.231)     (0.221)       (0.112)       (0.196)     (0.115)      (0.215)      (0.177)       (0.188)
T3 (inflation target)           -0.228*       -0.212       -0.250       -0.188        -0.388     -0.435*     -0.288***     -0.631***      -0.175       -0.274       -0.099     -0.522***
                                (0.120)      (0.277)      (0.186)      (0.252)       (0.249)     (0.228)       (0.111)       (0.193)     (0.116)      (0.214)      (0.180)       (0.188)
T7 (Fed inflation forecast)      -0.128       -0.128       -0.102       -0.243        -0.037      -0.164      -0.228**      -0.438**      -0.120       -0.337       -0.138        -0.280
                                (0.121)      (0.281)      (0.188)      (0.256)       (0.238)     (0.241)       (0.112)       (0.196)     (0.118)      (0.225)      (0.178)       (0.185)
T8 (FOMC statement)              -0.182       -0.054       -0.057       -0.196        -0.160      -0.301        -0.089        -0.219      -0.092       0.166       -0.318*        -0.219
                                (0.118)      (0.307)      (0.190)      (0.242)       (0.240)     (0.235)       (0.112)       (0.191)     (0.119)      (0.218)      (0.182)       (0.188)
T9 (USA today coverage)        -0.266**       -0.074       -0.176       -0.140        -0.052      -0.193      -0.227**        -0.226     -0.221*       -0.003      -0.312*     -0.502***
                                (0.118)      (0.296)      (0.190)      (0.260)       (0.224)     (0.230)       (0.113)       (0.197)     (0.117)      (0.226)      (0.184)       (0.179)

Observations                    9,225         2,020        4,205        2,176        1,863        2,542        11,101        4,390        9,253        3,155        4,414        3,106
R-squared                       0.001         0.003        0.002        0.001        0.002        0.002        0.002         0.004        0.001        0.007        0.002        0.004



 Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative to those in the control group, broken down along observable
 characteristics of individuals. Columns (1) and (2) differentiate respondents by whether they report having enough credit on their credit cards to make an emergency payment equal
 to one month of their salary. Columns (3) to (5) differentiate respondents by the amount of their total liquid savings (checking plus savings accounts) relative to their monthly income.
 Columns (6) and (7) differentiate respondents by whether they plan to buy a car, house or other big ticket item over the next six months. Columns (8) and (9) differentiate between
 households depending on whether they report having any positive financial wealth. Columns (10) to (12) differentiate between respondents depending on what fraction of their
 monthly income they report having saved each of the last 12 months on average. In each case, revisions in beliefs are measured using the inflation forecasts from the second wave
 of the survey relative to initial beliefs from the first wave measured before all treatments. Treatments are described in detail in the text. Results are from Huber robust regressions to
 control endogenously for outliers. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                                         55
                        Appendix Table 2 (continued): Heterogeneous Three-Month Effects of Treatments on Inflation Expectation
                                                                                              Number of bins used in inflation            Time spent answering inflation
                                          Race                 Who does groceries:
                                                                                             expectations distribution question          expectations distribution question
                                White       Non-White         Just me       Shared            1 bin        2 bins       3+ bins         <20 sec.   20-120 sec.      120+ sec.
                                 (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)           (9)           (10)
T5 (pop growth)                  -0.154        0.104           -0.057         -0.101           -0.062       -0.378*      -0.019           -0.031         -0.155        -0.500
                                (0.108)       (0.243)          (0.206)       (0.114)          (0.128)       (0.228)      (0.210)         (0.301)        (0.164)        (0.534)
T6 (UE)                       -0.293***        0.007           -0.166       -0.261**         -0.336**        -0.241       0.094           -0.408      -0.436***        -0.264
                                (0.112)       (0.241)          (0.202)       (0.118)          (0.131)       (0.237)      (0.217)         (0.293)        (0.167)        (0.562)
T4 (gas prices)                  -0.156       -0.246            0.081        -0.227*           -0.171        -0.294      -0.057           -0.221         -0.225        -0.621
                                (0.110)       (0.256)          (0.206)       (0.117)          (0.131)       (0.233)      (0.213)         (0.321)        (0.165)        (0.539)
T2 (past inflation)              -0.065        0.169            0.234         -0.092           -0.016        -0.283       0.179           -0.186         -0.047        -0.645
                                (0.110)       (0.238)          (0.199)       (0.116)          (0.131)       (0.224)      (0.206)         (0.292)        (0.165)        (0.555)
T3 (inflation target)          -0.273**      -0.488**          -0.251      -0.316***        -0.436***        -0.298       0.021          -0.524*       -0.362**         0.609
                                (0.111)       (0.228)          (0.207)       (0.116)          (0.131)       (0.219)      (0.213)         (0.297)        (0.162)        (0.537)
T7 (Fed inflation forecast)    -0.286**        0.075           -0.311         -0.170         -0.304**        -0.370       0.150           -0.436         -0.272        -0.354
                                (0.113)       (0.232)          (0.209)       (0.117)          (0.134)       (0.227)      (0.208)         (0.322)        (0.166)        (0.516)
T8 (FOMC statement)             -0.204*        0.163            0.098        -0.193*           -0.090        -0.138      -0.235           -0.435         -0.276        -0.352
                                (0.112)       (0.230)          (0.207)       (0.117)          (0.130)       (0.246)      (0.210)         (0.292)        (0.169)        (0.570)
T9 (USA today coverage)        -0.254**       -0.088          -0.426**        -0.147          -0.247*      -0.562**       0.099           -0.352       -0.364**         0.229
                                (0.112)       (0.237)          (0.203)       (0.118)          (0.132)       (0.235)      (0.206)         (0.294)        (0.159)        (0.554)

Observations                    11,587           2,056         3,633         9,844            8,723         2,071         2,848           1,615          4,672          532
R-squared                       0.001            0.005         0.005         0.001            0.002         0.003         0.002           0.004          0.002         0.017



 Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative to those in the control group, broken down along observable
 characteristics of individuals. Columns (1) and (2) differentiate respondents by their race. Columns (3) and (4) differentiate respondents by whether they report being the sole shopper
 for their household or share the shopping with others. Columns (5) to (7) differentiate respondents by the number of bins on which they assign positive probabilities when completing
 the distributional inflation expectations question. Columns (8) to (10) differentiate respondents based on the amount of seconds it took them to complete the distributional inflation
 expectations question. In each case, revisions in beliefs are measured using the inflation forecasts from the second wave of the survey relative to initial beliefs from the first wave
 measured before all treatments. Treatments are described in detail in the text. Results are from Huber robust regressions to control endogenously for outliers. Robust standard errors
 are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                                      56
                        Appendix Table 2 (continued): Heterogeneous Three-Month Effects of Treatments on Inflation Expectation
         Breakdown of Sample:                    By Gender                                   By Income                                          By Education
                                                                                                                                                  Assoc.
                                                                              Bottom          Middle          Highest           High school      degree or        College or
                                           Female           Male
                                                                              Tercile         Tercile         Tercile             of less          some             more
                                                                                                                                                  college
         Treatment Group:                     (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)                  (6)           (7)               (8)
         T5 (pop growth)                    -0.010          -0.266*           -0.049          -0.139           -0.123               -0.645        -0.035            -0.008
                                            (0.129)         (0.154)           (0.181)         (0.213)          (0.140)              (0.580)       (0.456)           (0.292)
         T6 (UE)                            -0.322**        -0.050            -0.182          -0.058           -0.360**            -1.538***      -1.165**          -0.057
                                            (0.130)         (0.163)           (0.180)         (0.219)          (0.147)              (0.546)       (0.476)           (0.285)
         T4 (gas prices)                    -0.111          -0.245            -0.231           0.074           -0.231               -0.641         0.517            -0.059
                                            (0.133)         (0.154)           (0.178)         (0.213)          (0.151)              (0.552)       (0.482)           (0.268)
         T2 (past inflation)                -0.024          -0.005            -0.028           0.157           -0.092              -1.682***      -0.147             0.269
                                            (0.132)         (0.152)           (0.189)         (0.216)          (0.139)              (0.600)       (0.453)           (0.266)
         T3 (inflation target)             -0.341***        -0.266*           -0.377**        -0.356           -0.247*               0.155        -0.011            -0.391
                                            (0.131)         (0.155)           (0.174)         (0.220)          (0.147)              (0.534)       (0.440)           (0.289)
         T7 (Fed inflation forecast)        -0.301**        -0.078            -0.356*         -0.064           -0.181               -1.131*       -0.028             0.398
                                            (0.133)         (0.157)           (0.184)         (0.221)          (0.144)              (0.592)       (0.447)           (0.254)
         T8 (FOMC statement)                -0.135          -0.118            -0.109          -0.079           -0.168               -0.394        -0.169             0.037
                                            (0.132)         (0.157)           (0.182)         (0.214)          (0.147)              (0.554)       (0.488)           (0.316)
         T9 (USA today coverage)            -0.228*         -0.205            -0.281          -0.146           -0.212                0.311        -0.189            -0.009
                                            (0.130)         (0.162)           (0.181)         (0.215)          (0.148)              (0.593)       (0.466)           (0.283)

         Observations                      10,230           3,413              4,668           4,043            4,932               1,890           3,375            7,120
         R-squared                         0.002            0.002              0.002           0.002            0.002               0.017           0.007            0.003


Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative to those in the control group, broken down along observable
characteristics of individuals. Columns (1) and (2) separate households by gender, columns (3) to (5) consider where individuals rank in the income distribution of all respondents
by tercile, columns (6) to (8) classify respondents using the highest level of education in the household. In each case, revisions in beliefs are measured using the inflation forecasts
from the second wave of the survey relative to initial beliefs from the first wave measured before all treatments. Treatments are described in detail in the text. Results are from Huber
robust regressions to control endogenously for outliers. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                                      57
                       Appendix Table 3: Treatment effects by initial inflation expectations.

                                               Outcome: forecast revision immediately after treatment
                                             Pre-treatment expected           Pre-treatment expected
                                                  inflation <2%                    inflation ≥ 2%
                                               (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)
             T5 (pop growth)                  0.197            0.080           -0.597***         -0.645***
                                             (0.143)          (0.149)         (0.138)            (0.146)
             T6 (UE)                          0.013            0.042           -0.624***         -0.664***
                                             (0.144)          (0.151)         (0.138)            (0.149)
             T4 (gas prices)                  1.957***         1.781***         1.264***          1.221***
                                             (0.166)          (0.171)         (0.147)            (0.157)
             T2 (past inflation)              0.239*           0.180           -2.048***         -2.111***
                                             (0.141)          (0.149)         (0.135)            (0.143)
             T3 (inflation target)            0.144            0.023           -1.774***         -1.792***
                                             (0.139)          (0.148)         (0.132)            (0.142)
             T7 (Fed inflation forecast)     -0.106           -0.132           -1.872***         -1.922***
                                             (0.135)          (0.143)         (0.135)            (0.143)
             T8 (FOMC statement)             -0.098           -0.173           -1.988***         -1.949***
                                             (0.137)          (0.145)         (0.134)            (0.142)
             T9 (USA today coverage)          0.064           -0.088           -0.883***         -0.952***
                                             (0.143)          (0.151)         (0.138)            (0.146)
             Remove outliers                   Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
             Using sampling weights            Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
             Controls for demographics         No               Yes              No                Yes
             Observations                     7,157            6,555          12,020             11,016
             R2                               0.040            0.070            0.081             0.102


Notes: the table reports estimated treatment effects for respondents who report pre-treatment expected inflation above 2%
(columns 3 and 4) and 2% or below (columns 1 and 2). See notes to Table 2 for more details.




                                                                                                                      58
                                          Appendix Table 4: Descriptive Statistics of the Survey, Unfiltered Data

                                                        Pre-treatment expected             Pre-treatment perceived           Pre-treatment perceived
                                                               inflation                           inflation                inflation target of the Fed
                                                    Median       Mean     St.Dev.       Median       Mean    St.Dev.      Median       Mean       St.Dev.
                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)       (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)
            All                                         3        3.62       5.12            3        4.60      6.25           5        17.83       30.21
            Male                                        3        3.20       4.34            3        3.82      4.80           3        10.89       24.62
            Female                                      3        3.79       5.41            3        4.94      6.76           5        20.31       31.61
            White                                       3        3.55       4.94            3        4.54      6.13           5        15.87       28.49
            Non-white                                   3        3.83       5.64            3        4.79      6.61          10        23.99       34.36
            Income: tercile 1 (low)                     3        3.87       5.92            3        5.19      7.04          10        23.84       35.87
            Income: tercile 2                           3        3.73       4.98            3        4.73      6.46           5        19.33       30.93
            Income: tercile 3                           3        3.37       4.48            3        4.12      5.44           3        12.55       23.52
            Enough credit                               3        3.44       4.49            3        4.32      5.63           4        13.42       25.87
            Not enough credit                           3        4.19       5.59            3        5.22      7.01           7        21.02       31.46
            HTM: less than 1 month in savings           3        4.03       5.29            3        5.11      6.77           5        18.65       29.79
            HTM: 1-6 months in savings                  3        3.55       4.20            3        4.15      5.29           3         9.92       22.25
            HTM: 6+ months in savings                   3        3.13       3.55            3        3.60      4.28           3         8.61       18.63
            Plan to buy durable                         3        3.63       4.82            3        4.72      6.37           5        16.34       28.08
            No plan to buy durable                      3        3.61       5.21            3        4.57      6.21           5        18.31       30.85
            No financial wealth                         3        3.60       5.97            2        4.96      7.04          10        24.20       35.20
            Positive financial wealth                   3        3.63       4.55            3        4.41      5.76           4        13.10       24.86
            Saving rate: 0                              3        4.30       5.72            3        5.26      7.18           6        20.65       31.72
            Saving rate: 0-10                           3        3.69       4.39            3        4.56      5.78           4        12.42       23.85
            Saving rate: 10+                            3        3.40       4.30            3        4.32      5.48           3        13.41       25.11
            Do grocery: me/self                         3        3.57       4.95            3        4.55      6.29           5        16.40       28.24
            Do grocery: share                           3        3.65       5.17            3        4.63      6.25           5        18.25       30.69
            Education: high school or less              3        3.67       5.83            3        5.07      7.20          10        26.92       37.24
            Education: some college                     3        3.75       5.31            3        4.83      6.55           5        18.18       29.86
            Education: college or more                  3        3.48       4.46            3        4.16      5.32           3        12.08       23.68
Notes: The table reports average values and cross-sectional deviations of expected inflation over the next twelve months (columns 1-3), perceived inflation over the
previous twelve months (columns 4-6) and beliefs about the Federal Reserve’s inflation target (columns 7-9). Data are not restricted/filtered in any way. Rows
indicate which subset of the sample is used. Each row captures an observable characteristic of the respondent on which we condition. All moments are computed
using the Huber robust method.




                                                                                                                                                                 59
                                        Appendix Table 5: Treatment Effects over Time using only Repeat Participants

                                                                                      Outcome: forecast revision
                      Treatments                          Immediate revision            Revision after 3 months         Revision after 6 months
                                                           (1)          (2)                (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)

                      T5 (pop growth)                  -0.267*        -0.282*           -0.053          -0.073            0.153          0.183
                                                       (0.155)        (0.155)           (0.104)         (0.108)          (0.112)        (0.114)
                      T6 (UE)                          -0.420***      -0.451***         -0.247**        -0.261**         -0.024         -0.030
                                                       (0.154)        (0.155)           (0.107)         (0.111)          (0.109)        (0.112)
                      T4 (gas prices)                   1.259***       1.220***         -0.128          -0.156           -0.029         -0.027
                                                       (0.163)        (0.165)           (0.107)         (0.111)          (0.111)        (0.112)
                      T2 (past inflation)              -1.057***      -1.131***          0.081           0.024            0.262**        0.235**
                                                       (0.154)        (0.156)           (0.106)         (0.110)          (0.111)        (0.113)
                      T3 (inflation target)            -0.882***      -0.940***         -0.320***       -0.388***         0.051          0.010
                                                       (0.151)        (0.154)           (0.107)         (0.111)          (0.109)        (0.112)
                      T7 (Fed inflation forecast)      -1.091***      -1.181***         -0.151          -0.180            0.136          0.118
                                                       (0.151)        (0.153)           (0.108)         (0.111)          (0.109)        (0.112)
                      T8 (FOMC statement)              -1.213***      -1.265***         -0.100          -0.142            0.095          0.086
                                                       (0.149)        (0.151)           (0.106)         (0.110)          (0.113)        (0.116)
                      T9 (USA today coverage)          -0.572***      -0.662***         -0.156          -0.163            0.191*         0.159
                                                       (0.153)        (0.155)           (0.107)         (0.111)          (0.110)        (0.113)

                      Remove outliers                     Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
                      Using sampling weights              Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
                      Controls for demographics           No             Yes               No             Yes               No            Yes
                      Observations                       9,097          8,743             9,761          9,353             9,873         9,438
                      R2                                 0.042          0.063             0.002          0.013             0.001         0.015


Notes: The table reports the average change in inflation expectations of individuals in each treatment group relative to those in the control group. Columns (1) and
(2) consider the immediate change in expectations after the treatment, columns (3) and (4) consider the changes in beliefs after three months, columns (5) and (6)
report changes in beliefs over a six month horizon. In each case, differences in beliefs are measured relative to initial beliefs from the first wave measured before all
treatments. Treatments are described in detail in the text. For each time horizon, the second column uses the same specification as in the first column but augmented
with respondent-specific controls. Results are from Huber robust regressions to control for outliers and influential observations. Robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses. Only respondents who participate in all waves are included.




                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                               Appendix Table 6: Balancedness Tests across Treatment Arms

                                                                                         Treatment
                                 T1             T2              T3            T4             T5            T6              T7            T8             T9
                                                                                                                          (Fed                        (USA
                                               (past         (inflation                     (pop                                      (FOMC
                              (control)                                   (gas prices)                    (UE)         inflation                      today
                                             inflation)        target)                    growth)                                    statement)
                                                                                                                       forecast)                    coverage)
     Age                        50.36          50.87           51.29         51.89          50.74         50.39          50.60          51.19          50.28
                               (15.03)        (14.85)         (14.96)       (15.28)        (15.06)       (14.83)        (14.86)        (14.54)       (14.99)

     Male share                  0.30           0.28            0.29           0.31          0.29           0.28          0.29            0.29          0.29
                                (0.46)         (0.45)          (0.46)         (0.46)        (0.46)         (0.45)        (0.45)          (0.45)        (0.45)

     White share                 0.74           0.74            0.75           0.76          0.76           0.74          0.77            0.73          0.75
                                (0.44)         (0.44)          (0.44)         (0.43)        (0.42)         (0.44)        (0.42)          (0.45)        (0.43)

     Household size              2.55           2.51            2.49           2.50          2.44           2.55          2.47            2.48          2.52
                                (1.35)         (1.29)          (1.34)         (1.30)        (1.29)         (1.31)        (1.31)          (1.30)        (1.34)

     Employed share              0.57           0.56            0.54           0.52          0.57           0.56          0.54            0.53          0.57
                                (0.50)         (0.50)          (0.50)         (0.50)        (0.49)         (0.50)        (0.50)          (0.50)        (0.50)

     Income (‘000)              63.97          67.41           63.77         63.42          64.24         65.82          64.16          64.40          65.06
                               (37.58)        (37.08)         (37.79)       (37.77)        (37.60)       (37.80)        (37.09)        (37.48)        (37.16)

     Saving rate                10.51          10.40           10.14         10.44          10.03         10.84          10.08           9.35          10.95
                               (15.00)        (14.09)         (14.31)       (15.17)        (14.75)       (15.20)        (13.90)        (13.19)        (15.19)


Notes: The table reports means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for different observable characteristics of respondents in each treatment arm, using sampling
weights. The first row of the table indicates treatment arms for which moments are reported.




                                                                                                                                                                  61
          Appendix Figure 1. The joint distribution of posterior (immediately after the treatment) and prior beliefs about future inflation.




Notes: the figure reports a binscatter plot of 12-month-ahead inflation expectations before treatment and immediately after treatment. Each circle represents 2.5
percent of the sample. The line shows fitted regression.
                                                                                                                                                              62
