                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SOCIAL PROGRESS AND CORPORATE CULTURE

                                        Gary B. Gorton
                                     Alexander K. Zentefis

                                      Working Paper 25484
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25484


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




We are grateful to Peter DeMarzo, Darrell Duffie, and Arvind Krishnamurthy for their
discussions on this topic. We also thank Nick Barberis, James Choi, Stefano Giglio, Will
Goetzmann, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Jon Ingersoll, Bryan Kelly, Song Ma, Tim McQuade, Paul
Pfleiderer, Monika Piazzesi, Geert Rouwenhorst, and seminar participants at Yale SOM and
Stanford GSB for their valuable feedback and comments The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Gary B. Gorton and Alexander K. Zentefis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Progress and Corporate Culture
Gary B. Gorton and Alexander K. Zentefis
NBER Working Paper No. 25484
January 2019
JEL No. D23,G3,G38,J31,L13

                                         ABSTRACT

Social progress through improved treatment of minority groups (the embrace of anti-racist and
anti-sexist norms, for example) may or may not spread to corporate cultures through competition.
Sometimes the market fails to adapt on its own and government must pass legislation to secure
changes in the workplace. We show how corporate culture is determined, why a variety of
corporate cultures exist, and whether progressive corporate cultures can oust regressive ones.


Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

Alexander K. Zentefis
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Ave
New Haven, CT 06511
USA
alexander.zentefis@yale.edu
1       Introduction
Firms have organizational cultures that involve shared sets of values, norms, and customs
which agents within those firms consider important. An organization that hires like-minded
people who subscribe to the same culture can avoid clashes in communication and interaction
which a common culture facilitates. However, the decision to exclude others who share different
norms and customs denies a richer variety of views that can improve decision-making and
enhance performance. In this paper, we study this trade-off in the design of a firm’s corporate
culture and examine whether practices firms use to ease this tension that become intolerable
to society can be brought to an end by market forces.
    A firm’s hiring decision involves judging whether a potential employee’s cultural values
concur with those of the organization. Such a calculation matters to a firm because severe
cultural differences can put groups at odds with each other and harm organizational efficiency.
But selection that relies heavily on defusing cultural conflicts ignores the importance of hiring
the most skilled applicants who might have varied cultural backgrounds and values. Hence an
essential trade-off in devising a corporate culture is one between organizational cohesion and
diversity.
    We study this trade-off for two purposes. The first is to determine how it affects the devel-
opment of a firm’s culture and whether it can explain the observed heterogeneity of cultures
across firms. This variety is puzzling given the large body of empirical work documenting
that corporate culture affects firm performance.1 Seeing this fact, one would think that at
each point in time, there ought to be a unique, optimal corporate culture instead of constant
heterogeneity.
    A salient example from history of firms diverging in their choices between cohesion and
diversity took place during the civil rights movement of the mid-1950s to late-1960s. Martin
Luther King Jr. and other central figures of the campaign had realized that pressuring
businesses to racially integrate was an effective strategy to propel the plight of black Americans
into the national conscience (Roberts and Klibanoff (2007)). However, many businesses were
resistant to hiring black Americans. Newsweek reported at the time, “some white executives
preferred talking among themselves. . . than to lower class black employees.” Other executives
had “concerns about men and women of different races working together” (Russell and Lamme
(2013)).
    On the other hand, some firms publicly welcomed the burgeoning social movement. The
American industrial firm Cummins Inc. treated diversity as central to its culture and deseg-
regated factory lines as early as the 1940s (Reed (2017)). “[Black employees] are as efficient
and in some cases more productive than other employees,” said an International Harvester
executive (Fournier (1956)). Charles Marshall of the Illinois Bell Telephone Company wrote, “I
like to think we’re big enough to abolish racial discrimination because it’s an injustice that we
    1
    Denison (1984), Gordon and DiTomaso (1992), Kotter and Heskett (1992), Sørensen (2002), Guiso et al. (2015a),
Guiso et al. (2015b), Martinez et al. (2015).


                                                       1
can’t stand to live with in a free society” (Marshall (1968)). Hastened by the movement, The
Civil Right Act passed in 1964 and outlawed discrimination in the workplace, forcing firms
whose corporate cultures opposed integration to change.
   This example is notable because it also demonstrates that organizational cultures are often
subject to public scrutiny. In developing their cultures, firms can relax the trade-off between
cohesion and diversity by instituting formal and informal policies designed to narrow cultural
differences among a diverse workforce. To achieve greater cohesion, these practices regularly
involve agents with control rights over the organization instilling their own cultural values
and customs in other agents without such rights who differ culturally. Over time, however,
as public attitudes and beliefs evolve, such practices can become socially unacceptable and
lead organizational cultures to stray from societal advancement. A natural question arises:
can market forces compel firms to adjust their corporate cultures at the same rate as social
progress, or must outside intervention like government action institute change?
   An example where firm practices associated with corporate cultures ran afoul of social
standards involved the recent “Me Too” movement. The campaign began in 2006 to help
survivors of sexual violence worldwide. By late 2017, public awareness of Me Too erupted
and the movement focused on the pervasiveness of sexual harassment in the workplace
(me too. (2018)). In response, corporate boards began re-examining their corporate cultures,
asking whether active harassment was common, how such cases were handled internally,
whether perpetrators were tacitly supported, and whether women and men felt that jobs and
promotions were limited by their genders (Temin (2018)). By May 2018, nearly three hundred
senior executives across U.S. companies were let go or forced to resign after accusations of
sexual misconduct, including those at the Weinstein Company, Nike, Intel, Uber, Fox News,
Wynn Resorts, and Lululemon (Dishman (2017), Williams and Lebsock (2018), Nocera (2018),
Creswell et al. (2018), Temin (2018), Ovide (2018)).
   This brings us to our second purpose in studying the trade-off between cohesion and
diversity. We analyze the reasons corporate cultures can and cannot reform on their own via
market forces after social progress. The progress we consider is the improved treatment of a
minority group in the workplace, such as the adoption of anti-racist or anti-sexist norms. This
form of progress aligns with the examples provided. It also is a kind of progress that relates to
the trade-off between cohesion and diversity in corporate culture, as it can render firm behavior
that urges one group to conform to the values and customs of another group socially obsolete.
   We proceed with our analysis in the following steps. We first develop a theory of corporate
culture and explain how a variety of corporate cultures can emerge endogenously across
firms because of the trade-off between cohesion and diversity. We then use this theory to (1)
understand when a demand in society for the improved treatment of a minority group in the
workplace can transmit to corporate cultures via market competition and (2) present testable
empirical predictions.




                                               2
Our notion of culture
We consider corporate culture as inseparable from the culture(s) of the people who make up
a firm. Explaining what we mean by corporate culture requires us to make plain our notion
of culture. We view a person’s culture through an anthropological lens. One of the earliest
articulations of the term was made by the late 19th century English anthropologist Edward
Burnett Tylor, who wrote, “culture...is that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art,
morals, law, custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by [humans] as member[s]
of society" (Tylor (1871)). We adopt this interpretation of culture and expand it to specifically
include symbols, language, values, norms, mores, and typical behavioral patterns people share,
interact, and communicate. Because we focus on corporations, we limit the components of
culture to those involving a workplace.
   Making this idea analytical and open to modeling requires imposing a mathematical
structure. We do so by treating culture as the importance people assign to various components
of culture. This importance is modeled as a function that maps cultural components to different
weights between zero and one. We do not take a stand on the precise content of the cultural
elements that constitute the domain of the function—as in an exact cultural value like “fair
employee rewards.”
   The range of the function matters more. The range is the weight the culture places on
an element of the domain. For example, if a culture places a weight close to one on “clearly
articulating goals to everyone,” that element carries a great deal of importance to the culture.
Conversely, if “secretly defrauding customers” maps to a weight close to zero, that element is
unimportant or even abhorrent to the culture.
Model
In the model, there are two types of people: the majority and the minority. The two types are
endowed with distinct cultures, placing different weights on the possible cultural components.
The majority and minority may differ along any observable characteristic. Age, gender, race,
creed, political beliefs, and sexual orientation are examples, but not the only ones. Besides dif-
fering from the minority in culture, the majority by definition makes up more of the employees
at a firm and exclusively manages it.
   In our framework, corporate culture is a decision of a firm. Indeed, the objective of a firm
is to maximize profits by choosing its corporate culture. We define corporate culture as the
optimal mixture (weighted average) of the majority and minority cultures. The two instruments
the majority uses to choose the firm’s corporate culture are (1) the number of majority and
minority employees to hire and (2) the extent to which the hired minority is socialized into the
majority’s culture.
   Socialization is a concept in both sociology and organizational behavior: it is the process
by which one group internalizes the culture of another (Bauer and Erdogan (2011), Macionis
(2013)). We treat socialization as the minority conforming to the behavior implied by the



                                                3
majority’s culture. We model the cultural change as a transformation of the minority culture
function into the majority’s. The transformation could be complete or incomplete, depending
on the optimal choice of the majority. The residual “distance” between the minority’s culture
after socialization and majority’s culture we call cultural conflict (a lack of cohesion) because it
measures the disagreement between the two groups on what is culturally important at the
organization.
    Profits of a firm are increasing in employee diversity because it enhances innovation,2 but
decreasing in cultural conflict because it harms productivity.3 Employing all majority types,
for instance, will be free of conflict but will also lack diversity. By hiring more of the minority,
a firm enhances diversity but worsens cultural conflict. A firm can ease this trade-off using
socialization.
    To members of the minority, the socialization process may be positive or painful. It may
better position them for understanding their responsibilities and expectations in the organi-
zation, or it may confront them with an environment wholly unpleasant and offensive, such
as one that endorses harassment. Because one’s culture is so personally important, shifting a
minority employee away from his or her culture will inevitably trigger some emotions (utility
or disutility). How the minority reacts to the socialization is critical to whether a variety of
corporate cultures emerge in equilibrium.
Endogenous variety of cultures
The hiring and socialization decisions of a firm turn out to be complements: the more minority
employees a firm hires, the greater the benefit of socialization because doing so reduces
cultural conflict. This complementarity can make choices of either more diversity (with more
socialization) or less diversity (with less socialization) appealing. Because each choice generates
a different mixture of the majority and minority cultures, each implies its own corporate culture.
Whether the choices are equally optimal depends on how members of the minority emotionally
react to the socialization. Their reaction will influence how much they must be paid to stay
with the firm rather than leave for an outside option.
    For example, if retaining minority employees becomes too expensive for one choice of a
corporate culture over another, a single corporate culture will be optimal. Otherwise, multiple
corporate cultures become equally profitable. A firm could hire mostly the same people (the
majority) and sacrifice diversity for less cultural conflict. Or a firm could hire more different
people and alleviate the cultural conflict with socialization in order to enhance diversity. Two
firms that had no starting differences whatsoever could select two very different corporate
cultures.
    2
      Østergaard et al. (2011) find the likelihood of introducing a new product or service is higher when the employees
of a firm are more diverse in education and gender.
    3
      Bartel (1994) finds a positive relation between training programs—a form of socialization to reduce cultural
conflict—and labor productivity.




                                                          4
Social progress and firms
When studying how social progress can spread to industry, we focus on progress that calls
for the improved treatment of minority employees at work. We model that progress as a new,
shared expectation and demand in society for less painful socialization. The progress in society
occurs in the model exogenously, but one can imagine a long history of events and evolution of
thought that lead to it. Whether that social progress changes corporate culture is endogenous.
   Our economic environment features an incumbent firm that faces a threat of entry by
another firm. The incumbent believes and practices in an old way of business that predates the
advancement in views. The firm might be willfully ignorant of the change, stubborn to adapt,
or even adversarial to the progress. The incumbent is also headstrong in what it believes to be
the correct difference in pay between its majority and minority employees (its wage gap). This
characteristic makes the incumbent obstinate or slow to adjust the pay differences in response
to competition by a potential entrant.
   Unlike the incumbent, the entrant embraces the progress and makes the socialization
process less painful for members of the minority. The entrant is the vehicle by which the
advancement in views can percolate through the marketplace. The entrant might be a wholly
new firm that emerges in reaction to public outcry against the behavior of the incumbent. Or it
may be an existing firm that reformed its corporate culture on its own and now competes for
dominance against the incumbent. The potential entrant also is willing to modify its wage gap
in order to compete with the incumbent.
   Both majority and minority employees can leave the incumbent for the entrant should
doing so be more favorable. While leaving for the progressive entrant is appealing for members
of the minority, they bear a bias to stay at the incumbent despite the more painful socialization.
This restraint from exiting may arise from any kind of general switching cost. Some examples
are a perceived lack of full information about the new firm, a status quo bias or loss aversion
(Kahneman et al. (1991)), a mere-exposure effect because the incumbent is more familiar
(Zajonc (1968)), or the minority’s aversion to change because working at the incumbent culture
has entered the minority’s sense of identity (Cote and Levine (2002), Weinreich (2003), Akerlof
and Kranton (2005)).
   In the competition between the incumbent and potential entrant, the incumbent’s wage gap
determines whether it can successfully thwart entry. If the incumbent’s wage gap is severe and
pay inequality between the majority and minority is large, the dominance of the incumbent
corporate culture is lost. The progressive firm enters the market, ousts the incumbent, and a
new corporate culture that reflects the social advancement permeates the market.
   On the other hand, an incumbent with a narrower wage gap completely deters entry
because the new firm is not profitable enough to enter. In this case, competition has no means
to advance a corporate culture that embodies the social progress. Only an outside intervention,
such as government legislation like the Civil Rights Act of 1964, can force change. A third
possibility is that the incumbent and entrant are equally profitable, which leads both corporate


                                                5
cultures to coexist in the market.
   The minority’s bias to remain with the incumbent controls the range of wage gaps for which
the incumbent can shield itself from expulsion. One might think that a stronger bias gives
room for the incumbent to survive over larger wage gaps because minority employees are less
likely to leave despite bearing greater disutility from socialization. But it is the opposite. A
greater bias shrinks the range of wage gaps that deters entry because the bias makes the
entrant compete more aggressively. The entrant does so by easing the pain of socialization
even more to overcome that bias and convince the minority to leave the incumbent. And so, the
tighter the grip on the minority, the more fragile the dominance of the prevailing, but outdated,
corporate culture.
   The minority’s bias to stick with the incumbent also determines the amount that minority
treatment at work improves should the progressive entrant successfully displace the regressive
incumbent. A larger bias compels the entrant to compete more fiercely by lowering the pain
of socialization. If profitable enough to enter, the entrant improves the treatment of minority
employees by the size of the incumbency bias. The more the minority clings to the status quo,
the larger is the improvement to their condition if the corporate cultural change is successful.
Empirical predictions
The model has several empirical predictions. For those predictions to be tested, an econome-
trician would first have to select appropriate majority and minority groups as well as the
incumbent(s) and entrant(s). We discuss this issue in more detail in Section 6. After such
choices are made, one prediction is that the two “between-firm” wage gaps are opposite in sign.
The between-firm wage gaps are the difference in majority pay and the difference in minority
pay across the two firms. Hence, if members of the majority are paid relatively more at the
incumbent than at the entrant, members of the minority are paid relatively more at the entrant
than at the incumbent.
   Another prediction is that the coefficient from a cross-sectional or panel regression of the
entrant(s) wage gap on the incumbent(s) wage gap measures the relative treatment of minority
employees at the incumbent(s) relative to the entrant(s). A larger coefficient implies the
minority’s condition is significantly worse at the incumbent. The other predictions, including
some that relate the shares of minority employees at the incumbent and entrant, are detailed
in Section 6.
Summary
We provide a conceptual framework to analyze culture as the importance people place on
various cultural elements. We propose that corporate culture is a mixture of the individual
cultures of the employees that make up a firm. We argue that firms optimally choose their
corporate cultures by comparing an interest in diversity and organizational cohesion. This
trade-off, combined with the reaction of the minority to their socialization, can generate a
multiplicity of corporate cultures. Finally, we show that firms can evolve positively in their


                                               6
corporate cultures when society advances in the treatment of a minority group. But firms do
not always advance, as the power of incumbent attitudes is sometimes too great for the market
to overcome them on its own.
    We wait to discuss existing theories of corporate culture until the end. Next, we present the
model, starting with the ingredients, turning to the emergence of corporate cultural variety,
and ending with the competition between an incumbent and entrant.

2     Model
A firm consists of employees belonging to one of two groups: the majority and minority. The
majority carries the decision-making authority over a firm. Let the initial share of the majority
          1
be x0 ≥   2   and the minority share be 1 − x0 at a firm.
2.1    Culture
The majority and minority employees are distinct only in their cultures. A culture of a group
is the collection of values, customs, behaviors, norms, traditions, symbols, and language, etc.
that are shared among its members and which are deemed socially acceptable or unacceptable
within a firm. An expectation for all to arrive at the office before 9 A.M. and leave after 8
P.M. could be an element of a culture. Celebrating birthdays, honoring retirements, chatting
at the water cooler, talking sports at lunchtime, expecting overtime or encouraging personal
time, punishing harassment or ignoring it, believing greed is good or bad, promoting extreme
risk-taking or caution, obeying regulations or violating safety standards could be parts as well.
    Some elements of culture, such as the structure of compensation, are expressed using
enforceable contracts, whereas others are not. The sheer act of writing contracts when possible
rather than relying on informal agreements is also part of culture. So too is the language and
symbols used by members of a group. One group may call each other “employees,” but the other
insists on “team-members.” One group may expect all to communicate by email, whereas the
other may never use email. One group may all wear suits, whereas another wears shorts and
t-shirts that bear a company logo.
    The list can continue. But any enumeration of the precise elements of a group’s culture will
never be definitive, exhaustive, or satisfactory. So, rather than specifying the exact components,
we simply take as given the existence of some set of elements that make up a culture, whatever
that set may contain. In our analysis, we focus instead on the weights that a group places on
each element in terms of how important that element is to its culture.
    Formally, let Ω be a non-empty set wherein the elements o ∈ Ω are the norms, beliefs,
behaviors, traditions, values, language, symbols, etc. that are part of a culture. Let S be a
σ-algebra of subsets of Ω. We define culture as the following:

Definition 1. Culture is a real-valued function c : S → [0, 1] that assigns a number in [0, 1] to
every set si ∈ S, called the weight of si in culture c. The function c satisfies

    1. (Total Weight) c (Ω) = 1,

                                                  7
                                               
                                       S                P
   2. (Countable Additivity) c             si       =         c (si ) for all countable collections {si } of pairwise
                                     i∈I                i∈I
       disjoint sets.

Moreover, the function c induces an order via the binary relation . on S such that for any sets
si , sj ∈ S,

   1. (Non-strict ordering) si . sj if and only if c (si ) ≤ c (sj ),
   2. (Strict ordering) si ≺ sj if and only if c (si ) < c (sj ),
   3. (Equivalence) si ∼ sj if and only if c (si ) = c (sj ),

where ≺ is the strict relation induced by ., and ∼ is the equivalence relation induced by ..

    If si & sj , we say that “si carries at least as much weight as sj in culture c.” In other words,
members of a group adhering to culture c deem the customs, norms, values, etc. of si with at
least as much importance as those belonging to sj . Figure 1 provides an illustration of the
mapping and induced ordering.

                                                    Figure 1: Culture




    Our definition requires members of a group to make binary comparisons between elements
(more precisely, sets of elements) that could make up a culture. One can see that the binary
relation induced by the culture function c generates a proper ordering that obeys both transi-
tivity and completeness. Every potential element of a culture can be compared, and if si carries
at least as much weight as sj , and sj carries at least as much as sk , then si carries at least as
much weight as sk .
    We consider the culture of an individual to be a primitive, similar to how preferences,
technology, information, markets, and property rights generally are primitives in economic
models. A person does not choose a culture, but is endowed with one. That culture may have
formed and evolved over many years before the person’s birth. Looking throughout history and

                                                                8
countries, one can observe that cultures do indeed change over time, some at different speeds
than others. However, for the period we consider in the model, a person’s culture is fixed.
   The ordering induced by a culture does not correspond to a preference relation. Nor does
a cultural weight measure the strength of importance. That is, if c (si ) = 0.1 and c (sj ) = 0.5,
this does not imply that si is five times as important than sj in culture c. It merely means
that sj is more important than si . If a cultural element has no importance to an individual,
it gets zero weight. Similarly, if two cultural elements are “complements” in the set-theoretic
sense, such as “punishing harassment” and “not punishing harassment,” one will get a positive
weight, whereas the other will get zero weight, unless neither is of importance to an individual,
in which case both get zero weight. Finally, an individual’s culture will differ from corporate
culture, which a firm chooses.
   For mathematical convenience, we examine cultural weighting functions that are integrals
of continuous densities defined over R. So, let y be a variable defined on Ω that maps to R.
Define the set {y ∈ B} ≡ {o ∈ Ω; y (o) ∈ B}, where B is a Borel subset of R, and let the set be in
S. Let c ({y ∈ B}) be the cultural weighting of that set. We define the cultural density function
as the following:

Definition 2. The cultural density function ρ (y) is a non-negative function defined for y ∈ R
such that                                  Z   b
                       c ({a ≤ y ≤ b}) =           ρ (y) dy,   −∞ < a ≤ b < ∞.
                                           a



2.2   Corporate culture
The majority as a group makes the decisions at a firm. The majority has two choices: (1) worker
employment and (2) minority socialization. The employment decision determines the diversity
of a firm. The socialization decision influences how closely the minority conforms to the culture
of the majority. Both decisions set the corporate culture of the firm.
Diversity
A firm can hire from a pool of majority and minority types outside the firm, and the type of
any potential hire is perfectly identifiable by the firm. A firm’s employment decision involves
adding or deducting from the starting measure of the majority x0 .
   Let x denote the measure of new workers to add to or subtract from the majority. If x ≥ 0, a
firm increases the measure of the majority. To do so, a firm can either lay off some members
of the minority or hire more of both types, but hire relatively more of the majority. If x < 0, a
firm decreases the measure of the majority. Let x̃ = x0 + x be the majority share that includes
the employment changes. The corresponding minority measure is 1 − x̃. Because choosing a
new measure x of workers is effectively the same as choosing the overall share x̃, we treat the
choice variable of a firm to be x̃.



                                                       9
   Define the diversity of a firm as

                                       ∆ (x̃) = x̃ (1 − x̃) .                                  (1)

Diversity at a firm is the degree to which the majority hires individuals from the minority
group who share a different culture. Diversity is maximized when 1 − x̃ = 12 , which gives the
minority the largest share possible. Diversity is minimized when x̃ = 1, meaning a firm is
made up entirely of the majority types who share an identical culture. Because the majority
cannot exceed 1 and the minority cannot exceed 12 , those are the upper and lower bounds on
the choice variable. Maintaining diversity will be an interest of a firm, which we discuss below
when explaining a firm’s problem.
Socialization
The second decision of a firm is the socialization of the minority. Socialization is the process
by which one group within an organization internalizes the culture of another group (Bauer
and Erdogan (2011); Macionis (2013)). We treat socialization as the formal and informal ways
the majority influences the minority to conform its behavior to the culture of the majority.
Moreland and Levine (1984) argues that with socialization, “the group attempts to change the
individual so as to maximize his or her contributions to the attainment of group goals.”
   Socialization could take the form of training, onboarding programs, orientations, evalua-
tions, recognition awards, codes of conduct, or group “summits.” It can also be less ceremonious,
such as unspoken but observed dress codes, shared stories of legendary figures, tales of dis-
charged deviants, open door policies, or superiors actively listening to subordinates. It can even
be quite subtle, such as nodding to approve conforming actions, telling vile jokes, whispering
uncomfortable comments about a person’s body, ignoring the lower-ranked, talking over others
at meetings, or excluding groups from social events.
   The sociologist Mindy Fried described a form of socialization at financial firms in the early
1980s in which woman “tried very hard to play the part of, and even ‘look’ like, men as they
struggled for respect and acceptance within a male-defined workplace culture. These women
wore two-piece suits in solid colors with bow ties and medium-length skirts” (Fried (1998)).
Similar behavior to sound and act masculine is seen among female entrepreneurs in Silicon
Valley today (Brooks et al. (2014); Tariyal (2018); Robson (2018)).
   So that the majority and minority cultures can be compared when we model socialization,
it is helpful for the cultural weighting functions to map to the unit interval from the same
σ−algebra. Therefore, let Ψ ≡ Ω ∪ Ωm be the union of the sets for the majority (Ω) and the
minority (Ωm ) that contain the elements of their respective cultures. And let F be a σ-algebra
of subsets of Ψ. By uniting the elements of both cultures into a single set, we implicitly require
that members of the minority and the majority groups are capable of ordering and weighting
the values, traditions, language, customs, norms, etc. that make up the cultures of either group.
Let z be a variable defined on Ψ, and let g (z) be the cultural density function of the majority


                                                10
and f (z) the cultural density of the minority.
   The cultural density of the socialized minority is

                                                       g n f 1−n
                                           fˆ (n, z) =           ,                                    (2)
                                                            a

                 g n f 1−n dz is some integrating constant (as a function of n) that ensures fˆ is a
             R
where a =
density, and n ∈ [0, 1] is the extent of socialization. The majority has the means to transform
the culture of the minority into that of the majority through the choice of n. Later, we will get
to the reason why the majority has an interest in doing this.
    The culture of the socialized minority fˆ is a weighted average between the minority’s
original density and the majority’s density. A perfectly socialized minority means fˆ = g,
implying n = 1. The socialization process at a firm, however, does not permanently alter the
original culture f of the minority. Over the period of time in the background when socialization
takes place, a minority employee never truly abandons his or her personal culture. And if a
minority employee left a firm, his or her culture would revert to f . After socialization, the
minority partially or fully conforms its behavior to act in accordance with the values, norms,
traditions, etc. of the majority’s culture.
   Socialization is costly to a firm. Formal training programs require resources. Informal
practices steal time from productive work. The cost of socialization is φ (n), and we assume the
following properties to make it well-defined:

Assumption 1. (Properties of φ) The cost of socialization function φ (n) is continuously differ-
entiable, strictly increasing, strictly convex, satisfies φ (0) = 0 and lim φ (n) = ∞.
                                                                           n↑1


Corporate culture and conflict
Corporate culture is a mixture of the majority’s personal cultural density g and the socialized
minority’s cultural density fˆ. The mixing weights is the measure of the two groups under the
employment decision:
                                                           g x̃ fˆ1−x̃
                                          σ (x̃, n, z) =               ,                              (3)
                                                                aσ
                 g x̃ fˆ1−x̃ dz is an integrating constant. The corporate culture σ is a function of both
             R
where aσ =
choice variables of a firm. When x̃ or n tend to 1, σ → g, making a firm’s corporate culture
exactly match the majority culture.
   The more the cultural density functions g and fˆ differ, the more the cultures of the majority
and socialized minority conflict. Corporate cultural conflict means the two groups place con-
trasting importance on the elements that make up the set Ψ. One group has customs, values,
or norms that put it at odds with the other group, creating a kind of cultural “clash” (Turner
(2005)). Perhaps the minority’s expectations which they consider common given their cultural
backgrounds are not met when interacting with the majority at the workplace (Grewe (2005)).
Or, technical language might be a major component of each group’s culture and the languages

                                                    11
are incompatible and difficult to remember across groups, such as code words between sales
people and engineers. (Cremer et al. (2007) nicely explore this issue.) Cultural conflict in this
case would involve significant and costly disruptions in communication.4
    One way to measure cultural conflict is to calculate the “distance” between the cultural
densities. A distance would capture the degree to which the two groups disagree on the elements
of culture each considers important. But that distance should account for the measures of the
majority and minority groups. Significant discrepancies between g and fˆ, for instance, would
create more cultural conflict if the minority share 1 − x̃ is larger. With this in mind, we measure
cultural conflict as the distance between a firm’s corporate culture σ and a corporate culture
that has no conflict. The only corporate culture in the model that has no conflict is the one that
coincides with the culture of the majority g. Such a corporate culture is achievable either with
full socialization (n = 1) or a complete majority (x̃ = 1).
    For the distance between densities, we use the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. Roughly
speaking, the KL divergence measures the information lost when one uses a different density
to approximate a reference density rather than using the reference itself. When using the
majority culture g as a reference density, the KL divergence is

                                    DKL (g||σ) = Eg [log g − log σ] ,
                                                 Z                   
                                                               g (z)
                                               = g (z) log              dz.
                                                               σ (z)

Notice the expectation is taken with respect to the g density because it is the reference density.
A KL divergence of 0 implies a firm can expect similar, if not the same, weighting under a firm’s
culture σ rather than a culture of all employees having culture g. The only possible corporate
culture with zero KL divergence is σ = g.
    The KL divergence is not a true distance function because it is not symmetric: it needs a
reference density. The environment here does not suggest an obvious reference. If g is used, the
measure is the average difference in weights that a conflict-free firm would expect if it thought
to change to culture σ, which bears some cultural conflict but also greater diversity. If σ is used
as the reference, the measure is the discrepancy a firm would expect if it completely socialized
the minority or hired only majority types and sacrificed diversity. Neither density is a “true”
one that is being approximated by the other.
    Instead, we measure cultural distance using the sum of the KL divergences when both g
and σ are references. The sum is a true statistical metric. Our distance measure is

                                  δ (x̃, n) = DKL conf (g||σ) + DKL (σ||g) .                                     (4)
   4
     An innovation of our approach to modeling corporate culture is focusing on differences between cultures rather
than choosing the components of any particular one. Many readers may differ on what they consider the correct
elements that distinguish a culture. What likely is less controversial is that one culture is different from another.
An apple may be difficult to define, but it is obviously not a cucumber.




                                                        12
The distance function δ captures the corporate cultural conflict at a firm. It measures the lack
of cohesion among employees. Along with diversity, cultural conflict will enter a firm’s decision
problem when it chooses the optimal employment x̃ and extent of socialization n. We turn to
firm profits next.
2.3   Firm profits
A firm will make an employment decision x̃ and a socialization decision n to maximize profits.
The cost of hiring will be wages paid to the two types of workers. A wage w is paid to the
majority, whereas a wage wm is paid to minority, making the total wage bill wx̃ + wm (1 − x̃) .
   The profit function of a firm is

                      π = A + ∆ (x̃) − δ (x̃, n) − φ (n) − wx̃ − wm (1 − x̃) ,

where diversity ∆ and cultural conflict δ are from (1) and (4), respectively, and A is a positive
constant that is large enough to ensure profits are non-negative even if diversity and conflict
are zero.
   Profits are increasing in diversity. There can be a number of reasons why. Variety of views,
backgrounds, or beliefs among employees can enhance the creative process that generates
ideas for improving firm productivity. Østergaard et al. (2011) find a positive relation between
diversity in education and gender and the likelihood of introducing a new product or service.
Diversity through a variety of opinions might also produce higher quality decisions and in turn
better financial performance. Richard (2000) finds that racial diversity increases return on
equity and productivity, as measured by net income per employee.
   Profits can also be decreasing in cultural conflict for a number of reasons. Conflict might
create animosity between groups and give one group a feeling of moral license to engage in
deviant behavior—such as shirking, free-riding, or theft (Kornblum (2011)). It might also make
members of one group feel isolated or listless, harming their productivity. Finally, if cultural
conflict is a sign of cultural weakness rather than strength, then firms with stronger corporate
cultures (less conflict) will have higher profits. Denison (1984) and Gordon and DiTomaso
(1992) measure cultural strength as the consistency of survey responses within a company and
find that greater strength is associated with better firm performance.
   Socialization is a way to reduce the cultural conflict within the firm and increase profits.
Among the socialization methods are formal training and orientation programs. Bartel (1994)
shows that firms which implemented new employee training programs saw significant increases
in labor productivity growth over a three year period. See also Klein and Weaver (2000) and
references therein on how orientation programs significantly increase the levels of employee
commitment, job involvement, and tenure at firms.




                                                13
2.4   Employees
A unit measure of majority and minority types can enter employment. Each bears a single
unit of labor available to supply inelastically. As an alternative to working, the majority and
minority can pursue outside options. The majority’s outside option is worth b in utility, whereas
the minority’s is worth bm . The utility of the majority and minority types, respectively, are



                                    U = w + x̃,                                                  (5)
                                  Um = wm + (1 − x̃) − v (n) .                                   (6)

Utility is increasing in consumption, which here is equal to the wage. Employees also have
preference for working with others of the same type, which is why the employee shares enter
as the second term in utility. The tendency to associate with others who are similar is called
homophily. We take this preference to arise from the similarity in culture among those in the
same group. That similarity raises utility by easing communication and encouraging working
relationships (see McPherson et al. (2001) and the references therein).
   The last component of preferences, v (n), comes from an employee’s feelings about the
socialization process. We adopt insights from anthropological theory by envisioning culture as
having a clear reason to exist: it “provid[es] principles for framing experience” (Frake (1980)),
sets instructions on how to “operate in a manner [that is] acceptable” (Goodenough (1957)),
gives the “machinery individuals and groups employ to orient themselves in a world otherwise
opaque...and make sense of the events through which [they] live” (Geertz (1973)). And finally,
culture not only informs a person about his or her own worldview, but also provides a “theory
of what [his or her] fellows know, believe, and mean, a theory of the code being followed, the
game being played” (Keesing (1974)).
   Using these perspectives on the role of culture, we argue that the personal cultures of
employees are important to them as individuals. So, when a minority employee enters a
workplace environment that involves socialization into a different culture (the majority’s), that
employee will have an emotional reaction, feeling either utility or disutility from the process.
We label v (n) the emotion function from the socialization. This component will have a powerful
influence on whether a variety of corporate cultures can exist simultaneously in the market.
For the moment, we only assume the following properties on the function v (n):
Assumption 2. (Emotion function properties) The emotion function is continuously differen-
tiable, and the value of a non-socialized employee is zero, making v (0) = 0.
   Under Assumption 2, the emotion function of those in the majority vanishes because
members of that group are not socialized. For that reason we exclude the function in the
majority utility in (5). Both types, however, have identical utility functions over consumption,
homophily, and socialization. It is just the minority who are actually socialized.
   We do not assign any further properties to the emotion function v (n) for now, but discuss

                                               14
some possibilities and their corresponding interpretations. If v (n) > 0 for all n, for instance,
minority employees have a strict distaste for socialization. They prefer not having to adjust
their values, norms, language, etc. to conform with those of the majority. Such a distaste could
grow at an increasing rate—making v (n) convex—which implies that minority employees find
it increasingly painful to deviate from their personal cultures.
    Alternatively, v (n) can be strictly negative for all n. In this other extreme, a minority
type actively wants to conform to the majority culture. To do so, he or she joins the firm for
the socialization. An example would be an aspiring flight attendant who eagerly wishes to
“live the Southwest way,” which emphasizes a “desire to excel...an ability to proactively serve
customers...[and] a fun-loving attitude” (Weber (2015)).
    Finally, v (n) may be highly non-linear and trace the emotional turbulence of enduring
a workplace environment that pressures one to change personal values or behaviors. For
instance, as n increases, a minority employee’s emotional path might follow something similar
to the Kübler-Ross model in Kübler-Ross (1969): (1) shock (v (n) increases sharply); (2) denial
(v (n) decreases); (3) anger (v (n) increases sharply); (4) bargaining (v (n) decreases); and
(5) depression (v (n) increases sharply). Figure (2) illustrates a possible form of v (n) that
follows this path, but also features an upward trend over n because of a general distaste for
socialization.

                               Figure 2: An Example Emotion Function




                 0               0.25                0.5               0.75                 1

Notes: The figure illustrates a possible form of the emotion function v (n). The labels represent the emotions an
employee is feeling at the corresponding extent of socialization n.




                                                       15
3    A Specific Example of Cultures
Having described the general problem of the firm, we solve it under a specific example of
cultures. The example leads to very tractable and transparent results, and along the way, we
discuss the underlying assumptions that come with its use.
    For both the majority and minority cultures, we use exponential distributions. The cultural
densities of the majority and minority, respectively, are

                                       g (z) = λe−λz ,                                       (7)
                                       f (z) = λm e−λm z ,                                   (8)

where λ 6= λm . The monotonically declining behavior of exponential densities permits a special
interpretation of the numerical values of z. Under these densities, cultural weighting increases
the fastest for lower values of z. We therefore can treat the weights associated lower values
of z as mappings to the values, traditions, language, norms, symbols, etc. a group considers
the most important on the margin. For instance, if the group were asked to list a “small” set
of elements (in the cardinality-sense) from Ω that carried the most weight in the culture, the
lowest values of z would map to this set.
    With this in mind, we can also relate the densities of the majority and minority group.
Figure 3 provides an illustration of majority cultural density g (z) with parameter λ and two
cultural densities f (z) for the minority. One minority culture has λm < λ, whereas the other
has λm > λ. When λm < λ, the minority cultural density f (z) < g (z) for lower values of z.
The minority treats as less important what matters most to the majority. For example, if the
majority considers punishing harassment most important, the minority does not. Alternatively,
if λ < λm , then f (z) > g (z) for lower values of z. This relation implies the minority puts
relatively more weight on the things the majority considers most important. In this case, the
minority considers punishing harassment relatively more important than the majority does.
The more interesting case is when λm < λ, so we make that assumption:

Assumption 3. (Relative majority-minority weighting) The minority puts relatively less weight
on what the majority considers most important in the majority’s culture, making λm < λ.

    By using the exponential form, we implicitly assume there exists a latent, common cultural
factor that determines a common general ordering of cultural elements among people in the
economy. For each group, the most important elements on the margin come “first” in the
support. Therefore, the majority and minority cannot be too vastly different in their personal
cultures. The two groups will only differ on the relative weights they put on each cultural
element. Finally, because every cultural element has positive weight under the exponential
density, only those cultural elements that carry some importance to each group, however large,
are part of the support.




                                               16
                               Figure 3: Exponential Cultural Densities




Notes: The cultural density of the majority g (z) is exponential with parameter λ. Two minority cultural densities
f (z) are displayed: one with parameter λm > λ, and the other with λm < λ.


3.1    Corporate culture and conflict
Applying the socialized minority function from (2) to exponential distributions gives

                                              1  −λz n            1−n
                                  fˆ (n, z) =    λe        λm e−λm z      .
                                              c

For this to be a density, the integrating constant must be

                                                      λn λ1−n
                                                          m
                                            c=                    .
                                                  nλ + (1 − n) λm

Substituting c and rearranging terms gives the socialized minority density:

                                               fˆ (n, z) = λ̂e−λ̂z ,

where λ̂ = nλ + (1 − n) λm . Using (3) gives the corporate culture:

                                              σ (x̃, n, z) = λ̄e−λ̄z ,




                                                        17
where λ̄ = x̃λ + (1 − x̃) λ̂. Applying (4), gives the corporate cultural conflict:
                                                            
                                            λ λ̄        λ̄ λ
                             δ (x̃, n) = log + − 1 + log + − 1
                                            λ̄ λ        λ λ̄
                                        λ̄ λ
                                       = + − 2.
                                        λ λ̄

   Although δ is a function of a firm’s choice of x̃ and n, we can analyze it as a function of λ̄,
which is a weighted average of the majority and minority cultural parameters λ and λm that
accounts for the two choice variables. We make the following remark about some properties of
the function when treated this way:

Remark. (Properties of corporate cultural conflict) For a fixed majority parameter λ, the
corporate cultural conflict function has the following properties:

  1. δ ≥ 0,
  2. δ is strictly convex in λ̄,
  3. min δ = 0,
       λ̄
  4. arg min δ = λ,
             λ̄
  5. lim δ = ∞, and lim δ = ∞.
      λ̄↓0              λ̄↑∞


Figure 4 illustrates the function δ for fixed λ and different values of λ̄. As a comparison, the
figure also overlays the quadratic function

                                                          θ2       2
                                           δ̂ (x̃, n) =      λ − λ̄ ,                              (9)
                                                          2

which is a 2nd-order Taylor approximation of δ around λ̄ = λ and where θ2 is a constant. The
quadratic δ̂ bears the same properties as δ that are mentioned in the remark, except the last.
                               λ2
For the quadratic, lim δ̂ =    2 .   A second key distinction is that the derivatives away from λ̄ = λ
                      λ̄↓0
are symmetric for δ̂ but asymmetric for δ. For δ̂, the derivative depends only on the distance
between λ̄ and λ and not on whether the derivative is taken from the left or the right of λ. This
implies that the distance between the cultural density g and corporate culture σ increases by
the same amount whether the minority puts more or less weight than the majority does on the
norms, values, customs, traditions, etc. the majority considers most important.
   For δ, the derivatives are asymmetric around λ. In fact, the derivative is larger for λ̄ < λ
than λ̄ > λ. Because λ̄ is a weighted average between the majority parameter λ and the
minority’s λm , this asymmetry implies that that cultural conflict increases faster when the
minority places less weight than the majority on the elements of culture that the majority
considers most important (λm < λ). Conflict increases at a slower pace when the minority puts
more weight on the things the majority considers most important (λm > λ) .


                                                          18
                               Figure 4: Corporate Cultural Conflict δ and δ̂




Notes: The figure plots both the exact corporate cultural conflict δ = λλ̄ + λλ̄ − 2 and its approximation
              2
δ̂ = 12 λ − λ̄ as a function of the weighted average λ̄ = x̃λ + (1 − x̃) λ̂, where λ̂ = nλ + (1 − n) λm .


    Because of the similarity between the quadratic δ̂ and δ, we use the simpler function δ̂ for
the rest of our analysis. This way the intuition of the results can be presented more clearly
without losing much. In Appendix B, we solve the firm problem using the exact corporate
cultural conflict δ and show that a key result–the complementarity between the minority share
and the extent of socialization–remains. As we explain below, that relation can generate a
variety of corporate cultures despite no starting differences between firms.
    Under the approximate corporate cultural conflict δ̂, the firm problem in the exponential
example of cultures is

Problem. (Firm problem, exponential cultures)

                                                θ2       2
                      max A + x̃ (1 − x̃) −        λ − λ̄ − φ (n) − wx̃ − wm (1 − x̃) .                      (10)
                      {x̃,n}                    2


4    A Single Firm
Suppose potential employees can work only at a single firm. The outside options to working are
fixed at b for majority types and bm for minority types. We define an equilibrium when there is
a single firm as the following:


                                                         19
Definition 3. (Equilibrium, single firm) When there is a single firm, an equilibrium is the
tuple E1 = {x̃, n, w, wm }, where x̃ ∈ 12 , 1 is a majority share and n ∈ [0, 1] is an extent of
                                             

socialization that together maximize firm profits in (10), and {w, wm } are the majority and
minority wages, respectively, that clear the majority and minority labor markets.
   Clearing of the labor markets requires both types of employees to be indifferent between
working and their outside options. Under the employee utility functions from (5)-(6), the two
indifference conditions are

                                     b = w + x̃,
                                   bm = wm + (1 − x̃) − v (n) .

Subtracting the two indifference conditions delivers the majority-minority wage gap:

                                 ω = (b − bm ) − (2x̃ − 1) − v (n) .                          (11)

We call the difference in outside options of the majority and minority (b − bm ) the outside option
gap. A larger outside option gap will increase the wage gap because the threat of exit is weaker
for the minority. So too will a larger minority share. The firm takes advantage of the desire
for homophily by offering a lower minority wage. Finally, if socialization is painful so that
v (n) > 0, the wage gap will decrease. The firm will have to offer monetary compensation to the
minority for enduring the socialization.
   Socialization might be so painful that a member of the minority would rather pursue the
outside option rather than work at all. So that the minority group still has an incentive to
become employed, we place the following restriction on the emotion function:
Assumption 4. (Emotion function bound, single firm) When there is a single firm, the emotion
function obeys the upper bound v (n) ≤ b − bm for all n.
   The higher is the outside option bm of the minority group, the tighter the bound. In
equilibrium, a fraction x̃ of the majority will work while the remaining fraction will pursue the
outside option. Similarly, a fraction 1 − x̃ of the minority will work and the remaining will take
their outside options.
4.1   Optimal corporate culture
The first order conditions of the firm problem in (10) with respect to x̃ and n are

                          θ2 (λ − λm )2 (1 − n)2 (1 − x̃) = ω + (2x̃ − 1) ,                   (12)
                          θ2 (λ − λm )2 (1 − n) (1 − x̃)2 = φ0 (n) .                          (13)

The left-hand-side of (12) is the marginal benefit of increasing the size of the majority. A larger
majority reduces cultural conflict. The marginal benefit is declining in x̃, but increasing in the
cultural distance between the majority and the minority (λ − λm )2 and the marginal cost of

                                                   20
cultural conflict θ2 . The term (λ − λm )2 can be considered the “quantity” of cultural conflict
between employees, whereas θ2 is its “price” in terms of lost profits. The marginal benefit is
also decreasing in the extent of socialization n. If the minority is already highly socialized to
match the majority culture, then the additional benefit of hiring a majority type to reduce
cultural conflict is diminished. The right-hand-side of (12) is the marginal cost of hiring more
of the majority type. The larger the wage gap ω, the more expensive the majority is relative to
the minority. A greater majority also decreases the diversity of the firm at rate (2x̃ − 1) .
   The left-hand-side of (13) is the marginal benefit of socialization. This marginal benefit
is declining in n, but increasing in the cultural distance and the share of the minority 1 − x̃.
The right-hand-side is the marginal cost of socialization φ0 , which we assume to be strictly
increasing.
4.2   Corporate cultural variety
The fact that the marginal benefit of socialization increases with the minority share implies that
the extent of socialization n and the minority share 1− x̃ are complements. The marginal benefit
of socialization is higher if the firm employs a larger minority share. This complementarity can
lead to an upward-sloping marginal benefit of socialization. Indeed, substituting (12) into (13)
and then inserting the wage gap from (11) gives

                                     (b − bm − v (n))2
                                                          = φ0 (n) .                              (14)
                                   θ2 (λ − λm )2 (1 − n)3

   The left-hand-side of (14) is the marginal benefit of socialization after taking into account
the optimal adjustment to the minority share 1 − x̃ and the movement in the wage gap ω that
makes the labor markets clear. For a given extent of socialization n obtained from (14), the
corresponding optimal minority share 1 − x̃ comes from rearranging (12):

                                                 b − bm − v (n)
                                   1 − x̃ =                         .                             (15)
                                              θ2 (λ− λm )2 (1 − n)2

   The optimal minority share is positive by Assumption 2. Examining (14), one can observe
that the marginal benefit of socialization is declining in the size of the cultural conflict (λ − λm )2
between the majority and minority. The reason is because a larger gap between the cultures
induces the majority to hire less of the minority, as seen in (15). In turn, the complementarity
between the minority share 1 − x̃ and n implies the marginal benefit of socialization decreases
precisely because the size of the minority at the firm is smaller. Similar logic applies to explain
why the marginal benefit is declining in the marginal cost of cultural conflict θ2 . Finally, the
marginal benefit of socialization is increasing in the outside option gap because the minority
wage will be lower, which leads the firm to hire minority types, raising the marginal benefit of
socialization.
   The emotion function v (n) also enters the left-hand-side of (14). The behavior of that
function is crucial to the properties of the marginal benefit of socialization. The function v (n)

                                                      21
can reinforce the complementarity between the minority share and the extent of socialization
by generating regions over n ∈ [0, 1] such that the marginal benefit is increasing in n. This
property permits the marginal benefit curve and the marginal cost curve to intersect more
than once. Multiple crossings implies the possibility of multiple solutions to the firm problem.
    Figures 5(a)-5(b) illustrate two possible shapes of the marginal benefit curve. The difference
between the two panels is the emotion function v (n). In Figure 5(a), the marginal benefit
crosses the marginal cost curve only once (n∗ ), whereas in Figure 5(b), it crosses multiple times.
In Figure 5(a), the v (n) we use increases everywhere, but at a decreasing rate. For values of n
less than n∗ , the marginal benefit of socialization exceeds the marginal cost, whereas it falls
below the marginal cost for values greater than n∗ . In this case, n∗ is the global optimal choice
of socialization.
    In Figure 5(b), the emotion function v (n) oscillates in a similar way to the example given in
Figure 2. That behavior generates the multiple crossings. At n∗ , the marginal benefit curve
crosses the marginal cost curve “from below,” making it a local minimum and suboptimal. On
the other hand, both n∗1 and n∗2 are local maxima because at those points, the marginal benefit
curve crosses the marginal cost curve “from above.” In the example, n∗2 is the global optimum
and the unique choice of socialization because the area B exceeds the area A.

                   Figure 5: Two Examples of the Optimal Extent of Socialization

                 (a) Single solution                                            (b) Multiple solutions




                                                                        2
                                                                 m −v(n))
Notes: The figures illustrate the marginal benefit curve θ2(b−b
                                                             (λ−λm )2 (1−n)3
                                                                             and the marginal cost curve φ0 (n) for two
                                                                  v
different emotion functions v (n). The first panel has v (n) = n with v ∈ (0, 1), whereas the second has
v (n) = α1 + α2 n + α3 sin (2πf n + ψ) with the parameters arranged so v (0) = 0. Neither emotion function is shown.
The first panel presents a case in which a single optimal solution n∗ exists, whereas the second presents one in
which a single local minimal solution exists (n∗ ) and two locally maximal solutions exist (n∗1 and n∗2 ). Only one local
maximal (n∗2 ) is the unique global solution because the area B exceeds the area A.


4.3    Corporate cultural variety equilibrium
Although we speak in this section of an equilibrium in which a single firm exists, we can
interpret the environment as a broader economy in which there are many segmented firms

                                                          22
that do not compete in the same labor markets. (For example, the firms may demand different
types of labor skills.) In this context, a diverse collection of corporate cultures can coexist in
the economy in equilibrium.
    Corporate cultural variety can exist in equilibrium if and only if the multiple solutions to
the firm’s problem are all global maxima. That way the firm will have no preference to choose
one corporate culture over another. All firms could coordinate on a single solution, but they may
not, leading to a variety of corporate cultures between firms despite no starting heterogeneity.
    To construct such an equilibrium, we first need to choose a free parameter in (14) that can
be adjusted to ensure all local maxima generate the same level of profits. The outside option
gap b − bm could do it. In that case, if the outside option gap was too small because the value of
the minority’s outside option was too large, hiring more minority types beyond a certain share
would be too expensive, rendering all but one corporate culture suboptimal. The same could
be said for an outside option gap that was too large: only a single corporate culture would be
optimal. The outside option gap would have to be at a certain value for multiplicity in corporate
cultures to be sustained in equilibrium.
    Alternatively, one could use the amount of cultural conflict (λ − λm )2 between the majority
and minority at the firm. Selecting that parameter poses an intriguing question: what amount
of cultural conflict between employees is enough for two otherwise identical firms to adopt
distinct corporate cultures? To simplify notation, let Λ ≡ (λ − λm )2 and define

                                                      (b − bm − v (n))2
                                         m (n, Λ) ≡                     .
                                                         θ2 Λ (1 − n)3

Using the example depicted in Figure 5(b), we illustrate the construction of an equilibrium
with corporate cultural variety in Figure 6. The panel displays m (n, Λ) for three values
Λ1 < Λ2 < Λ3 . The marginal benefit of socialization is clearly decreasing in Λ. Importantly, at
the quantity of cultural conflict Λ2 and extents of socialization n∗1 and n∗2 , the areas A and B
are equal, meaning the majority at the firm would be indifferent between choosing n∗1 and n∗2
because they generate the same level of profit. The optimal employment condition from (15)
then pins down the corresponding minority shares 1 − x̃1 and 1 − x̃2 .5
    The complementarity between the extent of socialization and the minority share implies
that two firms could be equally profitable with a corporate culture having more socialization
and a larger minority (n∗2 , 1−x∗2 ) or one with less socialization and a smaller minority (n∗1 , 1−x∗1 ).
Proposition 1 formalizes the existence of corporate cultural variety in equilibrium. As part of
the proposition, we also establish the relation in the minority shares between firms that make
different optimal choices of n.

Proposition 1. (Corporate cultural variety) If an equilibrium exists at cultural conflict Λ = Λ̊
   5
     Here is why the two areas must be equal for a firm to be indifferent: both n∗1 and n∗2 are local maxima, whereas
the value of n between n∗1 and n∗2 at which m crosses φ0 from below is a local minimum. The profit function decreases
as n moves away from n∗1 until n reaches the middle crossing point, after which profits begin increasing until n∗2 .
The two areas A and B must equal so that the “height” of the profit function at n∗1 and n∗2 is the same.


                                                        23
                         Figure 6: Corporate Cultural Variety in Equilibrium




Notes: When the amount of cultural conflict between the majority and minority Λ ≡ (λ − λm )2 reaches Λ2 , a firm
becomes indifferent between choosing n∗1 and n∗2 as the extent of socialization. In the illustration, Λ1 < Λ2 < Λ3 ,
and the areas A and B are equal. The emotion function of the minority is v (n) = α1 + α2 n + α3 sin (2πf n + ψ) with
the parameters arranged so v (0) = 0.


and constant parameters θ and b − bm , then such an equilibrium features corporate cultural
variety when there exists at least one n ∈ (0, 1) satisfying

                    2v 0 (n) (b − bm − v (n)) = θ2 Λ̊ (1 − n)2 3φ0 (n) − (1 − n) φ00 (n) .
                                                                                        
                                                                                                               (16)

In this kind of equilibrium, there exist at least two tuples {n∗i , 1 − x̃∗i } , i ≥ 2, between which a
firm is indifferent. Among the tuples, if n∗i > n∗j , then 1 − x̃∗i > 1 − x̃∗j for i 6= j.

    The proposition places a condition on the relation between the emotion function and the
marginal cost of socialization (and their derivatives) that must be satisfied for a variety of
corporate cultures to exist in equilibrium. In the example of Figure 6, corporate cultural variety
exists when the cultural differences between the minority and majority groups are not too
small or too large so that (16) is met. At extreme values of Λ, a unique corporate culture will
be optimal. Too small a cultural gap and the majority at any firm would do best to hire a larger
group of minority and engage in more socialization over all other choices. That case would
be similar to Λ = Λ1 and n∗2 in the figure. On the other hand, too large a cultural gap (as in
Λ = Λ3 in the figure) would lead the majority everywhere to hire more of itself and forego much
socialization: if the world were made up of only MBAs and Visigoths, the MBAs would rather


                                                        24
hire themselves than trouble with socialization.
    When the cultural gap is not extreme, a variety of corporate cultures arise because the
complementarity between the choices of n and 1 − x̃ makes the firm problem non-convex. That
non-convexity, along with the shape of v (n), opens the possibility for multiple optimal corporate
cultures. Identical firms with the same technology, information, and profit functions would
choose different corporate cultures featuring different levels of diversity and socialization in
equilibrium. Importantly, the wage gaps at the firms would differ as well. 6                       ,7


4.4     Equilibrium wage gap
Substituting the optimal minority share from (15) into (11) expresses the wage gap solely as
a function of the firm’s choice of n. For an optimal extent of socialization n∗ , the equilibrium
wage gap is                                                                            
                           ∗                      ∗           2
                      ω (n ) = (b − bm − v (n )) 1 +                                        − 1.                 (17)
                                                     θ (λ − λm )2 (1 − n∗ )2
                                                      2

An interesting feature of (17) is that the wage gap could be negative, meaning the firm pays
the members of the minority relatively more than the majority, which can be a sign of minority
power. A minority group’s credible threat to exit from either a strong outside option bm or
severe disutility from socialization could turn the wage gap negative in order to entice the
minority to stay.
    Figures 7(a)-7(b) display how the wage gap varies with a firm’s choice of n when the emotion
functions are the same as those used in Figures 5(a) and 6. The emotion function v (n) used in
the first panel is increasing and concave, whereas the wage gap is everywhere positive, but
U-shaped, similar to the behavior of the marginal benefit curve of socialization. The emotion
function for the second panel oscillates and reaches it peak near n∗2 . The wage gap curve in turn
is U-shaped, but turns negative. At both optimal choices of socialization, the minority earns
more than the majority. When the extent of socialization at the higher level n∗2 , the minority is
paid significantly more. Members of the minority must be compensated sufficiently enough to
retain them at the firm despite their distaste for that high degree of socialization.
    An examination of (17) gives insight into the behavior of the wage gap under different
extents of socialization and corporate cultures more generally. On the one hand, the comple-
mentarity between socialization and the minority share suggests that if a firm chooses to
socialize members of the minority more, it would hire more of them. That in turn would imply
the minority is paid relatively less (generating a larger wage gap) because the minority at that
firm is compensated with greater homophily. But the exact relation between the wage gap and
the choice of n will depend on how that complementarity compares to the minority member’s
    6
      Introducing non-convexity into the cost of socialization function φ would create an additional source of multiple
corporate cultures. But the interpretation would be distinct from the one we focus on, which arises from the
complementarity between n and 1 − x̃, as well as the shape of v (n) .
    7
      Gârleanu et al. (2015) also feature a non-convex optimization problem, but in the portfolio problem of investors.
There, a complementarity between participation across markets and leverage generates multiple optimal portfolio
choices for otherwise identical investors.



                                                          25
Figure 7: Two Examples of the Relation between the Wage Gap and the Extent of Socialization

                 (a) Single solution
                                                                                       (b) Multiple solutions




Notes: The figures illustrate the equilibrium wage gap from (17) as a function of a firm’s choice of n. The first panel
uses the emotion function v (n) = nv with v ∈ (0, 1), whereas the second uses v (n) = α1 + α2 n + α3 sin (2πf n + ψ)
with the parameters arranged so v (0) = 0. The optimal choices of n under the two emotion functions are marked,
just as in Figures 5(a) and 6.


emotions from undergoing more socialization. Lemma 1 presents the conditions that determine
the relation between the wage gap and corporate culture.

Lemma 1. (Wage gaps across corporate cultures) A firm that socializes its minority more in its
corporate culture will also feature a higher wage gap if

                                                         v (n∗1 )                v (n∗2 )
                              v (n∗2 ) − v (n∗1 ) <   θ2
                                                                          −   θ2
                                                                                                  ,
                                                      2 Λ (1   − n∗1 )2       2 Λ (1   − n∗2 )2

where n∗1 < n∗2 are two optimal choices of n.

    So far we have only studied the case of a single firm. Options for employment were limited
and alternatives to working were fixed. We turn next to a setting in which a single incumbent
firm operates within an industry, but the incumbent faces the threat of entry from a newcomer.
This richer environment allows us to study whether one corporate culture can drive out another
in the marketplace without intervention from an external authority.

5    Firms and Social Progress
In many ways, corporate culture echoes society’s culture. The civil rights and “Me Too” move-
ments discussed earlier are examples of corporate cultures adapting to social progress, whether
voluntarily or forcefully through government legislation. Another example is the movement in
the U.S. for protected family medical leave while employed.
    Beginning in the mid-1980s, as an increasing number of women were entering the work-
place, a variety of voices called for generous leave policies during pregnancy, after the birth of


                                                           26
a child, or for personal or family illness. Some of the proponents were clinical experts, social
science researchers (Fried (1998)), constituency groups such as the National Partnership for
Women & Families, the Children’s Defense Fund, AARP, the American Academy of Pediatrics,
the Catholic Conference, and even companies such as Ben & Jerry’s, Stride-Rite, and Fel-Pro
(Lenhoff and Bell (2002)).
   Ultimately, Congress passed the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), which
entitled eligible employees for up to twelve weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave for qualified
family and medical reasons (United States Department of Labor (2018)). Before that, only
a quarter to one-third of leave policies at firms offered as many protections as the FMLA
required, with many voluntary policies omitting authorized leave to care for newborns, or a
gravely ill parent, child, or spouse (Commission on Family and Medical Leave (1996)). With
the passage of the FMLA, the notion of a “work-life” balance for employees broadly entered
corporate cultures (Fried (1998); Hoch (2013); Glynn (2013)).
5.1   Competition between corporate cultures
When society witnesses a cultural advancement, one might ask: can that progress spread to
the corporate cultures in industry by competition, or must the government intervene? Indeed,
companies often use their contrasting corporate cultures to compete.
   For instance, the ride-hailing firm Lyft saw its competitor Uber’s myriad scandals, including
accusations of widespread sexual harassment and gender discrimination, as an opportunity to
position itself as a more ethical alternative. The head of brand strategy at Lyft, Gina Ma, said,
“diversity and inclusivity are key to the Lyft mission.” That proclaimed corporate culture is a
sharp contrast to Uber’s “always be hustlin’,” win-at-all-cost corporate culture, where “you can
never get ahead unless someone else dies” (Solon (2017)).
   Uber’s difficulties helped increase Lyft’s customer base (Wong (2017)). By July 2018, the
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission had put Uber under investigation over the
accusations against the company of gender discrimination, adding to the long list of federal
investigations into the company’s practices (Kuchler and Bond (2018)).
   Dating app Bumble is another example of two firms competing over corporate cultures.
Whitney Wolfe Herd had co-founded Tinder—another online dating app—but left and sued
Tinder for sexual harassment. She started Bumble as a women-led company and the “first
feminist dating app” where women make the initial move (Alter (2015), Yashari (2015)). The
company was created in part to compete against the male-focused and overly sexualized Tinder.
In mid-2017, Bumble rejected a buyout offer by Tinder’s parent company and was valued at
well over $1 billion (O’Connor (2017), Wagner (2018)).
   To study the propagation of social progress to the marketplace, we introduce an environment
in which an incumbent firm operates in a sector or industry that another firm considers
entering. While we speak of firms, they stand for competing corporate cultures. The incumbent
represents the prevailing, regressive corporate culture prior to some progressive social change.
The incumbent could be the corporate culture that is common among many firms within

                                               27
an industry or the corporate culture of a single firm that dominates an industry. A crucial
distinction of this incumbent is that it defies adopting any aspect of the social progress.
   A potential entrant, on the other hand, exemplifies the social progress. It incorporates into
its operations the change that has come to society. It could be a start-up firm, but it need not
be. The potential entrant may be as old and as large as the incumbent, but simply advances its
corporate culture in a way the incumbent does not. While society can progress in a number of
ways, the social change we focus on is the acceptable manner in which a minority is treated in
a workplace.
5.2   An incumbent and entrant
Let i denote the incumbent and e the entrant. Both are managed by members of the majority
who make employment and socialization decisions. Just as in the previous section, majority
employees have personal cultural density g from (7), whereas minority employees have f from
(8). The incumbent and entrant engage in Stackelberg competition (von Stackelberg (1952)).
The incumbent selects its corporate culture (choosing ni and x̃i ) first, and the entrant follows
sequentially by choosing {ne , x̃e }, as well as making its entry decision. The profit functions of
the two firms are identical and the same as the profit function expressed in Problem 10 from
the previous section.
   Though sharing the same profit function, the incumbent and entrant will differ in their
flexibility to adjust wages and their treatments of the minority. Whereas the entrant allows
its wage gap ωe to respond to competition in the majority and minority labor markets, the
incumbent does not. The incumbent pegs its wage gap to ωi and does not let it adjust in
response to any strategy of the entrant. The entrant must allow its wage gap to be flexible in
order to have a chance at entering.
   We interpret this inflexible behavior of the incumbent as a stubbornness to change majority-
minority pay differences despite outside pressure from the market in the form of a threat of a
competitor’s entry. The incumbent is hard-nosed precisely because the market pressure arises
from social change. In the face of progress, the incumbent clings to an antiquated view of what
it believes to be the correct wage gap. Sticking to its wage gap ωi is an endowed feature of the
incumbent and partly defines it.
   The incumbent also differs from the entrant in how it treats members of the minority when
socializing them. Both the incumbent and the entrant have an interest in reducing cultural
conflict, which requires some degree of socialization. From here on we assume the socialization
process for the minority is painful, captured by an emotion function v (n) > 0 for all n. The
social progress we consider is the entrant making the socialization process less painful for the
minority. This change is in contrast to the incumbent’s attitude, who makes no advancement
from its now obsolete view on minority treatment.
   One example of this kind of social progress is a firm installing private rooms for female
employees to nurse a newborn rather than preventing them from doing so at work entirely. A
policy of this kind may be imperfect, so we do not force v (n) to be zero at the entrant. The firm,

                                                28
for instance, may still limit the use of the rooms to only early hours or at times certain clients
are not present. Another example is asking an employee to cover his or her dreadlocks in front
of customers rather than demanding the dreadlocks be cut in order to stay at the firm. A final
example is requesting an employee to wear only darker colored hijabs rather than banning
the head covering altogether. Progress in the workplace is an improvement but may remain
incomplete.
   So let vi (n) be the emotion function of an employee at the incumbent, and ve (n) the emotion
function at the entrant. By distinguishing the two functions, we presume that employees have
state-dependent disutility from socialization. The “state” in this case is the firm where an
employee works. We model the entrant incorporating the social progress into its business with
the following assumption:

Assumption 5. (Emotion functions, Stackelberg game) In the Stackelberg game, the emotion
functions of employees at the incumbent and the entrant are continuous, strictly increasing,
strictly convex, and for each n ∈ (0, 1] , satisfy 0 < ve (n) < vi (n).

5.3   Employee utility
The outside option for employees is to leave the incumbent and join the entrant. They can
freely do so because labor is perfectly mobile between the two firms. A single friction, however,
dissuades the minority from leaving the incumbent. That friction is a utility cost κ > 0 to
exiting that creates a preference of the minority to stay with the incumbent corporate culture.
The indifference conditions for the majority and minority are

                                       wi + x̃i = we + x̃e ,                                 (18)
                       wi,m + 1 − x̃i − vi (ni ) = we,m + 1 − x̃e − ve (ne ) − κ.            (19)

The left-hand-side of (18) is the majority’s utility from working at the incumbent, whereas the
right-hand-side is the utility from joining the entrant. For the minority, the left-hand-side of
(19) is the utility from working at the incumbent, whereas the right-hand-side is that from
exiting for the entrant.
   The utility cost κ stands broadly for any kind of switching cost for the minority to give up
work at the incumbent and join the entrant. Up until the moment of social progress and the
emergence of a potential entrant, the minority has felt its treatment at the workplace under
the incumbent corporate culture. The entrant embodies a less painful socialization experience,
but members of the minority might be uninformed of that assertion, distrust it, or perceive
themselves undeserving of that better environment.
   The cost might also be general monetary expenses of transitioning to a new place of
employment. It may be a status quo bias (a preference for the current state of affairs), or loss
aversion (Kahneman et al. (1991); Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1998)). It could be a consequence
of the mere-exposure effect that makes the incumbent more familiar and preferable (Zajonc


                                                  29
(1968); Bornstein (1989)). It could also be a psychological cost to leaving because working at
the incumbent firm and undergoing the socialization there has entered the minority’s identity
(Cote and Levine (2002); Weinreich (2003); Akerlof and Kranton (2005)). The bias need only
give preference to the minority to remain with the incumbent rather than depart for the
entrant.
5.4    Equilibrium
Our notion of an equilibrium to the Stackelberg competition game between the incumbent and
entrant is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. The decisions of the two firms are sequential:
the incumbent chooses its corporate culture, which the entrant observes. Then the entrant
chooses its corporate culture and decides whether to enter. Information is perfect and complete,
and strategies are common knowledge. The definition of the equilibrium is the following:

Definition 4. (Equilibrium, incumbent and entrant) When an incumbent and entrant engage
in Stackelberg competition, an equilibrium is an entry decision by the entrant and a tuple
E2 = {x̃i , ni , x̃e , ne , ωe }, where {x̃i , ni } and {x̃e , ne } are Nash equilibrium strategies for the
incumbent and entrant, respectively, in every subgame, and where ωe ≡ we − we,m is the
majority wage gap of the entrant that clears the majority and minority labor markets (i.e.,
satisfy (18) and (19)) when the incumbent has wage gap ωi = wi − wi,m . The entry decision is
either to enter or not. In equilibrium, only the firm earning the highest profits operates in the
market.

    Should the potential entrant decide to enter, that entry is costless. However, as part of our
equilibrium, entry is Nash if and only if maximal profits of the entrant, given the strategy of
the incumbent, meet or exceed that of the incumbent. It is not enough for the entrant simply to
earn maximal profits that are positive. The entrant will not enter the market in equilibrium if
it earns less than the incumbent. To displace the incumbent and operate alone, the entrant
must earn even more.
    Our notion of entry, then, is stricter than another firm starting operations in the industry
beside the incumbent simply because entry is profitable. Entry in equilibrium means the
entrant earns at least as much as the incumbent, and if it earns more, the entrant drives out
the incumbent from the market. Any exit by the incumbent normally would take time, so we
consider exit, if it were to occur, to take place over the longer run. 8
    Because the two firms represent competing corporate cultures, the incumbent’s exit need
not represent a business shutting down. What exit truly means here is corporate cultural
progress: the supplanting of an antiquated corporate culture by a new one that reflects the
social progress of the time. The incumbent’s exit is the same as changing its corporate culture
to reflect the social progress. We presume that such an event can occur in the marketplace only
   8
    There are many reasons why the most profitable firm will succeed in the marketplace rather than all those
making strictly positive profits. Financial capital may flow over time only to the most profitable. Or, customers
may eventually flock to the most profitable firm because of its perceived stability, and over time, the firm can build
enough capacity to accommodate all the demand.


                                                         30
if the new corporate culture is more profitable than the previous. If the entrant is unsuccessful,
it means the more progressive corporate culture could not permeate the market independently.
Some kind of external intervention, such as government legislation, would be necessary to
impose widespread adoption among firms.
5.5     Firm strategies
We derive the equilibrium using backward induction. The entrant solves its problem taking
as given an arbitrary choice of the incumbent {x̃i , ni } . The incumbent then decides its best
response after observing the decisions {x̃e , ne } of the entrant.
      The optimality conditions for the two firms are virtually identical to (12) and (13) from the
single-firm case in the previous section. The only change reflects the outside options of the
employees now being an exit to another firm rather than some fixed value. Subtracting the
minority indifference condition in (19) from the majority’s in (18) gives

                        ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) = ωe + (2x̃e − 1) + ve (ne ) + κ.           (20)

From (20), the entrant’s best response as implicit functions of the incumbent’s strategy are

                          (ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) − ve (ne ) − κ)2
                                                2           3          = φ0 (ne ) ,            (21)
                                     2
                                   θ (λ − λm ) (1 − ne )
                             ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) − ve (ne ) − κ
                                                                       = 1 − x̃e .             (22)
                                     θ2 (λ − λm )2 (1 − ne )2

      Examining the left-hand-side of (21), one can see that the marginal benefit to socialization
for the entrant is increasing in the incumbent’s wage gap, majority share, and extent of
socialization (because vi (n) is increasing in n). The intuition here is that an increase to any of
these three objects makes staying at the incumbent less attractive. A weaker outside option to
joining the entrant raises the incentive of the entrant to socialize the minority more.
      This relation implies that the socialization decisions of the two firms are strategic comple-
ments. When the incumbent socializes more, the entrant has an incentive to do the same. It
is true that the entrant embodies the social progress by lowering the pain from socialization.
But it also wants to maximize profits. If the entrant observes the incumbent socializing the
minority to a greater extent, it too will want to socialize more, but it would do so in a way to
create less disutility for the minority.
      Equation (22) is the entrant’s minority share. Similar to its socialization decision, the
entrant wants to hire more members of the minority when their outside options are weaker.
More socialization at the incumbent, a lower sense of homophily there, and a weaker bias all
encourage the entrant to hire more minority.
      We now consider the incumbent’s best response (x̃i , ni ), which will be a function of the
entrant’s strategy. The optimality conditions that determine the best response of the incumbent
are


                                                    31
                            (ωe + (2x̃e − 1) + ve (ne ) − vi (ni ) + κ)2
                                                                         = φ0 (ni ) ,                         (23)
                                     θ2 (λ − λm )2 (1 − ni )3
                               ωe + (2x̃e − 1) + ve (ne ) − vi (ni ) + κ
                                                                         = 1 − x̃i .                          (24)
                                       θ2 (λ − λm )2 (1 − ni )2

Again, the marginal benefit of socialization increases when the outside option of the minority
is weaker. It also increases when the bias is more powerful (higher κ) because a higher utility
cost from leaving compels the minority to stay with the incumbent, which encourages the
incumbent to socialize them more. Finally, a larger bias emboldens the incumbent to hire more
minority because they are less likely to leave.
5.6    Discussion of the game
Classical games of competitive entry (e.g., von Stackelberg (1952); Spence (1977, 1979); Dixit
(1979, 1980)) typically involve the first mover making an irreversible decision that raises a
barrier to entry. For example, as in Dixit (1980), an incumbent may choose in the first period
a capacity level of output that cannot be reduced. The incumbent can expand capacity in the
second period, but the per-unit cost of production is cheaper when output stays within that
initial capacity. If another firm threatens entry, the incumbent can gain by investing in more
starting capacity than it otherwise would if it were a pure monopolist. That first period decision
allows the incumbent to credibly commit to a high level of production, which deters another
firm from entering the market because doing so is no longer profitable.
    In the competition here between corporate cultures, neither firm’s choice of x̃ or n directly
enters the profit function of the other firm, so the strategic interaction between the incumbent
and entrant is not direct.9 The incumbent influences the profit of the entrant only indirectly
via the labor decisions of the majority and minority. This single avenue of interaction and the
power of an employee to freely exit a firm undermine any commitment value of the incumbent’s
employment decision. The incumbent cannot physically restrain its employees from leaving so
as to make its choice of x̃ irreversible. Indeed, with the presence of only the indirect interaction,
one can show that the solution to this Stackelberg game will match that of a simultaneous-move
game between the incumbent and entrant.
    This is not to say that the incumbent has no “first-mover advantage.” Its association with
the societal culture prior to the social progress makes the incumbent the prevailing corporate
culture, which the minority has a bias to stay with. Most importantly, though, the incumbent
pegs its wage gap ωi , to which the potential entrant needs to respond to in order to compete.
The incumbent’s stubbornness to change its wage gap, despite the threat of entry, becomes
its commitment. When we provide explicit solutions below, we show that this inflexibility can
either insulate the incumbent from exit or foreshadow its downfall.
   9
    Mathematically, ∂∂π      i
                           x̃e
                               = 0 and ∂n∂πi
                                           e
                                             = 0. The decisions of the two firms are strategic complements, however,
           ∂πi                 ∂πi
because ∂ x̃i ∂ x̃e > 0 and ∂ni ∂ne > 0 for the incumbent, and likewise for the entrant.


                                                        32
   A final comment about the game is that the minority’s bias κ to remain with the incumbent
is necessary for the incumbent to have a chance at surviving. The less pain from socialization
the entrant inflicts on minority employees gives it a competitive advantage in the minority
labor market. To push out the incumbent, the entrant could simply mimic the incumbent’s
strategy and force the incumbent to raise its minority wage to retain its minority labor. Having
an identical policy but a higher minority wage, the incumbent would earn lower profits than
the entrant and be displaced. A positive bias κ > 0 is a counterweight to the entrant’s natural
advantage.
5.7     Solving the game
To obtain explicit solutions to the game, we assume the following functions for the cost of
socialization (common to the two firms), and the two emotion functions:

                                            φ2
                                                            
                                                      1
                                    φ (n) =                −1 ,
                                            2     (1 − n)2
                                                            
                                                     1
                                   vk (n) = vk             −1 ,
                                                 (1 − n)2

for k ∈ {i, e} and ve < vi . Note that our choice for φ (n) obeys Assumption 2 and vk (n) obeys
Assumption 5. These functions will guarantee a unique equilibrium to the game. Because the
outside options of employees is to join the other firm rather than obtain amounts b and bm , as
in the previous section, we impose one other assumption on the parameters in order to regulate
the firm solutions to remain within the bounds:
                                  h                      n                                     o
                                      2φ      κ+vi                         2φ          κ+vi −ve
Assumption 6. The interval I ≡ θ(λ−λ     m)    vi    , min  1, vvei +   θ(λ−λm )         vi             has posi-
tive measure and 1 − φθ (λ − λm ) + ωi ∈ I.

   We solve the game in four steps. First, we determine the best response of the entrant
while restricting the majority and minority labor markets from clearing (i.e., holding ωe fixed).
Second, we solve for the incumbent’s best response, which will account for the entrant’s strategy.
Third, we allow labor market clearing to express the firm strategies in terms of exogenous
objects. Fourth, and finally, we give the conditions in which the entrant can push out the
incumbent, giving the complete solution to the game.
5.7.1    Best responses prior to labor market clearing
Applying the specified functions for φ and vk to the entrant’s best response in (21) and (22)
provides the entrant’s explicit strategy, prior to the labor markets clearing. We present that
result in Lemma 2.

Lemma 2. (Entrant best response, fixed wage gaps) The entrant’s best response to the incum-




                                                 33
bent’s strategy (x̃i , ni ) before the majority and minority markets clear is
                                 r
                                                            ve
                      ne = 1 −                                                        ,
                                   ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) + ve − κ − φθ (λ − λm )
                            φ (ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) + ve − κ − φθ (λ − λm ))
                  1 − x̃e =                                                        .
                                                 ve θ (λ − λm )

   The entrant’s choice of socialization can be interpreted as a discount from full socialization.
The entrant socializes the minority less when socialization pains the minority more (higher
ve ) and when the minority has a larger bias to stay with the incumbent (higher κ). It also
socializes less when the cost of socialization is higher (higher φ) and when the personal
cultural conflict between the majority and minority (λ − λm ) is greater. More conflict also
encourages the entrant to hire fewer minority types. Finally, a lower incumbent wage gap ωi ,
greater homophily at the incumbent 1 − x̃i , and less painful incumbent socialization vi (ni ) all
discourage the minority to leave the incumbent. All three factors discourage the entrant from
both socialization and hiring more minority.
   We derive the incumbent’s strategy by inserting the explicit functions for φ and vk into the
incumbent’s best response in (23) and (24). That best response is given in Lemma 3.

Lemma 3. (Incumbent best response, fixed wage gaps) The incumbent’s best response to the
entrant’s strategy (x̃e , ne ) in Lemma 2 is
                                       √        s
                                           φ                        R
                       ni = 1 − p                                                     ,
                                    θ (λ − λm )     2 (ve θ (λ − λm ) − φ) + (S + T )
                                 2 (vi θ (λ − λm ) − φ) − (S + T )
                   1 − x̃i = 1 −                                   ,
                                                  R

where

                      R ≡ 2θ (vi + ve ) (λ − λm ) − 4φ,
                      S ≡ 2φ (vi − ve − ωi + κ) ,
                      T ≡ θ (λ − λm ) 2φ2 + ve (ωi + ωe ) − 2φve θ (λ − λm ) .
                                                                            



   The presence of a new, more progressive corporate culture compels the incumbent culture
to modify in order to defend itself from displacement. The incumbent adjusts its corporate
culture to respond when it otherwise would change nothing if no threat of entry existed. In this
sense, social progress can affect the prevailing corporate culture even if that progress cannot
entirely replace it. The entrant pressures the incumbent through its less painful treatment of
the minority ve and its wage gap ωe . The entrant’s wage gap, though, must also clear the labor
markets, which we turn to next.




                                                    34
5.7.2   Labor market clearing
The incumbent responds to the entrant’s wage gap ωe , which the incumbent knows will be
determined in equilibrium by the indifference of both the majority and minority employees
to work at either firm. The entrant’s wage gap will be determined explicitly by the market
clearing condition (20).
   Substituting (20) into the incumbent’s best response in Lemma 3, and then inserting those
solutions into the entrant’s best response in Lemma 2 delivers the optimal strategies entirely
in terms of exogenous objects. Proposition 2 has the results.

Proposition 2. (Best responses, labor markets clearing) The optimal strategies of the incum-
bent, allowing the labor markets to clear, are

                                                1
                                   1 − x̃∗i =     (1 − φθ (λ − λm ) + ωi ) ,
                                                2 s
                                                              φ
                                       n∗i = 1 −                             ,
                                                      θ (λ − λm ) (1 − x̃i )

whereas the optimal strategies of the entrant are
                                                                                               
                           vi
                           1                                 2φ                    κ + vi − ve
              1−  x̃∗e   =    (1 − φθ (λ − λm ) + ωi ) −                                              ,
                           2
                           ve                            θ (λ − λm )                   ve
                           s
                                       φ
                 n∗e = 1 −                           .
                              θ (λ − λm ) (1 − x̃e )


   The first thing to notice is that the equilibrium best responses of the incumbent and entrant
are quite similar. What tends to increase minority hiring at the incumbent does so at the
entrant as well. The same came be said when comparing the socialization strategies of the two
firms. The relation reveals the strategic complementarity in the best responses.
   For example, a higher wage gap ωi at the incumbent implies that minority labor is relatively
less expensive, so the incumbent wants to hire more of that type. For the entrant, a higher
ωi has the same effect in encouraging more minority hiring. We will see below that the wage
gap for the entrant ωe that clears the labor markets will depend on the incumbent’s wage
gap ωi . If the incumbent pegs to a larger wage gap, the entrant must follow suit in order to
attract majority employees. But minority pay then becomes relatively low, which encourages
the entrant to hire more minority. At the same time, a larger wage gap compels the entrant to
hire more minority in order to compensate them with greater sense of homophily.
   The central distinction between the incumbent and entrant strategies is that the entrant
                                                                            vi
accounts for the bias κ and its relative pain from socialization            ve ,   whereas the incumbent does
not. The incumbent does not even account for its own socialization pain vi when choosing its
socialization policy. The entrant, on the other hand, will reduce its extent of socialization the
more painful the process is for its minority and the larger is the bias.


                                                       35
   Why does the incumbent effectively ignore these two components? To answer this question,
it is useful to examine the incumbent’s optimal policy if it faced no threat of entry. Similar to
the single-firm environment of the previous section, suppose majority and minority employees
could not leave for another firm, but had fixed outside options b and bm . The incumbent’s
employment and socialization decisions would be

                                       φ (b − bm + vi + κ − φθ (λ − λm ))
                           1 − x̃i =                                      ,
                                                   vi θ (λ − λm )
                                           r
                                                              vi
                                  ni = 1 −                                   .
                                              b − bm + vi + κ − φθ (λ − λm )

Here, the incumbent does consider both κ and vi in its choices: a larger bias to work at the firm
lets the incumbent socialize the minority more without risk of losing those employees, but a
more painful socialization compels the incumbent to relax the extent of it.
   When facing no other firm’s competition, the incumbent accounts for both the bias and the
pain of socialization, but once the threat of entry arises, the incumbent stops. The reason is the
change in the employee outside options after a new corporate culture emerges. When alone, the
incumbent only competes against the alternatives to working, whose values are fixed. Those
outside options effectively anchor the incumbent’s strategies, forcing the incumbent to respond
to them and internalize both κ and vi .
   However, when another firm attempts to enter the market, the outside options of the
employees no longer stay fixed, but adjust to the strategy of the new firm. As the first mover,
the incumbent knows that any entrant’s strategy must respond to the incumbent’s choices.
So the incumbent now becomes the anchor of competition to which the outside options must
respond, rather than the other way around. In its best response, the incumbent does not need
to internalize the bias or the pain it inflicts on the minority through socialization because it
knows the entrant will instead.
   Having the best responses, we can also examine how the minority’s pain from socialization
compares while working at each firm. Substituting each firm’s socialization strategy into the
emotion function gives
                                                                                    
                                             θ (λ − λm )
                      vi (n∗i )   = vi                   (1 − φθ (λ − λm ) + ωi ) − 1 ,
                                                 2φ
                      ve (n∗e ) = vi (n∗i ) − κ.

   Unequivocally, the minority will bear less pain from socialization at the entrant than at the
incumbent. In this sense, the entrant embodies the social progress of the time: it makes the
socialization process less painful for the minority, in contrast to the incumbent. The amount
by which the entrant reduces the pain from socialization depends entirely on the bias κ. The
greater bias to stick with the prevailing environment, the more the entrant must reduce the
pain from socialization to encourage the minority to leave that environment behind.


                                                         36
   The entrant is the means by which progress in society can penetrate corporate culture. Al-
though the economy is static, we discussed in the definition of the equilibrium that successfully
expelling a prevailing corporate culture in reality takes time. Corporate cultural advancement
in this economy, therefore, can be thought of as occurring over a period in which the entrant
may eventually push out the incumbent.
   In equilibrium, the entrant anchors its minority’s emotion function at the value of the
incumbent’s. From that position, the entrant reduces the socialization pain by the amount
of the bias in an effort to displace the dominate corporate culture. If one envisions such a
displacement as a process, where vi (n∗i ) is the past “state” and ve (n∗e ) is today’s “state,” the
relation between vi (n∗i ) and ve (n∗e ) above reveals the process to be Markovian. Corporate
cultures advance to reflect society’s progress in a way that depends only on the current state.
Improvement is based on how good or bad things are currently rather than over history. And if
the improvement comes, the size of that change (κ) depends solely on how strong the resistance
was to it.
5.7.3   Wage gaps within and between firms
We can express the entrant’s equilibrium wage gap by substituting the best responses in
Proposition 2 into the market clearing condition (20):
                                                                                                            
                        vi                                     vi − ve               2φ            κ + vi − ve
             ωe =                ωi + (1 − φθ (λ − λm ))                     −                                       .   (25)
                        ve                                        ve             θ (λ − λm )           ve

The market clearing wage gap for the entrant adjusts around the incumbent’s fixed wage gap
ωi . If the incumbent has a larger wage gap, the entrant must increase its wage gap to appeal
to majority employees and clear the labor markets. If the pain from socialization vi is larger
at the incumbent, the entrant can get away with a larger wage gap because the minority’s
outside option is weaker. However, if the bias to remain with the incumbent κ is greater, the
entrant’s wage gap must fall in equilibrium in order to entice the minority to exit and join the
new corporate culture.
   So far we have examined the pay differences between majority and minority employees at
the same firm. We can label ωi and ωe the “within-firm” wage gaps. Alternatively, we can also
study the wage gaps of the same type of employee between firms. The “between-firm” wage gaps
for the majority and minority, respectively, are determined using the majority and minority
indifference conditions in (18) and (19). Those wage gaps are

                                        wi − we = x̃e − x̃i ,
                                    wi,m − we,m = x̃i − x̃e + vi (ni ) − ve (ne ) − κ.

Having the best responses of both firms completely specified, we can determine the between-
firm wage gaps, which we present in Lemma 4.

Lemma 4. (Between-firm wage gaps) The difference in majority pay at the incumbent and

                                                           37
entrant is
                                                                                
                            κ + vi − ve             φ              1       vi − ve
            wi − we =                                            −                       (1 − φθ (λ − λm ) + ωi ) ,
                                ve             θ (λ − λm )         2          ve

whereas the difference in minority pay between the two firms is

                                           wi,m − we,m = − (wi − we ) .


   The sign of the minority wage gap is always opposite that of the majority. So if the incumbent
pays its majority more than the entrant pays its majority, the entrant will pay its minority
more than the incumbent will pay its minority.
5.7.4     The market entry of social progress
The final step to complete the solution of the game is determining the entry decision. Again, our
definition of entry in equilibrium is the entrant coexisting with or displacing the incumbent,
which only occurs if πi ≤ πe . Substituting the best responses of the two firms from Proposition
2 into the difference πi − πe generates a function P (ωi ) that is quadratic in the incumbent’s
(within-firm) wage gap.
   When the wage gap ωi is at a value for which P (ωi ) < 0, the entrant can earn more profits
than the incumbent. In this case, the new corporate culture enters the market and forces the
dominant one to exit. Conversely, at values of ωi for which P (ωi ) > 0, the entrant’s corporate
culture is not profitable enough to enter the market, so it is deterred from displacing the
incumbent. Finally, where P (ωi ) = 0, profits of the two firms match, so a firm cannot expel or
bar the other. The incumbent accommodates the entrant without being forced out, meaning
the old and progressive corporate cultures coexist in the market.
   Each case represents a distinct kind of equilibrium. We label the three equilibria forced
exit (P (ωi ) < 0), deterred entry (P (ωi ) > 0), and accommodation (P (ωi ) = 0). In the next
proposition, we discuss the regions of ωi that determine the equilibrium.
Proposition 3. (Forced exit, deterred entry, accommodation equilibrium) A subgame per-
fect Nash equilibrium to the Stackelberg
                                              competition exists and is unique. Moreover, if
                      2φ    κ+vi −ve
1 − φθ (λ − λm ) > θ(λ−λm )  vi −ve    , the quadratic P (ωi ) has two roots ωi,− and ωi,+ that
are arranged ωi,− < 0 < ωi,+ . The roots are
                                   
              2φ        κ + vi − ve
ωi,−    =                             − (1 − φθ (λ − λm )) ,
          θ (λ − λm )     vi − ve
                                                                                                 
              2φ        κ + vi − ve                             vi                               ve
ωi,+    =                             − (1 − φθ (λ − λm ))             + (1 + φθ (λ − λm ))             .
          θ (λ − λm )     vi + ve                            vi + ve                          vi + ve

The roots separate the three possible equilibria. The equilibrium is forced exit when ωi < ωi,− or
ωi > ωi,+ ; deterred entry when ωi ∈ (ωi,− , ωi,+ ); and accommodation when ωi = ωi,− or ωi = ωi,+ .



                                                             38
    Figure 8 illustrates the function P as well as the three regions that separate the equilibria.
Two values of the incumbent wage gap, ωi,− and ωi,+ constitute the accommodation equilibrium.
At the first value, the incumbent pays its minority more than its majority, whereas at the
second, it pays its minority less. At both values, the profit difference between the incumbent
and entrant vanishes, so both firms can operate in the market simultaneously.
    The proposition reveals that when the magnitude of the incumbent wage gap exceeds either
of those two values, forced exit takes place. In a situation of an extreme wage gap at the
incumbent–which can be considered as severe inequality in pay between the two groups–a new
corporate culture has room to push out the old one. What the proposition also reveals, however,
is that forced exit is not possible and entry is deterred when the incumbent’s wage gap is
within a specific range. If there are not large differences in pay between the two groups at the
firm, there is no way for the market to adopt the social progress on its own. The prevailing, but
outdated corporate culture would persist unless some external authority mandated change.

               Figure 8: Forced Exit, Deterred Entry, Accommodation Equilibrium




Notes: The figure plots the quadratic function P (ωi ) = πi − πe . Where P (ωi ) > 0 is deterred entry because the
potential entrant’s profits cannot eclipse the incumbent’s, so there is no entry. Where P (ωi ) < 0 is forced exit
because the new corporate culture is more profitable than the old, so the entrant displaces the incumbent. Finally,
the points at which P (ωi ) = 0 are accommodation because the incumbent and entrant are equally profitable, so
both coexist in the market.

    The intuition for why forced exit occurs at extreme wage gaps is the following. Generally
speaking, there are two strategies a firm can choose. The first strategy is to employ more


                                                       39
minority employees to increase diversity and choose more socialization to reduce conflict. The
second is to employ more majority employees to reduce conflict and choose less socialization
while sacrificing diversity. When the wage gap is large and positive, minority employees are
much less expensive to hire, so the first strategy is more profitable. In contrast, when the wage
gap is large and negative, majority employees are less costly to hire, so the second strategy is
more profitable. From Proposition 2, one can observe that the entrant’s employment decision is
more responsive to the incumbent’s wage gap, making it better at executing the more profitable
strategy when the wage gap is extreme. When the wage gap is narrower, however, the entrant’s
advantage is weaker, the two strategies deliver roughly the same profits, and the incumbent
cannot be displaced.
   The region ωi+ − ωi,− is the range where the dominant corporate culture can shield itself
from displacement. Taking the difference between the two expressions in Proposition 3 gives
the size of the range:

                                    2ve (θ (λ − λm ) (vi − ve ) − 2φ (κ + vi − ve ))
                    ωi,+ − ωi,− =                                                    .
                                                θ (λ − λm ) vi2 − ve2
                                                                      


   We put attention on the effect of the bias κ on the range. A greater bias to resist leaving
for the entrant surprisingly shrinks the incumbent’s protected range. One might think that a
stronger bias of the minority to stick with the incumbent awards the incumbent a wider range
to protect itself from being driven out. It is the opposite: the tighter the incumbent’s grip on
the minority, the more fragile it is. When the entrant observes a large bias, it competes more
aggressively by reducing the minority’s pain from socialization by a greater amount. That
competitive pressure weakens the incumbent’s power to sustain a large wage gap. The bias for
the incumbent, therefore, regulates both the size of the market’s progress in corporate culture
should the change occur, as well as how much of a chance the entrant has at effecting the
change.
5.8   A flexible incumbent
So far we have taken the incumbent’s wage gap ωi as an object endowed to the firm that is
a conspicuous feature of the prevailing corporate culture. And that corporate culture itself
was an offspring of an outworn societal culture that has since progressed. The incumbent was
firmly committed to maintaining ωi at the endowed value irrespective of any threat of entry. We
then studied the conditions in which that commitment to ωi can either shield the incumbent
from being displaced or force its exit.
   If the incumbent were more flexible and willing to adjust ωi in response to the risk of being
pushed out by a potential entrant, however, a moment’s reflection would make one realize
that entry would always be deterred. If P (ωi ) < 0 at the incumbent’s current wage gap ωi , the
incumbent would shrink the magnitude of the wage gap just enough to the value ωi0 so that
P (ωi0 ) > 0. The entrant would be kept out, and there would be no way in this economy for the
market by itself to adopt social progress into widespread corporate culture. In this setting the

                                                   40
first-mover advantage of the incumbent is most apparent. An outside intervention would be
the only means to impose corporate cultural change and better the workplace conditions of the
minority.

6     Empirical Predictions
The model lends itself to a number of empirical predictions with respect to the shares of
minority employees and the wage gaps at firms. All of those objects are observable. Examining
the minority shares in Proposition 2 and the wage gaps in (25) and Lemma 4, one can notice
that all are affine in the incumbent’s wage gap ωi . Therefore, an econometrician could fix an
industry and run a univariate linear time-series regression of an entrant’s minority share and
wage gaps onto the wage gap of an incumbent and compare the coefficients to the relations
predicted by the model. He or she could alternatively run a panel or cross-sectional regression
across industries provided that each industry is segregated enough from every other so that
firms across industries do not meaningfully compete.
6.1   Choice of groups and firms
The econometrician would inevitably have some freedom in the choice of the minority group
as well as the incumbent and the entrant. The model is silent on the exact characteristics of
the members of the minority, except that they collectively make up a share of all employees
that does not exceed one-half. But that restriction is quite loose. In every firm, any employee
could be a minority along enough dimensions. There is only one of each of us after all. In the
selection of the majority and minority groups, the econometrician must choose an observable
dimension that is broad enough to obtain meaningful shares—such as race, ethnicity, or
gender–and the members of each group must reasonably be perceived to have similar personal
cultures. Considerable discretion remains. The chosen groups must also match as closely
as possible along every other dimension except that which distinguishes their minority or
majority membership. For instance, the wage gap between a male and female manager should
be compared rather than that of a male custodian and a female manager.
    The most important characteristics of the incumbent when trying to identify such a firm
within an industry is (1) its existence prior to the emergence of a progressive firm and (2) its
treatment of the minority that is considered regressive upon the development of the social
progress. The entrant must embrace the social progress insofar as its improved treatment of
the chosen minority. It need not be a start-up firm. The entrant could be as old and as large
as the incumbent, but simply distinguish itself as adhering to a more progressive corporate
culture. The characteristics defining the two kinds of firms rightfully limit the econometrician,
but they unfortunately also admit imprecision.
6.2   The predictions
After the selection of an incumbent and entrant and minority and majority groups, the most
apparent prediction of the model is the relation between the majority and minority wage gaps


                                               41
between firms in Lemma 4. The two should be opposite in sign and most precisely, equal in
magnitude, though the latter condition is less likely to hold empirically given its strictness.
No regression needs to be run here, but only a comparison in averages through time or across
industries.
   Moving onto the minority shares, one can express the equations in Proposition 2 as

                                       1 − x̃∗i = β1−x̃∗i ,0 + β1−x̃∗i ,1 ωi ,
                                       1 − x̃∗e = β1−x̃∗e ,0 + β1−x̃∗e ,1 ωi .

With this relation, the following sets of parameters can be identified from linear regressions of
the minority shares on the incumbent wage gap:

                                                               β1−x̃∗i ,0
                                        1 − φθ (λ − λm ) =                ,
                                                               β1−x̃∗i ,1
                                                          vi   β1−x̃∗e ,1
                                                             =            .
                                                          ve   β1−x̃∗i ,1

Because of the sign restrictions on those sets of parameters, two empirical predictions of the
model are
                                               β1−x̃∗i ,0
                                                          ∈ (0, 1) ,                           (26)
                                               β1−x̃∗i ,1
                                               β1−x̃∗e ,1
                                                          > 1.                                 (27)
                                               β1−x̃∗i ,1

   The first ratio (26) is a measure of the marginal cost of cultural conflict. A larger cultural
gap between the majority and minority would imply a ratio closer to zero. The second ratio
(27) of the two loadings from the regressions is a measure of the relative mistreatment of the
minority by the incumbent. A greater ratio would imply a larger relative mistreatment.
   The remaining wage gaps to examine are the entrant wage gap ωe in (25) and the majority
wage gap between the two firms wi − we in Lemma 4. The two linear relations here are

                                           ωe = βωe ,0 + βωe ,1 ωi ,
                                     wi − we = βwi −we ,0 + βwi −we ,1 ωi .

                      vi
From (25), βωe ,1 =   ve ,   making this coefficient another measure, besides (26), of the relative
minority mistreatment between the incumbent and entrant. The wage gap equations then




                                                        42
imply the three predictions

                                                          β1−x̃∗e ,1
                                                βωe,1 =              ,                                           (28)
                                                          β1−x̃∗i ,1
                                                βωe,1 > 1,                                                       (29)
                                            βwi −we ,1 < 0,                                                      (30)
                                                                                 
                                                                         vi −ve
where the last prediction arises because βwi −we ,1 = − 12                 ve         . The relation in (26) is rather
strict, so a more realistic one is that the loading βωe,1 from the wage gap regression matches
                                                              β1−x̃∗e ,1
signs with the ratio of the minority share loadings           β1−x̃∗ ,1 .
                                                                    i


7    Perfect Competition
The incumbent and entrant have so far differed in four ways: (1) the order of their decisions,
(2) the incumbent’s commitment to its wage gap ωi but the entrant’s willingness to adjust its
wage gap to competition, (3) their different treatments of the minority that were represented
by different emotion functions vk (n) at each firm, and (4) the incumbent’s advantage of the
minority’s bias κ to stay.
    In this section, we examine the case in which there are no differences at all between the
firms. No longer is one an incumbent or entrant. Both are actively competing in the market
simultaneously. Both firms need to adjust their wages in response to competition in the majority
and minority labor markets. The emotion function is also the same at both firms, with vk = v.
Finally, any employee may leave one firm for another, and none has a bias to remain with
either firm.
    We consider this type of environment one of perfect competition because the firms are
identical, there could be many of them, labor is freely mobile, and both firms and labor will be
price-takers in the labor markets. The next proposition describes the outcome.

Proposition 4. (Equilibrium, perfect competition) When the two firms are identical and
engage in perfect competition, the optimal employment and socialization decisions are the
same between them and are

                                      1
                           1 − x̃ =     (1 − φθ (λ − λm ) + ω) ,
                                      2 s
                                                            2φ
                                  n=1−                                         ,
                                            θ (λ − λm ) (1 − φθ (λ − λm ) + ω)

where ω is the within-firm wage gap common to both firms. Profits of the two firms are
identical, both majority and minority between-firm wage gaps are zero, and ω must satisfy
1 − φθ (λ − λm ) + ω ∈ [0, 1) .

    Similar factors that influence the corporate culture decisions in the Stackelberg game do so
in perfect competition as well. More costly socialization φ reduces n and also the share of the


                                                     43
minority. Greater personal cultural conflict (λ − λm ) between the majority and minority also
shrinks the minority share. With fewer members of the minority, there is less incentive for a
firm to engage in socialization, so that reduces as well.
    Whereas earlier, the majority and minority between firms earned different wages, here that
is not the case. Both types of labor expect the same homophily and socialization at either firm,
so both firms must match wages for each type in order to retain employees. The majority must
earn at one firm what it would earn at the other firm, and likewise for the minority. Free labor
mobility and perfect competition are powerful enough forces to zero out those two wage gaps.
    As for the within-firm wage gap ω, perfect competition guarantees that the difference in
pay between a majority and minority type is the same across firms, but does not guarantee
the difference is zero. In fact, multiple within-firm wage gaps may constitute an equilibrium
with perfect competition so long as each one meets the condition provided in the proposition.
Interestingly, no gap in pay between the majority and minority within a firm is an equilibrium,
despite the two types contributing differently to marginal revenue. But so too are equilibria
with positive or negative wage gaps.

8    Existing Theory on Corporate Culture
The theoretical literature on corporate culture in economics is reviewed in a thorough and
enjoyable survey by Benjamin Hermalin (Hermalin (2001)). We define corporate culture math-
ematically in a different way than the previous literature and answer questions that have not
yet been addressed: why does corporate cultural variety exist and when does corporate culture
adapt to social progress?
    Some of the existing work uses a setting with repeated games and treats corporate culture
as one of multiple equilibria. Kreps (1990) considers corporate culture as principles a firm has
a reputation for applying and communicating when unforeseen contingencies occur—events
that are difficult or impossible to anticipate and contract on ex ante.
    Crémer (1993) takes a different approach. He thinks in terms of teams in which there are
no agency problems. But employees have limited capacity to process and transmit information.
A growing stock of that information is common and lives on beyond the lives of individual
employees. This common stock of knowledge is what Crémer calls corporate culture.
    Prat (2002) uses classical team theory that involves incomplete information games to
study whether organizations should hire people with similar backgrounds or with different
backgrounds. This question relates to the trade-off between cohesion and diversity presented
in this paper. In solving the problem of optimal employee variety, Prat (2002) puts attention
on difficulties in employee communication that prevents members of the team from acting on
full information about each other. He shows that when jobs within the team are complements,
homogeneity is optimal; when they are substitutes, heterogeneity is optimal.
    Van den Steen (2010b) considers corporate culture as shared beliefs (priors). Like us, he
studies the costs and benefits of employee homogeneity. On the one hand, strong homogeneity



                                               44
makes a firm efficient in carrying out its tasks, featuring more delegation and less monitoring.
However, the cost of that homogeneity is less experimentation and less information collection.
He focuses on mergers and acquisitions and studies the change in firm behavior when two
firms having incongruent beliefs combine. Van den Steen (2010a) shows how shared beliefs
arise endogenously within a firm through screening, self-sorting, and joint learning.
    Song and Thakor (forthcoming 2018) study bank culture. In their setting, bank culture
offers a way to improve upon explicit incentive contracting. A bank’s culture is the behavior it
prefers loan officers to follow when extending credit: issuing loans indiscriminately to increase
growth or exerting effort judiciously to discern creditworthy borrowers. Banks reinforce their
cultures by penalizing deviant behavior. Common knowledge about a bank’s culture helps
match a bank with loan officers who share aligned beliefs about default risk, which moves the
loan officer’s behavior closer to the first-best.
    Management and organizational behavior theories of corporate culture are nicely sum-
marized in Gordon and DiTomaso (1992). An early example is Schein (1983), who considers
corporate culture as “provid[ing] group members with a way of giving meaning to their daily
lives, setting guidelines and rules for how to behave, and, most important, reducing and con-
taining the anxiety of dealing with an unpredictable environment.” Martin (1992) categorizes
an extensive part of the organizational behavior literature as interpreting corporate culture as
shared beliefs and values.

9    Conclusion
With this paper we hope to provide fresh insight into why firms can differ vastly in their
corporate cultures and whether the market can discipline itself to reform the treatment of
minority groups at the workplace. To do so we introduce a new mathematical construction
of culture as a mapping between values, norms, behaviors, symbols, etc. and weights that
members of a group put on those elements in terms of importance.
    We consider corporate culture as a deliberate choice of a firm, one that optimally combines
the different cultures of its employees to improve diversity but also ensure cohesion by avoiding
cultural conflict. We show that such a trade-off can lead otherwise identical firms to choose
distinct corporate cultures. Some firms might elect greater diversity while inculcating the
minority in the majority’s culture. Other firms may decide on less diversity without disturbing
as much the culture of the minority.
    Whether firms on their own can adapt to progressive development in society depends on
the power of the incumbent corporate culture, as measured by the difference in pay between
the majority and minority there. Extreme differences in wages give room for an emergent,
progressive corporate culture to displace a regressive, outdated one. In contrast, a narrower
wage gap insulates the incumbent, thereby straining corporate culture to advance without
forced intervention. The more entrenched an antiquated corporate culture, the more vulnerable
it is to removal, as progressive firms compete more aggressively to change the minds of the



                                                    45
minority to leave. And finally, this fiercer competition from a progressive outsider implies
that a stronger bias of minority employees to remain with the status quo leads to a larger
improvement in how they are treated should the outsider succeed.
   Surely, the way we model social progress is simple and incomplete. In history and the
world, the process is slow and imperfect. At times it may seem as if society has advanced in its
treatment of certain groups, only to revert to sad, sick behavior not long after. Just the same
with progress in corporate culture. Deeply rooted tendencies of a firm that may have grown out
of the beliefs of a founder and persisted thereafter do not change rapidly. If corporate culture
changes after pressure from the market, it does so in fits and starts.
   Our model treats social progress as happening in advance of firm improvement, though
at times society may lag firms. When North Carolina required transgender people to use the
bathroom corresponding with their genders at birth, many corporations responded quickly
by aborting plans to enter or expand in the state, and canceling conventions, concerts, and
sporting events. North Carolina then modified its law (Bissell (2017)). How a firm positions
itself to influence the society in which it attempts to optimize some objective is an issue worth
studying.
   We aim to draw more attention to corporate culture within the research area broadly
interpreted as the“theory of the firm.” That subject has a long and rich history dating as early
as Coase (1937). Since then economists have advanced substantially, with many significant
contributions sprouting from the field of organizational economics. Gibbons and Roberts (2012)
provides a handbook of surveys. If corporate culture is part of the nature of a firm, then it seems
right to study it formally and deeply to better understand how it can shape firm decisions,
whether operational or financial. Here we have put attention on how firms respond to changes
in the society in which they do business. We hope we have provided a framework handy enough
to think about that continuous process and many others related to the firm.




                                                46
References
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. Identity and the economics of organizations. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 19(1):9–32, 2005. [5], [30]

Alter, Charlotte. Whitney Wolfe wants to beat Tinder at its own game. Time, 2015. URL
  https://perma.cc/CJ4V-KBLT. [27]

Bartel, Ann P. Productivity gains from implementation of employee training programs. Indus-
  trial Relations, 33(4):411–425, 1994. [4], [13]

Bauer, Talya N. and Berrin Erdogan. Organizational socialization: The effective onboarding
  of new employees, volume 3: Maintaining, expanding, and contracting the organization,
  chapter 2, pages 51–64. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC, US, 2011. [3],
  [10]

Bissell, Jennifer.      North Carolina repeals bathroom law under corporate pres-
  sure.    Financial Times, November 2017.           URL https://www.ft.com/content/
  7d03a170-1574-11e7-b0c1-37e417ee6c76. [46]

Bornstein, Robert F. Exposure and affect: Overview and meta-analysis of research 1968-1987.
  Psychological Bulletin, 106(2):265–289, 1989. [30]

Brooks, Alison Wood, Laura Huang, Sarah Wood Kearney, and Fiona E. Murray. Investors
  prefer entrpreneurial ventures pitched by attractive men. PNAS, 2014. URL https:
  //perma.cc/RWL9-VQ6W. [10]

Coase, Ronald H. The nature of the firm. Economica, 4(16):386–405, November 1937. [46]

Commission on Family and Medical Leave. A workable balance, 1996. URL https://perma.
  cc/3GLQ-QG8V. [27]

Cote, James E. and Charles G. Levine. Identity, Formation, Agency, and Culture. Psychology
  Press, 2002. ISBN 0805837965. [5], [30]

Crémer, Jacques. Corporate culture and shared knowledge. Industrial and Corporate Change,
  2(3):351–386, 1993. [44]

Cremer, Jacques, Luis Garicano, and Andrea Prat. Language and the theory of the firm. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):373–407, 2007. [12]

Creswell, Julie, Kevin Draper, and Rachel Abrams. At Nike, revolt led by women leads to exodus
  of male executives. The New York Times, 2018. URL https://perma.cc/LX45-HFWJ. [2]

Denison, Daniel R. Bringing corporate culture to the bottom line. Organizational Dynamics,
  13(2):5–22, 1984. [1], [13]

                                               47
Dishman, Lydia. This ‘Me Too’ timeline shows why 2017 was a reckoning for sexism. Fast
  Company, 2017. URL https://perma.cc/W82V-6G59. [2]

Dixit, Avinash. A model of duopoly suggesting a theory of entry barriers. The Bell Journal of
  Economics, 10(1):20–32, 1979. [32]

Dixit, Avinash. The role of investment in entry-deterrence. The Economic Journal, 90(357):
  95–106, March 1980. [32]

Dontchev, Asen L. and R. Tyrrell Rockafellar. Implicit Functions and Solution Mappings.
  Springer, second edition, June 2014. ISBN 1493910361. [1]

Fournier, W.C. Desegregated jobs. Wall Street Journal, page 1, 1956. [1]

Frake, Charles O. Plying frames can be dangerous, chapter I, Part 4, pages 45–60. Language
  Science and National Development. Stanford University Press, first edition, 1980. ISBN
  0804710740. [14]

Fried, Mindy. Taking Time. Temple University Press, 1998. ISBN 1566396468. [10], [27]

Gârleanu, Nicolae, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu. Financial entanglement: A theory of
  incomplete integration, leverage, crashes, and contagion. The American Economic Review,
  105(7):1979–2010, 2015. [25]

Geertz, Clifford. Person, Time, and Conduct in Bali, chapter 14, pages 360–411. Basic Books,
  first edition, 1973. ISBN 0465093558. [14]

Gibbons, Robert and John Roberts, editors. The Handbook of Organizational Economics.
  Princeton University Press, 2012. [46]

Glynn, Sarah Jane. The Family and Medical Leave Act at 20. The Atlantic, 2013. URL
  https://perma.cc/V6L8-7KHR. [27]

Goodenough, Ward. Cultural Anthropology and Linguistics, pages 167–173. Georgetown
  University Press, 1957. URL https://perma.cc/AXL4-26GB. [14]

Gordon, George G. and Nancy DiTomaso. Predicting corporate performance from organizational
  culture. Journal of Management Studies, 29(6):783–798, 1992. [1], [13], [45]

Grewe, Alexander. “I’m sick to death with you...” or External Character Conflicts in Fawlty
  Towers. GRIN Verlag, 2005. ISBN 3638428850. [11]

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. Corporate culture, societal culture, and
  institutions. The American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 105(5):336–339, 2015a.
  [1]



                                               48
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. The value of corporate culture. Journal of
  Financial Economics, 117(1):60–76, 2015b. [1]

Hermalin, Benjamin E. Economics and Corporate Culture, chapter 10, pages 217–261. John
  Wiley & Sons Ltd, 1st edition, 2001. ISBN 0471491268. [44]

Hoch, Maureen. 20 years after FMLA, what’s changed and what hasn’t? Harvard Business
  Review, 2013. URL https://perma.cc/RB9V-7DZ6. [27]

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler. Anomalies: The endowment effect,
  loss aversion, and status quo bias. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1):193–206, 1991. [5],
  [29]

Keesing, Roger. Theories of culture. Annual Review of Anthropolgy, 3:73–97, 1974. [14]

Klein, Howard J. and Natasha A. Weaver. The effectiveness of an organizational-level orienta-
  tion training program in the socialization of new hires. Personnel Psychology, 53(1):47–66,
  2000. [13]

Kornblum, William. Sociology in a Changing World. Cenage Learning, 9 edition, 2011. ISBN
  1111301573. [13]

Kotter, John P. and James L. Heskett. Corporate Culture and Performance. Free Press, 1992.
  ISBN 1451655320. [1]

Kreps, David M. Corporate Culture and Economic Theory, chapter 4, pages 90–143. Political
  Economy of Institutions and Decisions. Cambridge University Press, 1990. ISBN 0521398517.
  [44]

Kübler-Ross, Elisabeth. On Death and Dying. Scribner, reprint (august 12, 2014) edition, 1969.
  ISBN 1476775540. [15]

Kuchler, Hannah and Shannan Bond.            Uber under investigation for gender discrim-
  ination in US.       Financial Times, 2018.        URL https://www.ft.com/content/
  e696a51a-890e-11e8-b18d-0181731a0340. [27]

Lenhoff, Donna R. and Lissa Bell.       Government Support for Working Families and for
  Communities, pages 6–27. Work, Family, and Democracy Project, 2002. URL https:
  //perma.cc/UU54-VNAR. [27]

Macionis, John J. Sociology. Pearson, 15 edition, 2013. ISBN 0205985602. [3], [10]

Marshall, C. Civil rights: What role for business? Saturday Review, page 54, 1968. [2]

Martin, Joanne.      Organizations in Cultures.     Oxford University Press, 1992.       ISBN
  9780195071641. [45]

                                              49
Martinez, Elizabeth A., Nancy Beaulieu, Robert Gibbons, Peter Pronovost, and Thomas Wang.
  Organizational culture and performance. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings,
  105(5):331–335, May 2015. [1]

McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M. Cook. Birds of a feather: Homophily in
  social networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27:415–444, 8 2001. [14]

me too. 2018. URL https://perma.cc/MJT3-UNG3. [2]

Moreland, Richard L. and John M. Levine. Role Transitions in Small Groups, chapter 13, pages
  181–195. Plenum Press, 1984. ISBN 978-1-4613-2697-7. [10]

Nocera, Joe. How an executive is fired after #MeToo incident might relate to makeup of the
  company’s board. Financial Post, 2018. URL https://perma.cc/B9S6-2Z8Y. [2]

O’Connor, Clare. Billion-dollar Bumble: How Whitney Wolfe Herd built america’s fastest-
  growing dating app. Forbes, 2017. URL https://perma.cc/E7FQ-5J4C. [27]

Østergaard, Christian R., Bram Timmermans, and Kari Kristinsson. Does a different view
  create something new? Research Policy, 40:500–509, 2011. [4], [13]

Ovide, Shira.     Intel is corporate america’s biggest MeToo moment.            Bloomberg,
  2018.          URL      https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2018-06-21/
  intel-is-corporate-america-s-biggest-metoo-moment. [2]

Prat, Andrea. Should a team be homogeneous? European Economic Review, 46(7):1187–1207,
  2002. [44]

Reed, Heidi. Corporations as agents of social change. Business History, 59(6):821–843, 2017.
  [1]

Richard, Orlando C. Racial diversity, business strategy, and firm performance. Academy of
  Management Journal, 43(2):164–177, 2000. [13]

Roberts, Gene and Hank Klibanoff. The Race Beat. Vintage Books, first vintage books edition,
  2007. ISBN 0679735658. [1]

Robson, David. The reasons why women’s voices are deeper today. BBC, 2018. URL https:
  //perma.cc/DKY9-RK8J. [10]

Russell, Karen Miller and Margot Opdycke Lamme. Public relations and business reponses to
  the civil rights movement. Public Relations Review, 39:63–73, 2013. [1]

Samuelson, William and Richard Zeckhauser. Status quo bias in decision making. Journal of
  Risk and Uncertainty, 1(1):7–59, 3 1998. [29]



                                             50
Schein, Edgar H. The role of the founder in creating organizational culture. Organizational
  Dynamics, 12(1):13–28, 1983. [45]

Solon, Olivia. Is Lyft really the ‘woke’ alternative to Uber? The Guardian, 2017. URL
  https://perma.cc/39FG-UXAE. [27]

Song, Fenghua and Anjan V. Thakor. Bank culture. Journal of Financial Intermediation,
  forthcoming 2018. [45]

Sørensen, Jesper B. The strength of corporate culture and the reliability of firm performance.
  Administrative Science Quarterly, 47(1):70–91, 2002. [1]

Spence, A. Michael. Entry, capacity, investment and oligopolistic pricing. Bell Journal of
  Economics, 8(2):534–544, 1977. [32]

Spence, A. Michael. Investment strategy and growth in a new market. Bell Journal of
  Economics, 10(1):1–19, 1979. [32]

Tariyal, Ridhi. To suceed in Silicon Valley, you still have to act like a man. The Washington
  Post, July 2018. URL https://perma.cc/G5C5-76SC. [10]

Temin, Davia. How the reputation risk of #MeToo is forcing businesses to reevaluate their
  corporate culture. Forbes, 2018. URL https://perma.cc/4T6S-PCU4. [2]

Turner, Jonathan H. Sociology. Pearson, 2005. ISBN 0131134965. [11]

Tylor, Edward Burnett. Primitive Culture, volume 1. Cambridge University Press, 2010 edition,
  1871. ISBN 1108017509. [3]

United States Department of Labor, . Family and Medical Leave Act, 2018. URL https:
  //perma.cc/HLJ2-DUKR. [27]

Van den Steen, Eric. Culture clash. Management Science, 56(10):1718–1738, 2010a. [45]

Van den Steen, Eric. On the origin of shared beliefs (and corporate culture). The RAND Journal
  of Economics, 41(4):617–648, 2010b. [44]

von Stackelberg, Heinrich. The Theory of the Market Economy. Hodge, 1952. [28], [32]

Wagner, Kurt. Bumble called Tinder’s parent company a ‘bully’ and promised it would never
  sell to them, ‘no matter the price tag’. Recode, 2018. URL https://perma.cc/8KPB-8C8B.
  [27]

Weber, Julie. How Southwest Airlines hires such dedicated people. Harvard Business Review,
  December 2015. URL https://perma.cc/R28D-LP95. [15]




                                             51
Weinreich, Peter. Identity Structure Analysis, chapter Part I, Chapter 1, pages 7–76. Routledge,
  1 edition, 2003. [5], [30]

Williams, Joan C. and Suzanne Lebsock. Now what? Harvard Business Review, 2018. URL
  https://perma.cc/KWY4-YKJK. [2]

Wong, Julia Carrie. Uber’s ‘hustle-oriented’ culture becomes a black mark on employees’
  résumés. The Guardian, 2017. URL https://perma.cc/X5Y4-BRFE. [27]

Yashari, Leora. Meet the Tinder co-founder trying to change online dating forever. Vanity Fair,
  2015. URL https://perma.cc/XU8C-RK9X. [27]

Zajonc, Robert B. Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of Personality and Social
  Psychology, 9(2, Pt. 2):1–27, 1968. June. [5], [29]




                                               52
A     Appendix A: Proofs (For Online Publication)
A.1   Proof of Proposition 1
To demonstrate the existence of a corporate cultural variety equilibrium, we let n∗ (Λ) be the
set of optimal extents of socialization n that solve the firm problem in (10) when the cultural
conflict (λ − λm )2 = Λ and the other parameters b − bm and θ are constants. For variety in
equilibrium, it must be that n∗ (Λ) is not single-valued. The theorem of the maximum implies
that n∗ (Λ) is an upper hemicontinuous correspondence. If n∗ (Λ) is single-valued, it must then
be a continuous function. To prove variety, we need only provide a condition under which n∗ is
not a continuous function.
    Every element n ∈ n∗ (Λ) must satisfy the necessary first-order condition (14), repeated
here in rearranged form:

                                (b − bm − v (n))2 − θ2 Λ (1 − n)3 φ0 (n) = 0.

Let f (Λ, n) be the continuous function on the left-hand-side of the above equation defined
over the elements of n∗ . To prove that n∗ is not a continuous function, we rely on a symmetric
implicit function theorem proven in Dontchev and Rockafellar (2014) (Theorem 1B.8). Under
                                                                        ∂f                         
Assumptions 1 and 2, f is continuously differentiable. Provided ∂Λ          6= 0 at a point Λ̄, n̄
                                                                                     ∂f
for n̄ ∈ n∗ , there exists a single-valued function around Λ̄ for n̄ if and only if ∂n
                                                                                              
                                                                                        Λ̄, n̄ 6= 0.
                ∂f       
Therefore, if ∂n   Λ̄, n̄ = 0, there must exist at least one Λ where there does not exist a single-
valued function. This in turn implies that n∗ must not be a continuous function and hence not
single-valued.
    The partial derivative of f with respect to the parameter Λ is

                                 ∂f
                                     = −θ2 (1 − n)3 φ0 (n) .
                                 ∂Λ
                                ∂f                                                ∂f
By Assumption 1, φ0 > 0, making ∂Λ
                                          
                                    Λ̄, n̄ 6= 0. The partial derivative           ∂n   is

               ∂f    h                                                                    i
                  = − 2v 0 (n) (b − bm − v (n)) + θ2 Λ (1 − n)3 φ00 (n) − 3 (1 − n)2 φ0 (n) .
               ∂n
          ∂f
Setting   ∂n   equal to zero and rearranging gives the condition

                     2v 0 (n) (b − bm − v (n)) = θ2 Λ (1 − n)2 3φ0 (n) − (1 − n) φ00 (n) .
                                                                                        


If the above relation holds for n̄ ∈ n∗ when Λ = Λ̄, we have what we need to show that n∗ is
not single-valued. In the proposition we impose the stronger condition that the relation holds
for any n ∈ (0, 1) when Λ = Λ̄. To complete the construction of a corporate cultural variety
equilibrium, we note that market clearing in the labor markets is confirmed by construction
given (14).


                                                      1
   To prove the relation between multiple optimal firm decisions, suppose without loss of
generality that {n1 , n2 } ∈ n∗ (Λ). Let n1 < n2 . Because n∗ (Λ) is multivalued, an implication of
the necessary first order condition (15) is that x̃∗ (Λ) is also multi-valued. To complete the proof
of the proposition, we need only show that 1 − x̃1 < 1 − x̃2 . Because v (n) ≤ b − bm , (14) can be
expressed as                                     q
                             b − bm − v (n) =         θ2 (λ − λm )2 φ0 (n) (1 − n)3 .

Substituting this expression into (15) gives
                                                 s
                                                            φ0 (n)
                                      1 − x̃ =                             .
                                                     θ2 (λ − λm )2 (1 − n)

Because φ0 (n) is strictly increasing, n1 < n2 implies 1 − x̃1 < 1 − x̃2 .
A.2   Proof of Lemma 1
Substitute the optimality condition for 1 − x̃ in (15) into the market clearing condition (11) to
express the wage gap as
                                                                                
                                                                       2
                            ω (n) = (b − bm − v (n)) 1 +                             − 1,
                                                                 θ2 Λ (1 − n)2

where Λ ≡ (λ − λm )2 . Suppose n∗1 < n∗2 are two optimal extents of socialization. A firm that
chooses n∗2 instead of n∗1 will feature a larger wage gap if

                                             ω (n∗2 ) − ω (n∗1 ) > 0.

Substituting the wage gap into the inequality gives

                      θ2                           b − bm − v (n∗1 ) b − bm − v (n∗2 )
                         Λ (v (n∗1 ) − v (n∗2 )) >                  −                  .
                      2                               (1 − n∗1 )2       (1 − n∗2 )2

Rearranging gives

               θ2                             v (n∗1 )       v (n∗2 )      b − bm       b − bm
                  Λ (v (n∗1 ) − v (n∗2 )) +            2 −            2 >          2 −             .
               2                                    ∗
                                            (1 − n1 )              ∗
                                                           (1 − n2 )            ∗
                                                                          (1 − n1 )    (1 − n∗2 )2

Because n∗1 < n∗2 , the right-hand-side of the above inequality is negative. Therefore, the
inequality is satisfied if

                           θ2                             v (n∗1 )       v (n∗2 )
                              Λ (v (n∗1 ) − v (n∗2 )) +            2 −             > 0.
                           2                            (1 − n∗1 )     (1 − n∗2 )2

Some further minor manipulation delivers the condition in the lemma.




                                                         2
A.3   Proof of Lemma 2
Substitute the specific function for φ into the entrant’s best response (implicit) function (21) to
get

                    (ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) − ve (ne ) − κ)2 = φ2 θ2 (λ − λm )2 ,

which implies
                      ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) − ve (ne ) − κ = ±φθ (λ − λm ) .             (31)

Substitute the left-hand-side of this last equation into the entrant’s other best response function
(22) to get
                                              ±φ
                                                             = 1 − x̃e .                      (32)
                                      θ (λ − λm ) (1 − ne )2
By Assumption 3, φ (n) > 0, making φ > 0. Hence, the entrant’s minority share is positive.
Next, rearrange (31) to get

                       ve (ne ) = ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) − κ − φθ (λ − λm ) .

Now substitute the specific function for ve into this last equation and rearrange to get
                               r
                                                            ve
                   ne = 1 −                                                           ,
                                   ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) + ve − κ − φθ (λ − λm )

which matches the expression for ne in Lemma 2. Finally, substitute ne into (32) to get

                               φ (ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) + ve − κ − φθ (λ − λm ))
                   1 − x̃e =                                                          ,
                                                   ve θ (λ − λm )

which also matches the Lemma.
A.4   Proof of Lemma 3
The optimality conditions of the incumbent that determine its best response are

                        (ωe + (2x̃e − 1) + ve (ne ) + κ − vi (ni ))2
                                              2         3            = φ0 (ni ) ,
                                   2
                                 θ (λ − λm ) (1 − ni )
                           ωe + (2x̃e − 1) + ve (ne ) + κ − vi (ni )
                                                                     = 1 − x̃i .
                                   θ2 (λ − λm )2 (1 − ni )2

Substituting the functional forms of φ and vk and rearranging delivers the two conditions:

                       vi (ni ) = ωe + (2x̃e − 1) + ve (ne ) + κ − φθ (λ − λm ) ,             (33)
                                            φ
                       1 − x̃i =                          .                                   (34)
                                   θ (λ − λm ) (1 − ni )2



                                                      3
From Lemma 2, the optimal conditions for the entrant are

                  ve (ne ) = ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) − κ − φθ (λ − λm ) ,                   (35)
                              φ (ωi + (2x̃i − 1) + vi (ni ) + ve − κ − φθ (λ − λm ))
                  1 − x̃e =                                                          .         (36)
                                                  ve θ (λ − λm )

Substituting (35) into (33) and solving for the incumbent majority share 1 − x̃i gives

                                                 1
                              1 − x̃i = x̃e +      (ωi + ωe ) − φθ (λ − λm ) .
                                                 2

Next, substitute (36) to obtain
                                             1 − x̃i = L (vi (ni )) ,

where L is a function of the emotion function at the incumbent vi (ni ). We set this equation
equal to (34), but first we must express (34) in terms of vi (ni ) . Some manipulation gives

                                                     φ (vi (ni ) + vi )
                                       1 − x̃i =                        .                      (37)
                                                      vi θ (λ − λm )

Equating the right-and-side of (37) to L and solving for ni gives
                                     √           s
                                         φ                           R
                    ni = 1 − p                                                         ,
                                  θ (λ − λm )        2 (ve θ (λ − λm ) − φ) + (S + T )

where

                     R ≡ 2θ (vi + ve ) (λ − λm ) − 4φ,
                     S ≡ 2φ (vi − ve − ωi + κ) ,
                     T ≡ θ (λ − λm ) 2φ2 + ve (ωi + ωe ) − 2φve θ (λ − λm ) .
                                                                           


The incumbent’s optimal minority share is found by substituting ni into (34). Doing so yields
the expression in the lemma.
A.5     Proof of Proposition 2
The equilibrium best responses of both the incumbent and entrant are determined by sub-
stituting the equilibrium entrant wage gap in (25) into the incumbent’s best responses in
Lemma 3, then substituting those strategies into the entrant’s best response in Lemma 2.
Extensive algebra delivers the expressions in the proposition. By Assumption 6, ni , ne ∈ [0, 1]
and 1 − x̃i , 1 − x̃e ∈ 0, 12 .
                            

A.6     Proof of Lemma 4
The expressions in the lemma are derived by substituting the equilibrium best responses of
the firms into the definitions of the between-firm wage gaps and performing some extensive


                                                        4
algebra. Adding the two wage gaps reveals

                                      (wi − we ) + (wi,m − we,m ) = 0,

which is how we express the minority wage gap in the lemma.
A.7    Proof of Proposition 3
The entry decision of the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium is determined by the sign of the
difference in profit functions of the two firms. The profit function of each firm is

                                     θ2         2
               πk = A + x̃k (1 − x̃k ) − λ − λ̄k − φ (nk ) − wk x̃k − wk,m (1 − x̃k ) ,
                                      2
                                            
for k ∈ {i, e} . 
                  Some algebra shows λ − λ̄k = (λ − λm ) (1 − nk ) (1 − x̃k ) . Substituting φ (nk ) =
φ       1
2 (1−n )2 − 1 and taking the difference πi − πe gives
        k



                                                θ2                                                           
  πi − πe = (x̃i (1 − x̃i ) − x̃e (1 − x̃e )) −    (λ − λm )2 (1 − ni )2 (1 − x̃i )2 − (1 − ne )2 (1 − x̃e )2
              2
                                             2
            φ          1              1
          −                    −                − (ωi x̃i − ωe x̃e ) − (wi,m − we,m ) .
             2 (1 − ni )2 (1 − ne )2

Next, substitute the minority           − we,m = x̃i − x̃e + vi (ni ) − ve (ne ) − κ and use the
                              wage gap wi,m
                                        1
emotion function vk (nk ) = vk       (1−nk )2
                                                − 1 to get

                        θ2                                                           
πi − πe = x̃2e − x̃2i −    (λ − λm )2 (1 − ni )2 (1 − x̃i )2 − (1 − ne )2 (1 − x̃e )2
                        2
          φ2
                                                                                      
                      1           1                                    vi             ve
        −                   −             − (ωi x̃i − ωe x̃e ) −             −             + (vi − ve ) − κ.
           2 (1 − ni )2 (1 − ne )2                                 (1 − ni )2 (1 − ne )2

After substituting the best responses from Proposition 2 and the entrant wage gap in (25) and
doing some algebra, the difference in profit functions becomes

                                                πi − πe = P (ωi ) .

The function P (ωi ) is quadratic in the incumbent’s wage gap and is

                                           P (ωi ) = aωi2 + bωi + c,




                                                        5
where the coefficients are

                     vi2 − ve2
              a=−              ,
                        4ve2
                 φθ2 (λ − λm )2 vi2 − ve2 − θ (λ − λm ) vi (vi − ve ) + 2φvi (κ + vi − ve )
                                         
              b=                                                                            ,
                                               2θ (λ − λm ) ve2
                             c1 c2 vi2 − ve2
                                             
              c=−                                          ,
                  4θ2 (λ − λm )2 ve2 (vi + ve ) (vi − ve )

with

                c1 = 2φ (κ + vi − ve ) − θ (λ − λm ) (vi − ve ) + φθ2 (λ − λm )2 (vi + ve ) ,
                c2 = 2φ (κ + vi − ve ) − θ (λ − λm ) (vi − ve ) + φθ2 (λ − λm )2 (vi − ve ) .

Because the function P (ωi ) is continuous and the value P (ωi ) is unique for each ωi , the
equilibrium of the Stackelberg game exists and is unique. The leading coefficient a is negative,
so the parabola is concave down. The discriminant of the quadratic is

                                        ((2φ − λθ) (vi − ve ) + 2κφ)2
                                   ∆=                                 > 0,
                                                 4λ2 θ2 ve2

so the root(s) of P (ωi ) are real. From the quadratic formula, the roots of P (ωi ) are
                                  
             2φ        κ + vi − ve
ωi,−   =                             − (1 − φθ (λ − λm )) ,
         θ (λ − λm )     vi − ve
                                                                                                
             2φ        κ + vi − ve                             vi                               ve
ωi,+   =                             − (1 − φθ (λ − λm ))             + (1 + φθ (λ − λm ))             .
         θ (λ − λm )     vi + ve                            vi + ve                          vi + ve

The root ωi,− is negative if
                                                                                 
                                                      2φ            κ + vi − ve
                               1 − φθ (λ − λm ) >                                     .                      (38)
                                                  θ (λ − λm )         vi − ve

The root ωi,+ is positive if
                                                                                                  
                                  ve       2φ            κ + vi − ve                            ve
               1 − φθ (λ − λm ) <    +                                     + φθ (λ − λm )                .   (39)
                                  vi   θ (λ − λm )           vi                                 vi

The left-hand-side
                      of(39) is strictly less than one, and the right-hand-side strictly exceeds
ve      2φ      κ+vi −ve
vi + θ(λ−λm )     vi      . Under Assumption 6, ωi,+ > 0. Using this reasoning, one can also show
that c1 > 0 and c2 < 0, making c > 0. Therefore, if (38) holds, the roots of P (ωi ) are arranged
ωi,− < 0 < ωi,+ .




                                                     6
A.8   Proof of Proposition 4
The perfect competition equilibrium can be solved using the analysis that was done for the
Stackelberg game. Just let one firm be called the “incumbent” and the other the “entrant” and
let the decisions be made simultaneously. The within- and between-firm wage gaps are kept
distinct for the moment then solved for. From the proof of Proposition 3, the difference in profit
functions πi − πe is

                              θ2                                                           
      πi − πe = x̃2e − x̃2i −    (λ − λm )2 (1 − ni )2 (1 − x̃i )2 − (1 − ne )2 (1 − x̃e )2
                              2
                φ2
                                                                                              
                            1           1                                      1              1
              −                   −             − (ωi x̃i − ωe x̃e ) + v             −             .
                 2 (1 − ni )2 (1 − ne )2                                   (1 − ni )2 (1 − ne )2

   Each firm is solving the same problem, so will have identical optimal solutions. Applying
this fact to the between-firm wage gaps in Lemma 4 and the “entrant’s” wage gap in (25), while
also using vi = ve = v and κ = 0, one can see that the majority and minority between-firm
wage gaps are zero and the two within-firm wage gaps ωi = ωe = ω. With these results, one
can observe from the difference in profit functions that πi − πe ≡ 0 for any ω. Therefore, the
equilibrium is not unique. Nevertheless, any ω that constitutes an equilibrium must satisfy
the condition in the proposition. That condition is determined by setting vi = ve = v and κ = 0
in Assumption 6.




                                                    7
B    Appendix B: Exact Corporate Cultural Conflict (For Online
     Publication)
The exact corporate cultural conflict function is

                                                             λ̄ λ
                                               δ (x̃, n) =     + − 2,
                                                             λ λ̄

where λ̄ = x̃λ + (1 − x̃) (nλ + (1 − n) λm ). The firm problem using δ is

                    max A + x̃ (1 − x̃) − θ2 δ (x̃, n) − φ (n) − wx̃ − wm (1 − x̃) .
                    {x̃,n}


The two first order conditions are
                                                            
                                    2                  λ   1
                         [x̃] : θ (λ − λm ) (1 − n)      −     = ω + (2x̃ − 1) ,           (40)
                                                      λ̄2 λ
                                                            
                                                       λ   1
                                 2
                         [n] : θ (λ − λm ) (1 − x̃)      −     = φ0 (n) .                  (41)
                                                      λ̄2 λ

When λ > λm , the weighted average λ̄ of the exponential cultural parameters λ and λm is
decreasing in the minority share 1 − x̃. Therefore, the marginal benefit to socialization (the
left-hand-side of (41)) is increasing in the minority share. This relation means the extent of
socialization and the minority share are complements, just as they are in the main text. And
that complementarity has the capacity to generate a variety of corporate cultures, depending
on the behavior of the emotion function v (n).
    The wage gap ω that clears both the majority and minority labor markets again is

                                        ω = (b − bm ) − (2x̃ − 1) − v (n) .

Substituting ω into (40) and then solving for the minority share gives:

                                                   λ ((λ − λm ) (1 − n) − τ1 )
                                        1 − x̃ =                               ,
                                                       (λ − λm )2 (1 − n)2

where                               s
                                                   θ2 (λ − λm )3 (1 − n)3
                             τ1 =                                                    .
                                        λ ((b − bm ) − v (n)) + θ2 (λ − λm ) (1 − n)
Substituting the expression for 1 − x̃ into (41) delivers an equation exclusively in terms of n
that pins down the optimal extent of socialization. That equation is

                        λ ((b − bm ) − v (n)) ((λ − λm ) (1 − n) − τ1 )
                                                                        = φ0 (n) .
                                     (λ − λm )2 (1 − n)3

The marginal benefit of socialization is on the left-hand-side. Just as in the main text, the


                                                             8
properties of v (n) will influence the behavior of the marginal benefit curve and determine
whether corporate cultural variety can emerge in equilibrium.




                                             9
