NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAMING THE FACTOR ZOO:
A TEST OF NEW FACTORS
Guanhao Feng
Stefano Giglio
Dacheng Xiu
Working Paper 25481
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25481

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019

We appreciate insightful comments from Alex Belloni, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Chris
Hansen, Lars Hansen, Bryan Kelly, Stefan Nagel and Chen Xue. We are also grateful for helpful
comments from seminar and conference participants at the City University of Hong Kong, Peking
University, Renmin University, University of British Columbia, Luxembourg School of Finance,
AQR, Morgan Stanley, Two Sigma, 2018 Annual Meetings of the American Finance Association,
the 2016 Financial Engineering and Risk Management Symposium in Guangzhou, 2017 EcoStat
Conference at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and University of Oregon
Summer Finance Conference. We acknowledge research support by the Fama-Miller Center for
Research in Finance at Chicago Booth. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Guanhao Feng, Stefano Giglio, and Dacheng Xiu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taming the Factor Zoo: A Test of New Factors
Guanhao Feng, Stefano Giglio, and Dacheng Xiu
NBER Working Paper No. 25481
January 2019
JEL No. C01,C12,C23,C52,C55,C58,G00,G1,G10,G12
ABSTRACT
We propose a model-selection method to systematically evaluate the contribution to asset pricing
of any new factor, above and beyond what a high-dimensional set of existing factors explains.
Our methodology explicitly accounts for potential model-selection mistakes, unlike the standard
approaches that assume perfect variable selection, which rarely occurs in practice and produces a
bias due to the omitted variables. We apply our procedure to a set of factors recently discovered
in the literature. While most of these new factors are found to be redundant relative to the existing
factors, a few — such as profitability— have statistically significant explanatory power beyond
the hundreds of factors proposed in the past. In addition, we show that our estimates and their
significance are stable, whereas the model selected by simple LASSO is not.

Guanhao Feng
City University of Hong Kong
83 Tat Chee Avenue
Kowloon Tong
Hong Kong
gavin.feng@cityu.edu.hk

Dacheng Xiu
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlaswn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
dachxiu@chicagobooth.edu

Stefano Giglio
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
stefano.giglio@yale.edu

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25481

1

Introduction

The search for factors that explain the cross section of expected stock returns has produced hundreds
of potential candidates, as noted by Cochrane (2011) and most recently by Harvey et al. (2015),
McLean and Pontiff (2016), and Hou et al. (2017). A fundamental task facing the asset pricing field
today is to bring more discipline to the proliferation of factors – a task that the literature has been
trying to address using a variety of methods. In this paper, we approach this problem from the
following angle: how can we judge whether a new factor adds explanatory power for asset pricing,
relative to the existing set of hundreds of factors the literature has so far produced?
This paper provides a framework for systematically evaluating the contribution of individual
factors relative to the myriad of existing factors, and conducting appropriate statistical inference
in this high-dimensional setting. In particular, we show how to estimate and test the marginal
importance of any factor gt in pricing the cross section of expected returns beyond what is explained
by a high-dimensional set of potential factors ht , where gt and ht could be tradable or non-tradable
factors. We assume the true asset pricing model is approximately low-dimensional; however, in
addition to relevant asset pricing factors, gt and ht include redundant ones that add no explanatory
power to the model, as well as useless ones that have no explanatory power at all. Selecting the
relevant factors from ht and conducting proper inference on the contribution of gt above and beyond
those factors is the aim of this paper. Our methodology can be thought of as a conservative test for
new factors, which benchmarks them against a large-dimensional set of existing ones.
When ht consists of a small number of factors, testing whether gt is useful in explaining asset
prices while controlling for the factors in ht is straightforward: it simply requires estimating the
loadings of the stochastic discount factor (SDF) on gt and ht , and testing whether the loading of
gt is different from zero (see Cochrane (2009)). This exercise not only tells us whether gt is useful
for pricing the cross section, but it also reveals how shocks to gt affect marginal utility, which has a
direct economic interpretation.
When ht consists of potentially hundreds of factors, however, standard statistical methods to
estimate and test the SDF loadings become infeasible or result in poor estimates and invalid inference,
because of the curse of dimensionality. Although variable selection techniques (e.g., least absolute
shrinkage and selection operator, LASSO) can be useful in selecting the correct variables under
certain conditions and thereby reducing the dimensionality of ht , relying on this result produces
very poor approximations to the finite-sample distributions of the estimators, unless appropriate
econometric methods are used to explicitly account for model-selection mistakes (see Chernozhukov
et al. (2015)). This means that, for example, simply applying a model-selection tool like LASSO to
a large set of factors and checking whether a particular factor gt is significant (or even just checking

2

if it gets selected) is not a reliable way to determine whether gt is actually one of the true factors.
The methodology we propose in this paper marries these new econometric methods (in particular, the double-selection LASSO method of Belloni et al. (2014b)) with two-pass regressions such
as Fama-MacBeth to evaluate the contribution of a factor to explaining asset prices specifically in
a high-dimensional setting. Without relying on prior knowledge about which factors to include as
controls among a large number of factors in ht , our procedure selects factors that are either useful in
explaining the cross section of expected returns or are useful in mitigating the omitted variable bias
problem due to potential model selection mistakes. We show that including both types of factors as
controls is essential to conduct reliable inference on the SDF loading of gt .
We apply our methodology to a large set of factors proposed in the last 30 years; in particular, we
collect and construct a large factor data library containing 150 risk factors. This factor zoo contains
many potentially redundant factors, and is thus an ideal dataset to show our empirical results. As an
example, consider the seasonality factor of Heston and Sadka (2008). This factor has a statistically
significant alpha with respect to the Fama-French 3-factor model (t-stat 2.06) in our sample. So, if
evaluated against this benchmark model, one would conclude that seasonality is a useful factor. But
seasonality turns out to be highly correlated with momentum (for example, it has a correlation of
0.63 with Carhart momentum). And if one evaluates it against a model that includes momentum
(like the Fama-French 4 factor model), the alpha becomes small and statistically insignificant (tstat of -0.87). This example highlights the importance of the benchmark in evaluating new factors.
Most papers in the literature that aim to produce new factors, nonetheless, choose the benchmark
model somewhat arbitrarily, subject to a potential data-mining bias. Our procedure systematically
constructs the best low-dimensional benchmark to evaluate new factors using the entire factor zoo.
We perform a variety of empirical exercises that illustrate the use of our procedure in the data.
We start by evaluating the marginal contribution of recent factors proposed in the last five years
(2012 - 2016) to the large set of factors proposed before then. The new factors include – among
others – the two new factors introduced by Fama and French (2015) and Hou et al. (2015), and the
intermediary-based factors from He et al. (2016). Note that our test is conservative: it requires a
new factor gt to contribute to explaining the cross-section relative to the entire universe of existing
factors ht . Given the large dimensionality of the factors produced in the literature, one might wonder
whether, in practice, any additional factor could ever make a significant contribution. We show that
indeed several of the newly proposed factors (e.g., profitability and investment) have significant
marginal explanatory power for expected returns.
Second, we propose a recursive exercise in which factors are tested as they are introduced against
previously proposed factors. The exercise shows that our procedure would have deemed factors as
redundant or spurious in most cases, while finding significance for a small number of factors. Over
3

time, our procedure would have screened out many factors at the time of their introduction, thus
helping address the proliferation of factors. Going forward, our test can be used to make inference
about new factors that will be introduced in the future.
Third, we study the robustness of our procedure from different angles. We show that our results
are robust to using alternative methods to reduce the dimensionality of ht , like Elastic Net and PCA.
We also show that the results are robust to alternative portfolio constructions. Most importantly,
we explore in detail the robustness with respect to the tuning parameters. Like all machine learning
methods, our procedure involves the choice of tuning parameters (in particular two, one for each
selection step). In our analysis, we choose them by cross-validation; in the robustness section, we
also show that our empirical findings are robust to varying the tuning parameters in the neighborhood
of the values chosen by the cross-validation procedure.
The double-selection (DS) estimation procedure we propose, that combines cross-sectional asset
pricing regressions with the double-selection LASSO of Belloni et al. (2014b) (designed originally for
linear treatment effect models), starts by using a two-step selection method to select “control” factors
from ht , and then estimates the SDF loading of gt from cross-sectional regressions that include gt
and the selected factors from ht .
As the name implies, the “double selection” of factors from ht happens in two stages; both
stages are crucial to obtain correct inference on gt . A first set of factors is selected from ht based on
their pricing ability for the cross-section of returns. Factors whose covariances appear to contribute
little to pricing assets in the cross section are excluded from the set of controls. This first step –
effectively an application of standard LASSO to the set of potential factors ht – has the advantage
of selecting factors based on their usefulness in pricing the cross section of assets, as opposed to
other commonly used selection methods (e.g., principal components) that select factors based on
their ability to explain the time-series variation of returns. Using a cross-sectional approach with
factor covariances as inputs is expected to deliver more relevant factors for asset pricing.
This first step therefore chooses a low-dimensional model to explain the cross section using only
factors in ht . This model selection step corresponds closely to the approach taken in the current
literature dealing with the proliferation of asset pricing factors (e.g., Kozak et al. (2017)): take a
large set of factors (ht ), apply some dimension-reduction method (LASSO, Elastic net, PCA, etc.),
and interpret the resulting low-dimensional model as the SDF. Importantly, the interpretation of the
selected model in the literature has relied on the so-called “oracle property” of LASSO and other
model-selection methods: an asymptotic property that guarantees that under certain assumptions,
as the sample size goes to infinity, the procedures will eventually recover the true model. The first
step in our procedure, therefore, is similar in spirit to what has been commonly applied in the recent
literature.
4

In this paper, however, we make one step forward, and recognize that in practice the “oracle
property” never holds. For instance, LASSO makes frequent and potentially important mistakes
when recovering the SDF, as we show in simulations. To make things worse, the failure of the
“oracle property” in finite samples is also a problem for addressing the question we focus on in this
paper: whether a new factor gt improves over the factors in ht . Mistakes in selecting the reduceddimension model from ht also make inference on gt invalid. The LASSO selection may exclude some
factors that have small SDF loadings in sample, but whose covariance with returns are nonetheless
highly cross-sectionally correlated with exposures to gt . Any omission of relevant factors due to
model-selection errors distorts the asymptotic distribution of the estimator, leading to incorrect
inference on the significance – and even the sign – of gt ’s SDF loading. This issue is well-known
in the statistics literature (see, for example, Leeb and Pötscher (2005)), and it has spurred a large
econometrics literature on uniformly valid inference, with important consequences for asset pricing
tests that we explore in this paper.
The key contribution of our paper is to show that despite the mistakes that LASSO inevitably
makes in selecting the model, correct inference can be made about the contribution to asset pricing of
a factor gt . To obtain reliable asymptotic inference for gt , including a second stage of factor selection
is crucial. The second step adds to the set of controls selected by the first-stage LASSO additional
factors whose covariances with returns are highly correlated in the cross section with the covariance
between returns and gt (this step uses a second LASSO, since it still has to choose among many
factors in ht ). Intuitively, we want to make sure to include even factors with small in-sample SDF
loadings, if omitting them may still induce a large omitted variable bias due to the cross-sectional
correlation between their risk exposures and the risk exposures to gt . It is also possible that some
variables selected from the second stage are redundant or even useless, but their inclusion only leads
to a moderate loss in efficiency.
After selecting the set of controls from ht (including all factors selected in either of the two
selection stages), we conduct inference on gt by estimating the coefficient of a standard two-pass
regression using gt and the selected control factors from ht . This post-selection estimation step is
also useful to remove biases arising from regularization in any LASSO procedure; see, for example,
Friedman et al. (2009). We then conduct asymptotic inference on the SDF loading of gt using a
central-limit result we derive in this paper. We show in simulation that our estimator performs well
in finite samples, and substantially outperforms alternative estimators.
Finally, it is worth pointing out an alternative motivation for the methodology proposed in this
paper. Theoretical asset pricing models often predict that some factors (gt ) should be part of the
SDF, i.e. they should enter the investors’ marginal utility. Theoretical models, however, are often
very stylized, and their ability to explain the cross-section is limited. This suggests that, in reality,

5

investors may care about other risk factors that are not explicitly predicted by the model. This
creates an omitted variable problem when testing for the SDF loading of gt : if the true SDF contains
additional factors not explicitly incorporated in the estimation, the estimate for the loading of gt will
be biased. Our methodology – that estimates the loading of gt while taking a stand on the “omitted
factors” by choosing them from the large set ht – can then be seen as a way to address this omitted
factor concern when estimating SDF loadings. In this sense, it is related to Giglio and Xiu (2016), that
show how to make inference on risk premia in the presence of omitted factors. The crucial difference
between the two approaches is that Giglio and Xiu (2016) focus on the estimation of risk premia (the
compensation investors require for holding the gt risk), whereas this paper makes inference on SDF
loadings of observable factors in gt . Both SDF loadings and risk premia have important, though very
distinct, economic interpretations; they have different theoretical properties, and different tools need
to be used to address the omitted factor problem in the two cases. Importantly, only SDF loadings,
addressed in this paper, can speak to the contribution of factors to explaining asset prices (see
Cochrane (2009)), and therefore SDF loadings are the appropriate concept to refer to for disciplining
the zoo of factors.
Our paper builds on several strands of the asset pricing and econometrics literature. In addition
to a large literature devoted to identifying asset pricing factors1 and a vast econometrics literature
on estimating factor models,2 our paper is most closely related to the recent literature on the high
dimensionality of cross-sectional asset pricing models. Green et al. (2016) test 94 firm characteristics
through Fama-Macbeth regressions and find that 8-12 characteristics are significant independent determinants of average returns. McLean and Pontiff (2016) use an out-of-sample approach to study
the post-publication bias of 97 discovered risk anomalies. Harvey et al. (2015) adopt a multiple
testing framework to re-evaluate past research and suggest a new benchmark for current and future
factor fishing. Following on this multiple-testing issue, Harvey and Liu (2016) provide a bootstrap
technique to model selection. Recently, Freyberger et al. (2017) propose a group LASSO procedure
to select characteristics and to estimate how they affect expected returns nonparametrically. Kozak
et al. (2017) use model-selection techniques to approximate the SDF and the mean-variance efficient portfolio as a function of many test portfolios, and compare sparse models based on principal
1

Some of the factors proposed in the literature are based on economic theory (e.g., Breeden (1979), Chen et al.

(1986), Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), Yogo (2006), Pástor and Stambaugh (2003a),
Adrian et al. (2014), He et al. (2016)); others are constructed using firm characteristics, such as Fama and French
(1993, 2015), Carhart (1997), and Hou et al. (2015).
2
See, among the many papers, Jensen et al. (1972), Fama and MacBeth (1973), Ferson and Harvey (1991), Shanken
(1992), Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Welch (2008), and Lewellen et al. (2010). These papers, along with the majority
of the literature, rely on large T and fixed n asymptotic analysis for statistical inference and only deal with models in
which all factors are specified and observable. Recent literature relies on alternative asymptotic designs, including Bai
and Zhou (2015), Gagliardini et al. (2016), Gagliardini et al. (2017), Connor et al. (2012), Giglio and Xiu (2016), and
Raponi et al. (2017), for better small-sample performance and robustness to model misspecification.

6

components of returns with sparse models based on characteristics.
A crucial distinction between our paper and the existing literature is that we focus on the
evaluation of a new factor, rather than testing or estimating an entire reduced-form asset pricing
model, e.g., in the GRS test of Gibbons et al. (1989). To the extent that our procedure is used to
test a new factor gt that is determined ex-ante and motivated by theory, it is not directly subject to
the multiple testing concern that Harvey and Liu (2016) aim to address.3 Our procedure also helps
alleviate the concern of data-snooping, another form of multiple testing (see e.g., Lo and MacKinlay
(1990), Harvey et al. (2015)), because we suggest imposing discipline to the selection of controls as
opposed to the conventional practice of selecting arbitrary controls that leaves the researcher much
more freedom.
Of course, the existing literature has routinely attempted to evaluate the contribution of new
factors relative to some benchmark model, typically by estimating and testing the alpha of a regression of the new factor onto existing factors (e.g., Barillas and Shanken (2018) and Fama and French
(2016)). Our methodology differs from the existing procedures in several ways. First, we do not
use as control an arbitrary set of factors from ht (e.g., the three Fama-French factors), but rather
we select from ht the control model that best explains the cross section of returns. In addition, our
procedure aims to minimize the potential omitted variable bias while enhancing statistical efficiency.
Second, we not only test whether the factor of interest gt is useful in explaining asset prices, but
we also estimate its role in driving marginal utility (its coefficient in the stochastic discount factor);
this is important to be able to interpret the results in economic terms and relate them to the models
that motivated the choice of gt . Third, our procedure handles both traded and non-traded factors.
Fourth, our procedure leverages information from the cross section of the test assets in addition to
the times-series of the factors. Lastly, our inference is valid given a large dimensional set of controls
and test assets in addition to an increasing span of time series.
Finally, our paper is related to a large statistical and machine-learning literature on variable
selection and regularization using LASSO and post-selection inference. For theoretical properties of
LASSO, see Bickel et al. (2009), Meinshausen and Yu (2009), Tibshirani (2011), Wainwright (2009),
Zhang and Huang (2008), Belloni and Chernozhukov (2013). For the post-selection-inference method,
see, for example, Belloni et al. (2012), Belloni et al. (2014b), and review articles by Belloni et al.
(2014a) and Chernozhukov et al. (2015). Our asymptotic results are new to the existing literature in
two important respects. First, our setting is a large panel regression with a large number of factors,
in which both cross-sectional and time-series dimensions increase. Second, our procedure in fact
3

The two methodologies could potentially be combined to produce more conservative inference that also deals with

the possibility that the set of test factors gt is selected ex-post after looking at the inference results, raising concerns
about multiple testing. We leave this for future research. Relatedly, Giglio et al. (2018) tackle the multiple testing of
alphas in a linear asset pricing model.

7

selects covariances between factors and returns, which are contaminated by estimation errors, rather
than factors themselves that are immediately observable.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we set up the model, present our
methodology, and develop relevant statistical inference. In Section 3, we show several empirical
applications of the procedure, and explore the robustness of the results. Section 4 concludes. The
appendix contains technical details and Monte Carlo simulations.

2
2.1

Methodology
Model Setup

We start from a linear specification for the SDF:
mt := γ0−1 − γ0−1 λ|v vt := γ0−1 (1 − λ|g gt − λ|h ht ),

(1)

where γ0 is the zero-beta rate, gt is a d × 1 vector of factors to be tested, and ht is a p × 1 vector of
potentially confounding factors. Without loss of generality, both gt and ht are de-meaned; that is,
they are factor innovations satisfying E(gt ) = 0 and E(ht ) = 0. λg and λh are d × 1 and p × 1 vectors
of parameters, respectively. We refer to λg and λh as the SDF loadings of the factors gt and ht .
Our goal in this paper is to make inference on the SDF loadings of a small set of factors gt
while accounting for the explanatory power of a large number of existing factors, collected in ht .
That is, the main question in this paper is to evaluate the marginal contribution of gt relative to a
high-dimensional benchmark model ht .
Note that the factors in ht are not necessarily all useful factors: their corresponding SDF loadings may be equal to zero. This framework therefore potentially includes redundant factors (factors
that have zero SDF loadings but whose covariances with returns are correlated in the cross section
with the covariance between returns and the SDF), as well as completely useless factors (factors that
have zero SDF loadings and whose covariances with returns are uncorrelated with the covariances
of returns with the SDF). So part of the procedure we propose will reduce the dimensionality of
ht , trying to eliminate the useless and redundant factors, obtaining a low-dimensional benchmark
model.
In addition to gt and ht , we observe a n × 1 vector of test asset returns, rt . Because of (1),
expected returns satisfy:
E(rt ) = ιn γ0 + Cv λv = ιn γ0 + Cg λg + Ch λh ,

(2)

where ιn is a n × 1 vector of 1s, Ca = Cov(rt , at ), for a = g, h, or v. Furthermore, we assume the

8

dynamics of rt follow a standard linear factor model:
rt = E(rt ) + βg gt + βh ht + ut ,

(3)

where βg and βh are n × d and n × p factor-loading matrices, ut is a n × 1 vector of idiosyncratic
components with E(ut ) = 0 and Cov(ut , vt ) = 0.
Equation (2) represents expected returns in terms of (univariate) covariances with the factors,
multiplied by λg and λh . An equivalent representation of expected returns can be obtained in terms
of multivariate betas:
E(rt ) = ιn γ0 + βg γg + βh γh ,

(4)

where βg and βh are the factor exposures (i.e., multivariate betas) and γg and γh are the risk premia
of the factors. SDF loadings λ and risk premia γ are directly related through the covariance matrix
of the factors, but they differ substantially in their interpretation. The risk premium of a factor tells
us whether investors are willing to pay to hedge a certain risk factor, but it does not tell us whether
that factor is useful in pricing the cross section of returns. For example, a factor could command a
nonzero risk premium without even appearing in the SDF, simply because it is correlated with the
true factors. As discussed extensively in Cochrane (2009), to understand whether a factor is useful
in pricing the cross section of assets, we should look at its SDF loading instead of its risk premium.
Our model assumes constant risk exposure and risk premia. In the empirical analysis, we thereby
recommend using characteristic-sorted portfolios instead of individual stocks. The main advantage
of using portfolios is that their risk exposures are more stable over time, as discussed at length in the
asset pricing literature. Gagliardini et al. (2016) and Kelly et al. (2017) allow for stock specific and
time-varying betas as well as time-varying risk premia, by modeling these quantities as functions
of characteristics or macro time series. Our framework can be extended to a similar setting, see
a detailed discussion in Giglio and Xiu (2016). In particular, the estimated SDF loadings can be
interpreted as estimates of their time-series averages, if the SDF loadings are time-varying.
Because the link between SDF loadings and risk premia depends on the covariances among
factors, it is useful to write explicitly the projection of gt on ht as
gt = ηht + zt ,

where

Cov(zt , ht ) = 0.

(5)

Finally, for the estimation of λg , it is essential to characterize the cross-sectional dependence between
Cg and Ch , so we write the cross-sectional projection of Cg onto Ch as:
Cg = ιn ξ | + Ch χ| + Ce ,

(6)

where ξ is a d × 1 vector, χ is a d × p matrix, and Ce is a n × d matrix of cross-sectional regression
residuals.
9

2.2

Challenges with Standard Two-Pass Methods in High-Dimensional Settings

Using two-pass regressions to estimate empirical asset pricing models dates back to Jensen et al.
(1972) and Fama and MacBeth (1973). Partly because of its simplicity, this approach is widely used
in practice. The procedure involves two steps, including one asset-by-asset time-series regression to
estimate individual factor loadings βs, and one cross-sectional regression of expected returns on the
estimated factor loadings to estimate risk premia γ. Because our parameter of interest is λg , the first
step needs to be modified to use covariances between returns and factors rather than multivariate
betas. In a low-dimensional setting, this method would work smoothly, as pointed out by Cochrane
(2009).
However, the empirical asset pricing literature has created hundreds of factors, which can include
useless and redundant factors in addition to useful factors; all the useful ones should be used as
controls in estimating λg and testing for its significance. Over time, the number of potential factors
p discovered in the literature has increased to the same scale as, if not greater than, n or T . In
such a scenario, the standard cross-sectional regression with all factor covariances included is at best
highly inefficient. Moreover, when p is larger than n, the standard Fama-MacBeth approach becomes
infeasible because the number of parameters exceeds the sample size.
Standard methodologies therefore do not work well if at all in a high-dimensional setting due to
the curse of dimensionality, so that dimension-reduction and regularization techniques are inevitable
for valid inference. The existing literature has so far employed ad hoc solutions to this dimensionality
problem. In particular, in testing for the contribution of a new factor, it is common to cherry-pick a
handful of control factors, such as the prominent Fama-French three factors, effectively imposing an
assumption that the selected model is the true one and is not missing any additional factors. However,
this assumption is clearly unrealistic. These standard models have generally poor performance
in explaining a large available cross section of expected returns beyond 25 size- and value-sorted
portfolios, indicating omitted factors are likely to be present in the data. The stake of selecting
an incorrect model is high, because it leads to an omitted variable bias when useful factors are not
included, or an efficiency loss when many useless or redundant factors are included.
2.3

Sparsity

This high-dimensionality issue is not unique to asset pricing. To address it, we need to impose
a certain low-dimensional structure on the model. In this paper, like in much of the recent asset
pricing literature, we impose a sparsity assumption that has a natural economic interpretation and
has recently been studied at length in the machine-learning literature. Imposing sparsity in our
setting means that a relatively small number of factors exist in ht , whose linear combinations along

10

with gt nest the SDF mt , and those alone are relevant for the estimation of λg . More specifically,
sparsity in our setting means there are only s non-zero entries in λh , and in each row of η and χ,
where s is small relative to n and T . The sparsity assumption allows us to extract the most influential
factors, while making valid inference on the parameters of interest, without prior knowledge or even
perfect recovery of the useful factors that determine mt .
Does sparsity make sense in asset pricing? In fact, the asset pricing literature has adopted the
concept of sparsity without always explicitly acknowledging it. In addition to the proposed factor
or the factor of interest, almost all empirical asset pricing models include only a handful of control
factors, such as the Fama-French three or five factors, the momentum factor, etc. Such models
provide a parsimonious representation of the cross section of expected returns, hence they typically
outperform models with many factors in out-of-sample settings. This is a form of sparsity where the
few factors allowed to have non-zero SDF loadings are chosen ex ante. Moreover, sparse models are
easier to interpret and to link to economic theories, compared to alternative latent factor models,
which often use the principal components as factors. Last but not least, as advocated in Friedman
et al. (2009), one should “bet on sparsity” since no procedure does well in dense problems. The
notion of sparse versus dense is relative to the sample size, the number of covariates, the signal to
noise ratio, etc. Sparsity does not necessarily mean that the true model should always only involve
a very small number of factors in absolute terms, say 3 or 5. More non-zero coefficients can be
identified given better conditions (e.g., larger sample size).
2.4

LASSO and Model Selection Mistakes

To leverage sparsity, Tibshirani (1996) proposes the so-called LASSO estimator, which incorporates
into the least-squares optimization a penalty function on the L1 norm of parameters, which leads
to an estimator that has many zero coefficients in the parameter vector. The LASSO estimator has
appealing properties in particular for prediction purposes. With respect to parameter estimation,
however, a well-documented bias is associated with the non-zero coefficients of the LASSO estimate
because of the regularization. For these reasons, Belloni and Chernozhukov (2013) and Belloni
et al. (2012) suggest the use of a “Post-LASSO” estimator, which they have shown more desirable
statistical properties. The Post-LASSO estimator runs LASSO as a model selector, and then re-fits
the least-squares problem without penalty, using only variables that have non-zero coefficients in the
first step.
In the asset pricing context, the LASSO and Post-LASSO procedures could theoretically be
used to select the factors in ht with non-zero SDF loadings as controls for gt , therefore accounting
for the possibility that ht contains useless or redundant factors.
Unfortunately, these procedures are not appropriate when we conduct inference, because funda11

mentally, LASSO and other machine learning methods aim for better prediction. LASSO is designed
to minimize the out-of-sample prediction error. Certain variables, even if they are part of the true
model, may be not worth of including for prediction purpose, because their contribution to prediction is too small relative to the cost of inclusion. In fact, in any finite sample, we can never be sure
LASSO or Post-LASSO will select the correct model, just like we cannot claim the estimated parameter values in a given finite sample are equal to their population counterparts. But if the model is
misspecified, that is, if important factors are mistakenly excluded from the control, inference about
the SDF loadings will be affected by an omitted variable bias. Therefore, standard LASSO or PostLASSO regressions will generally yield erroneous inference, as we confirm in simulations in Appendix
A.
This omitted variable bias due to model-selection mistakes is exacerbated if risk exposures to
the omitted factors are highly correlated in the cross section with the exposures to gt , even though
these factors may have small SDF loadings (which is why they are likely omitted by LASSO). We
will therefore need to ensure that these factors are included in the set of controls even if LASSO
would suggest excluding them. Note this issue is not unique to high-dimensional problems – see, for
example, Leeb and Pötscher (2005) – but it is arguably more severe in such a scenario because model
selection is inevitable.
2.5

Two-Pass Regression with Double-Selection LASSO

To guard against omitted variable biases due to selection mistakes, we therefore adopt a doubleselection strategy in the same spirit as what Belloni et al. (2014b) propose for estimating the treatment effect. The first selection (basically, standard LASSO) searches for factors in ht whose covariances with returns are useful for explaining the cross section of expected returns. A second selection
(also using LASSO) is then added to search for factors in ht potentially missed from the first step,
but that, if omitted, would induce a large omitted variable bias. Factors excluded from both stages
of the double-selection procedure must have small SDF loadings and have covariances that correlate
only mildly in the cross section with the covariance between factors of interest gt and returns – these
factors can be excluded with minimal omitted variable bias. This strategy results in a parsimonious
model that minimizes the omitted factor bias ex ante when estimating and testing λg .
The regularized two-pass estimation proceeds as follows:
(1) Two-Pass Variable Selection
(1.a) Run a cross-sectional LASSO regression of average returns on sample covariances between

12

factors in ht and returns:4

bh λ
min n−1 r̄ − ιn γ − C

2

γ,λ


+ τ0 n−1 kλk1 ,

(7)

bh = Cov(r
d t , ht ) = T −1 R̄H̄ | .5 This step selects among the factors in ht those
where C
that best explain the cross section of expected returns. Denote {Ib1 } as the set of indices
corresponding to the selected factors in this step.
bg,·,j
(1.b) For each factor j in gt (with j = 1, · · · , d), run a cross-sectional LASSO regression of C
bh (the covariance between
(the covariance between returns and the jth factor of gt ) on C
returns and all factors ht ):6

bg,·,j − ιn ξj − C
bh χ| )
min n−1 (C
j,·
ξj ,χj,·

2

+ τj n

−1

kχ|j,· k1


.

(8)

This step identifies factors whose exposures are highly correlated to the exposures to gt
in the cross-section. This is the crucial second step in the double-selection algorithm,
that searches for factors that may be missed by the first step but that may still induce
large omitted variable bias in the estimation of λg if omitted, due to their covariance
properties. Denote {Ib2,j } as the set of indices corresponding to the selected factors in the
S
jth regression, and Ib2 = dj=1 Ib2,j .
(2) Post-selection Estimation
Run an OLS cross-sectional regression using covariances between the selected factors from both
steps and returns:

bg , λ
bh ) = arg min
(b
γ0 , λ

γ0 ,λg ,λh

bg λg − C
bh λh
r̄ − ιn γ0 − C

2

:

λh,j = 0,

∀j ∈
/ Ib = Ib1

[


b
I2 . (9)

We refer to this procedure as a double-selection (DS) approach, as opposed to the single-selection
(SS) approach which only involves (1.a) and (2).
The LASSO estimators involve only convex optimizations, so that the implementation is quite
fast. Statistical software such as R, Python, and Matlab have existing packages that implement
LASSO using efficient algorithms. Note that other variable-selection procedures are also applicable.
Either (1.a) or (1.b) can be replaced by other machine-learning methods such as regression tree,
random forest, boosting, and neural network, as shown in Chernozhukov et al. (2016) for treatmenteffect estimation, or by subset selection, partial least squares, and PCA regressions (or with LASSO
4

We use kAk and kAk1 to denote the operator norm and the L1 norm of a matrix A = (aij ), that is,
P
maxj i |aij |, where λmax (·) denotes the largest eigenvalue of a matrix.
P
5
For any matrix A = (a1 : a2 : . . . aT ), we write ā = T −1 Tt=1 at , Ā = A − ι|T ā.
6
For any matrix A, we use Ai,· and A·,j to denote the ith row and jth column of A, respectively.

13

p
λmax (A| A),

selection on top of PCs similar to Kozak et al. (2017)). They call this general procedure double
machine learning. We advocate LASSO because the underlying asset pricing model is linear, the
selected model is more interpretable, and its theoretical properties are more tractable.
It is useful to relate our approach to the recent model selection method by Harvey and Liu
(2016). Their model selection procedure is an algorithm that resembles the forward stepwise regression in Friedman et al. (2009) (a so-called “greedy” algorithm). Their algorithm evaluates the
contribution of each factor relative to a pre-selected best model through model comparison, and
builds up the best model sequentially. Just like LASSO cannot deliver the true model with certainty,
this algorithm cannot do so either, because it makes commitments to certain variables too early
which prevent the algorithm from finding the best overall solution later. Specifically, if one of the
factors in the pre-selected model is redundant relative to the factor under consideration (i.e., the
latter factor is in the DGP and the former one is a noisy version of it), the latter factor could either
be added or discarded depending on how noisy the former factor is. Neither scenario, however, yields
a model that is closer to the truth. In any case, if this algorithm were preferred to LASSO for any
reasons, we could easily substitute it in place of LASSO and still obtain correct inference, because
the double machine learning procedure explicitly accounts for model selection mistakes.
Our LASSO regression contains nonnegative regularization parameters, for example, τj (j =
0, 1, . . . , d), to control the level of penalty. A higher τj indicates a greater penalty and hence results
in a smaller model. The optimization becomes a least-squares problem if τj is 0. In practice, we
typically test one factor each time, so that this procedure involves two regularization parameters τ0
and τ1 . To determine these parameters, we adopt the widely used cross-validation (CV) procedure,
see Friedman et al. (2009).
We can also give different weights to λh . Belloni et al. (2012) recommend a data-driven method
for choosing a penalty that allows for non-Gaussian and heteroskedastic disturbances. We adopt a
strategy in the spirit of Bryzgalova (2015), which assigns weights to λh proportional to the inverse
of the operator norm of the univariate betas of the corresponding factor in ht . This strategy helps
remove spurious factors in ht because of a higher penalty assigned on those factors with smaller
univariate betas.
2.6

Statistical Inference

We derive the asymptotic distribution of the estimator for λg under a jointly large n and T asymptotic
design. Whereas d is fixed throughout, s and p can either be fixed or increasing. In the appendix,
we prove the following theorem:
Theorem 1. Under Assumptions B.1 - B.6 in Appendix B.2, if s2 T 1/2 (n−1 + T −1 ) log(n ∨ p ∨ T ) =

14

o(1), we have
L

bg − λg ) −→ Nd (0, Π) ,
T 1/2 (λ
where the asymptotic variance is given by
T
T

1 XX
| −1
Π = lim
E (1 − λ| vt )(1 − λ| vs )Σ−1
,
z zt z s Σ z
T →∞ T

Σz = Var(zt ).

t=1 s=1

bg does not rely on covariances (Cg , Ch ) or factor loadings
Note the asymptotic distribution of λ
(βg , βh ) of gt and ht , because they appear in strictly higher-order terms, which further facilitates our
inference. The next theorem provides a Newey-West-type estimator of the asymptotic variance Π.
Theorem 2. Suppose the same assumptions as in Theorem 1 hold. In addition, Assumption B.7
holds. If qs3/2 (T −1/2 + n−1/2 ) kV kMAX kZkMAX = op (1),7 we have
p
b −→
Π
Π,

b = (λ
bg : λ
bh ) is given by (9), and
where λ
b =1
Π
T

T
X

b| vt )2 Σ
b −1
b −1 zbt zb| Σ
(1 − λ
z
t z

t=1



q
T
 −1 
1X X
k
b| vt )(1 − λ
b| vt−k )Σ
b
b −1 zbt zb| + zbt−k zb| Σ
+
,
1−
(1 − λ
z
z
t
t−k
T
q+1
k=1 t=k+1

T
X
bz = 1
Σ
zbt zbt| ,
T

zbt = gt − ηeIeht ,

n
ηeIe = arg min kG − ηHk2 : η·,j = 0,
η

t=1

o
j∈
/ Ie ,

and Ie is the union of selected variables using a LASSO regression of each factor in gt on ht :
n
o
min T −1 kGj,· − ηj Hk2 + τ̄j T −1 kηj k1 , j = 1, 2, . . . , d.
ηj

(10)

We stress that the inference procedure is valid even with imperfect model selection. That is,
the selected models from (7) and (8) may omit certain useful factors and include redundant ones,
which nonetheless has a negligible effect on the inference of λg . Using analysis similar to Belloni
et al. (2014b), the results can be strengthened to hold uniformly over a sequence of data-generating
processes that may vary with the sample size and only under approximately sparse conditions, so
that our inference is valid without relying on perfect recovery of the correct model in finite sample.
We provide in Appendix A an extensive set of simulations that show the finite-sample performance of our estimator.
7

We use kAkMAX to denote the L∞ -norm of A in the vector space.

15

3

Empirical Analysis

3.1

Data

3.1.1

The Zoo of Factors

Our factor library contains 150 risk factors at the monthly frequency for the period from July 1976
to December 2017, obtained from multiple sources. First, we download all workhorse factors in the
U.S. equity market from Ken French’s data library. Then we add several published factors directly
from the authors’ websites, including liquidity from Pástor and Stambaugh (2003a), the q-factors
from Hou et al. (2015), and the intermediary asset pricing factors from He et al. (2016). We also
include factors from the AQR data library, such as Betting-Against-Beta, HML Devil, and QualityMinus-Junk. In addition to these 15 publicly available factors, we follow Fama and French (1993)
to construct 135 long-short value-weighted portfolios as factor proxies, using firm characteristics
surveyed in Hou et al. (2017) and Green et al. (2016).
To construct these factors, we include only stocks for companies listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or
NASDAQ that have a CRSP share code of 10 or 11. Moreover, we exclude financial firms and firms
with negative book equity. For each characteristic, we sort stocks using NYSE breakpoints based on
their previous year-end values, then build and rebalance a long-short value-weighted portfolio (top
30% - bottom 30% or 1-0 dummy difference) every June for a 12-month holding period. Both Fama
and French (2008) and Hou et al. (2017) have discussed the importance of using NYSE breakpoints
and value-weighted portfolios. Microcaps, i.e., stocks with market equity smaller than the 20th
percentile, have the largest cross-sectional dispersion in most anomalies, while accounting for only
3% of the total market equity. Equal-weighted returns overweight microcaps, despite their small
economic importance.
In Table 4 we report a complete list of the 150 factors and various descriptive statistics (publication years, the ending years of their sample used in the papers, monthly average returns, and
annualized Sharpe ratios), as well as the references.
3.1.2

Test Portfolios

We conduct our empirical analysis on a large set of standard portfolios of U.S. equities. We target U.S.
equities because of their better data quality and because they are available for a long period; however,
our methodology could be applied to any set of countries or asset classes. We focus on portfolios
rather than individual assets because characteristic-sorted portfolios have more stable betas, higher
signal-to-noise ratios, and they are less prone to missing data issues, despite the existence of a biasvariance trade-off between the choice of portfolios and individual assets. Selecting few portfolios

16

based on sorts of a handful characteristics is likely to tilt the results in favor of these factors, see
Harvey and Liu (2016). There might also be a loss in efficiency in using too few portfolios, e.g.,
Litzenberger and Ramaswamy (1979). In line with the suggestion of Lewellen et al. (2010), we base
our analysis on a large cross section of characteristic-sorted portfolios, which helps strike a balance
between having many individual stocks or a handful of portfolios.
We use a total of 750 portfolios as test assets. We start from a set of 36 portfolios: 3×2 portfolios
sorted by size and book-to-market ratio, 3 × 2 portfolios sorted by size and operating profitability,
3 × 2 portfolios sorted by size and investment, 3 × 2 portfolios sorted by size and short-term reversal
on prior (1-1) return, 3 × 2 portfolios sorted by size and momentum on prior (2-12) return, and 3 × 2
portfolios sorted by size and long-term reversal on prior (13-60) return. This set of test assets – all
available from Kenneth French’s website – captures a vast cross-section of anomalies and exposures
to different factors.8
We add to these 36 portfolios 714 additional ones obtained from our factor zoo, that cover
additional characteristics. In particular, we try to include all sets of 3×2 bivariate-sorted portfolios
from continuous factors in our factor zoo. These are the same sorting portfolios that are used to
construct the long-short factors. For each firm characteristic, the bivariate-sorted 3 × 2 portfolios are
constructed by intersecting its three groups with those formed on size (market equity). Notice that
the number of stocks in each 3×2 group can be unbalanced in the bivariate intersection. We only
include the resulting portfolios if each of the 6 groups contains a sufficient number of stocks (at least
10). This procedure gives us 119 sets of 3 × 2 bivariate-sorted portfolios, yielding 714 portfolios.9
As a robustness check, we alternatively use in our analysis the set of 202 portfolios used in Giglio
and Xiu (2016): 25 portfolios sorted by size and book-to-market ratio, 17 industry portfolios, 25
portfolios sorted by operating profitability and investment, 25 portfolios sorted by size and variance,
35 portfolios sorted by size and net issuance, 25 portfolios sorted by size and accruals, 25 portfolios
sorted by size and momentum, and 25 portfolios sorted by size and beta.
For a second robustness check, we use 1,825 5×5 bivariate-sorted portfolios instead of the 750
3×2 portfolios. We start from a standard set of 175 portfolios: 25 portfolios sorted by size and bookto-market ratio, 25 portfolios sorted by size and beta, 25 portfolios sorted by size and operating
8

See the description of all portfolio construction on Kenneth French’s website: http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/

pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.
9
There are 16 factors for which bivariate-sorted portfolios are not available. 8 of 16 are dummy or categorical
characteristics, including New equity issue(28), Dividend initiation (29), Dividend omission (30), Number of earnings
increases(45), Financial statements score (47), Financial statement Performance (90), Sin Stocks (122), and Convertible
Debt Indicator (150). The remaining 8 of 16 have certain portfolios with less than 10 firms or have missing values:
Industry-Adjusted Size (51), Dollar trading volume (53), Illiquidity (61), R&D increase (68), Corporate investment
(69), Change in Short-term Investments (87), Return on net operating assets (116), and Return on assets (127).

17

profitability, 25 portfolios sorted by size and investment, 25 portfolios sorted by size and short-term
reversal on prior (1-1) return, 25 portfolios sorted by size and momentum on prior (2-12) return,
and 25 portfolios sorted by size and long-term reversal on prior (13-60) return. We then add 1,650
additional ones. The sorting procedure is same as that for the 3×2 portfolios, except that the stock
universe is divided into five groups for each characteristic.
3.2

Evaluating New Factors

In this section we apply our methodology to factors that have been proposed in the last five years
(2012-2016), drawing the benchmark model against which to evaluate them from the set of 135 factors
that were proposed before then.10 By placing ourselves in the position of researchers evaluating “new”
factors (as of 2012), we exemplify in this section how our procedure can be applied going forward
as more factors are proposed. Note that we have no ex-ante reason to expect the results to go in
either direction. On the one hand, given that the set of potential control factors is already extremely
large, one might think that new factors are unlikely to contribute much to pricing the cross section
of returns. On the other hand, we expect new research to potentially uncover better factors over
time, yielding factors that improve over the existing ones.
3.2.1

The First LASSO

We start with the first step of our procedure: the cross-sectional LASSO, closely related to the
dimension-reduction methods that recent papers in asset pricing have been using to tackle the factor
zoo (e.g., Kozak et al. (2017)): the objective of this first LASSO is to select a parsimonious model
that explains the cross-section of risk premia.
The advantage of applying model-selection methods like LASSO to a large set of factors is
that they estimate a low-dimensional representation of the entire SDF. Here, we present and discuss
the model selected from ht by LASSO, since it is the first step in our procedure; but we also show
empirically its fragility in selecting the model.
When we apply it in our context, LASSO indeed selects a relatively small model of the SDF, with
four factors: SMB (21), Net external finance (99), Change in shares outstanding (109), and Profit
margin (117). As discussed above, this first LASSO step corresponds closely to the way modelselection methods have been applied in the asset pricing literature to estimate a low-dimensional
model for the SDF.
The main drawback of statistical model-selection methods is that in any finite sample they are
likely to make mistakes in selecting the factors, thus yielding the wrong model. It is useful to quantify
10

The most recent factors in our library were introduced in 2016.

18

the issue in our context, by showing empirically that LASSO is not able to robustly pin down the
identity of the factors in the model.
To evaluate the robustness of the LASSO selection, we explore how it depends on the LASSO
tuning parameter. Recall that, like other dimension-reduction methods, the LASSO estimator depends on a tuning parameter – the penalty parameter τ0 . This parameter is not pinned down by
theory, and must be selected by the researcher to trade off the fit and sparsity of the model. Different choices of τ0 result in different models selected by the estimator; the estimator is robust if the
conclusions (in this case: which factors get selected) do not change substantially as τ0 varies.
A key question in this robustness exercise is to determine what is a reasonable range of values
for τ0 to consider. Of course, the estimator cannot be expected to be robust to the entire possible
range of τ0 , since setting τ0 = 0 always selects all factors, and τ0 = ∞ selects no factors at all. We
propose here a procedure to select an ex-ante reasonable range of values τ0 to evaluate the robustness
of LASSO.
The starting point for our procedure is that in standard applications of machine learning,
tuning parameters are typically chosen by simulating the performance of the algorithm in the data,
and choosing values for the parameter for which the estimator performs the best in those simulations.
We use 10-fold cross-validation (CV) to pin down the two tuning parameters of the two LASSO steps
in our estimator. But these simulations are not deterministic: for example, in the case of 10-fold
CV, we divide the whole sample period into 10 disjoint and random subsamples. This means that
different sets of simulations will generally yield different values of the tuning parameters.
We therefore run the tuning-parameter-selection procedure multiple times, and explore the
robustness of the results across different sets of simulations. In the case of the first-stage LASSO,
we run 200 different 10-fold cross-validation exercises (by using 200 different randomization seeds).
For each seed, the CV will choose a different value of the tuning parameter τ0 . We then look at
robustness of the selected model using these 200 different values for τ0 . Therefore the range of
possible values for τ0 to consider in studying the robustness of LASSO is determined by the possible
(random) outcomes of the CV selection. This will effectively exclude values of τ0 that are unlikely
to be optimal using the CV criterion.
Figure 1 shows, for each factor (identified by its ID), in what fraction of the 200 LASSO-selected
models each factor appears. The figure shows striking variability in the model selection step. Only
SMB among 135 factors is actually selected more than 70% of the time. Instead, most of the factors
are selected in 1% to 20% of the cases, but not in the others.
If LASSO were able to perfectly select the true model, we should have found a small number of
factors (say, 3 to 5) to be selected 100% of the time, and the remaining factors to be selected 0% of

19

the time. Instead, Figure 1 shows that LASSO clearly has difficulty in pinning down which factors
are the correct ones. This exercise cautions against using simple LASSO to decide whether a factor
should be included in the SDF or not.
3.2.2

The Second LASSO

To make proper inference on the marginal contribution of new factors gt , our procedure adds a second
LASSO step aimed at identifying the factors most likely to cause an omitted variable bias. Whereas
the first LASSO only depends on ht , this second LASSO depends on both gt and ht . This means
that for every factor proposed after 2012, there will be a different set of factors selected in the second
step. For reasons of space, we do not report all the factors for each gt here.
That said, it is useful to compare the average number of factors selected at the two stages. As
reported above, the first LASSO selects in our sample a very parsimonious model, with 4 factors.
The second-stage LASSO, instead, tends to select between 20 and 80 control factors. The striking
difference is due to the difference in the objective function for the two LASSO steps. The first step
aims to explain the cross-section of expected returns; for this purpose, the CV exercise selects a very
parsimonious model (i.e. a high τ0 , indicating that a few factors go a long way in explaining the
cross-section of returns). Instead, the second LASSO has the objective of selecting factors that have
a high potential for omitted variable bias. Given that many factors in the control set ht are highly
correlated, this LASSO will retain many of those.
The number of factors selected by the first-stage LASSO can be interpreted as a measure of the
dimensionality of the underlying asset pricing model, at least as long as the “oracle property” holds.
There is, nonetheless, no theoretical relation between the number of factors selected in the second
stage and the number of true asset pricing factors in the model. Any factor that could potentially
bias the estimate of λg should be retained by the second LASSO, even redundant factors.
The fact that more factors are selected in the second stage is also consistent with the substantial
randomness we observe in the first stage selection. Many factors are close cousins. Including a subset
of them is more than enough, yet which subset to include depends on the subsamples. For this reason,
we expect substantial uncertainty in the first stage selection, as well as a large omitted variable bias
if only the first stage variables were used as controls.
3.2.3

The Double-selection (DS) Estimator

We now present our results about the marginal contribution of each factor gt using the DS methodology. Table 1 reports the results for the factors proposed in the last five years, among which we
find Quality-Minus-Junk (QMJ), Betting-Against-Beta (BAB), two investment factors, that is, CMA
from Fama and French (2015) (thereafter, FF) and IA from Hou et al. (2015) (thereafter, HXZ),
20

two profitability factors, that is, RMW from FF and ROE from HXZ, the nontradable intermediary
capital factor from He et al. (2016), and several factors constructed on accounting measures.
The table contains five columns of results, each reporting the point estimate of the SDF loading
and the corresponding t-statistic. More specifically, the point estimate corresponds to the estimated
slope of the cross-sectional regression of returns on (univariate) betas for each factor, using different
methodologies to select the control factors: it represents the estimated average excess return in basis
points per month of a portfolio with unit univariate beta with respect to that factor. This number,
which we refer to as λs , is equal to the SDF loading λg but scaled to correspond to a unit beta
exposure for ease of interpretation. A positive estimate for the SDF loading indicates that high
values of the factor capture states of low marginal utility (good states of the world). We adjust the
sign of each factor a priori, based on the economic theory, intuition, or story in the original paper
that proposes this factor, so that a positive estimate should be viewed as being consistent with the
economic implication. The t-statistic in each column corresponds to the test of the hypothesis that
the slope is equal to zero, constructed using different methodologies across columns.
The first column reports our main result – the estimates of SDF loadings for the factors introduced since 2012, with corresponding t-statistics, obtained with our DS procedure. Most of the
new factors appear statistically insignificant – our test therefore deems them redundant or useless
relative to the factors introduced up to 2011. However, we still find a few important factors useful
in explaining the cross section, as their estimates are significantly different from zero: in particular,
profitability is strongly significant (this is true both of the version of HXZ and that of FF). HXZ’s
investment factor is also significant, as are the intermediary investment and QMJ (interestingly,
Gagliardini et al. (2017) also find empirical evidence in favor of the recently introduced factors, like
investment and profitability, using a different econometric strategy.) All other factors appear statistically insignificant. These results show that our DS method can discriminate between useful and
redundant factors even when the set of controls contains hundreds of factors.
The second set of results reports the estimates that one would obtain using the naive SS methodology – that is, simply using one cross-sectional LASSO to select the factors to use as controls, without
the second selection step that is useful to avoid the omitted variable bias due to mistakes in model
selection. The results are quite different from the DS approach, with only one factor, the convertible
debt factor, appearing significant (with a negative sign); none of the other factors that appear significant with the DS method do so when using SS. Given our discussion in the previous sections, it
should not be surprising that results obtained using the SS method differ from those obtained using
the DS method: our theoretical results and simulations show that the SS method is biased in finite
samples. This table shows that these biases play a major role empirically.
The third column shows instead what the estimates for the various factors would be if one
21

simply used the Fama-French three factors (Market, SMB, HML) as controls, rather than selecting
the controls optimally among the myriad of potential factors. The results differ noticeably from the
benchmark with double selection. 9 out of 15 factors are significant against the Fama-French three
factor model. Of course, if the true SDF was known ex ante, selecting all and only the true factors
as controls would lead to the most efficient estimate for λg . In practice, however, it is unlikely that
we can pin down the entire SDF with certainty. The aim of our DS procedure is precisely to select
the controls statistically – avoiding arbitrary choices of control factors – while at the same time
minimizing the potential omitted variable bias.
The fourth column shows one more alternative way to compute SDF loadings: using standard
OLS estimation including in the cross-sectional regression all the hundreds of potential controls. This
panel therefore shows what happens if no selection is applied at all on the factors. As discussed in the
previous sections, this approach is unbiased but inefficient. We expect therefore (and confirm in the
table) that the results appear much more noisy and the estimates less significant than when operating
variable selection through our DS method. This result highlights the importance of machine learning
methods when sorting through the myriad of existing factors.
The last column of the table shows the average excess return of the factors, that is, their risk
premia. This number represents the compensation investors obtain from bearing exposure to that
factor, holding exposures to all other risk factors constant. As discussed, for example, in Cochrane
(2009), the risk premium of a factor does not correspond to its ability to price other assets. Using
the risk premium to assess the importance of a factor in a pricing model would be misleading. For
example, consider two factors that are both equally exposed to the same underlying risk, plus some
noise. Both factors will command an identical risk premium. Yet those factors are not both useful
to price other assets—regardless of their level of statistical significance. The most promising way to
reduce the proliferation of factors is not to look at their risk premium (no matter how significant it is),
but to evaluate whether they add any pricing information to the existing factors. Our paper proposes
a way to make this feasible even in a context of high dimensionality, when the set of potential control
factors is large. We come back to this point in the next section.11
To sum up, Table 1 shows that which factors are chosen as controls, and which econometric
procedure is used for estimation, make a large difference for the conclusions about the SDF loadings
and the usefulness of factors. Both the theoretical analysis and the simulations provided in this paper
suggest that the DS method allows researchers to make full use of the information in the existing
zoo of factors without introducing biases while accounting for efficiency losses.
11

It is interesting to note that about half of these factors do not have a significant risk premium, while they typically

did in the original publications. This is partly due to the different sample period used here, and partly because we use
a unified sorting methodology in this paper, rather than the heterogeneous methods used in the original papers. This
result is consistent with the findings of Hou et al. (2017).

22

3.3

Evaluating Factors Recursively

One of the motivations for using our methodology is that it can help distinguish useful from useless
and redundant factors as they are introduced in the literature. Over time, this should help limit the
proliferation of factors, and retain only those new factors that actually contain novel information to
price the cross section.
To illustrate this point, in each year starting in 1994 we consider the factors introduced during
that year, and use our DS procedure to test whether they are useful or redundant relative to factors
existing up to then. Note that the exercise is fully recursive, using only information available up to
time t when evaluating a factor introduced at time t, both in choosing the set of potential controls
ht and in constructing the test portfolios (which are therefore sorted on characteristics introduced
in the literature up to time t).
Table 2 reports the results. In the table, the factors introduced since 1994 are identified by
their ID; the table underlines the ones that appear to be statistically significant according to our
test, relative to the factors introduced before them. The table also reports the number of test assets
used in each year and the number of control factors in ht .
The results show that had our DS test been applied year by year starting in 1994, only 17 factors
would have been considered useful, and a large majority would have been identified as redundant or
useless.
It is useful to think about this exercise in light of the recent literature (e.g., McLean and Pontiff
(2016), Harvey et al. (2015)) that has highlighted and tried to address the existence of a multitude
of seemingly significant anomalies. The literature has proposed a variety of approaches, including
adopting a stricter requirement for significance (such as using a threshold for the t-statistic of 3).
Although the overarching theme is to tame the factor zoo, the perspectives are rather different. The
aforementioned papers emphasize the bias of data-snooping or raise the concern of multiple testing,
whereas our focus is on omitted controls. All these problems could contribute to the proliferation of
factors.
Our approach differs from the proposals in the existing literature in four substantial ways. First,
and most important, we explicitly address the problem of omitted variable bias due to potential model
selection mistakes when making inference about factors’ contribution to asset prices. Second, our
method directly takes into account the correlation among factors, rather than considering factors
individually and using Bonferroni-type bounds to assess their joint significance. We provide a statistical test of a factor’s contribution with desirable asymptotic properties, as demonstrated in the
previous sections, and do not rely on simulation or bootstrap methods whose statistical properties in
this context are unknown. Third, our method is specifically designed to handle hundreds of factors as
23

controls, exploiting model-selection econometric advances to reduce the dimensionality of the factor
set. Fourth, the criterion we employ for selecting factors is based on the SDF loading, not the risk
premium of the factors (see a more detailed discussion on their differences in Section 3.2), as it is
the right quantity to evaluate the contribution of a factor to explaining asset prices.
The various approaches that have been proposed in the literature so far address complementary
issues to be overcome on the path to disciplining the zoo of factor. We leave for future research
refinements of these methods that can potentially combine insights from our work and other recent
papers.
Finally, it is useful to remark that this recursive exercise is simply meant as an illustration of
possible applications of our method. We do not deal here with some of the potential issues that
arise in ordering factors by their discovery date, such as the fact that the publication year might
not capture precisely when researchers and investors first learn about the factor.12 However, our
methodology is quite general, and does not require ht and gt to be ordered temporally at all. For
example, ht might contain all factors obtained from equity markets, and gt could contain factors
from option markets, in which case our test could be interpreted as evaluating whether option-based
factors help explain the cross section beyond what is explained by equity factors. We leave these
other applications to future research.
3.4

Robustness

In this section we explore the robustness of our estimator, and discuss some extensions of our setup.
The most important robustness test – presented first – is with respect to the tuning parameters,
especially since we have shown in Section 3.2.1 that the first step of our procedure (the LASSO
model selection) is not very robust to these changes.
3.4.1

Robustness to the Choice of Tuning Parameters

We explore in this section how robust our conclusions are to changes in the tuning parameters. Recall
that each dimension-reduction step via LASSO depends on one tuning parameter. Our DS procedure
uses LASSO in two separate steps, so two tuning parameters are needed. In this section, we focus on
our benchmark estimates in Table 1, and check the robustness of our inference about the marginal
contribution of the factors proposed after 2012.
Just as in Section 3.2.1, we need to decide on a reasonable range of values for the two tuning
12

One alternative ordering that we have explored, and that is included in the internet appendix, uses the last year in

each paper’s sample rather than the publication year as an alternative – though still imperfect – measure of the year
in which the factor was discovered. Results are similar – 9 out of 12 factors significant in Table A1 are also significant
in Table 2 – though of course the results are by construction not invariant to the ordering of factors.

24

parameters. We follow the procedure described before: we choose 200 different seeds for the CV
simulations; for every set of simulations, we obtain one estimate for the two tuning parameters. We
then look at how each λg ’s t-statistic varies across choices of the tuning parameters. As before, this
procedure ensures that we only consider values for the tuning parameters that are reasonable, in the
specific sense that they are optimal given one set of CV simulations. Therefore, we exclude from the
robustness analysis values of the parameters that do not maximize the cross-validation criterion for
any of the 200 simulations.
We report the results of this robustness analysis in Figure 2 using heatmaps. Each panel
corresponds to a different factor gt . Different colors correspond to different levels of the t-statistics.
The two axes correspond to values for the two tuning parameters (in logs).
Each panel reports 200 black dots, corresponding to a choice of tuning parameters in one of
the CV simulation sets. The red cross in each graph is the average of these 200 tuning parameters,
and that is the level we use to generate the baseline results (Table 1). The figure shows that
inference for some factors is more robust than for others. The factors that appear significant in
the baseline appear generally robust, in the sense that the vast majority of choices for the tuning
parameters yield statistically significant results. Some of them (investment and profitability) appear
very robust. Others, like the intermediary investment factor, do not appear very robust, in the sense
that for a nontrivial subset of the tuning parameters considered, its significance vanishes. Other
factors appear strong and robust, though not statistically significant at standard levels in our main
results (for example, the Betting Against Beta factor). Finally, most other factors (like Growth in
Advertising Expense and Fama and French’s CMA) appear insignificant in the baseline, and robustly
so across the range of tuning parameters. These results confirm the main conclusions of our baseline
analysis, showing that a few of the recent factors appear to contribute significantly to explaining
the cross-section, and most of the remaining ones are redundant or useless; at the same time, they
provide a more nuanced view of the contribution of some of the factors.
Figure 3 shows the size of the selected model (the union of the factors selected at both steps of
our DS procedure) as a function of the two tuning parameters. The figure shows that our 200 tuning
parameters span a large subset of the parameter space: they induce the two-step selection procedure
to select models as small as 0 - 5 factors and as large as 120 factors. The range of tuning parameters
we consider therefore represents a statistically and economically meaningful set of possible choices.
Overall, Figures 2 and 3 are useful to refine the conclusions of our statistical analysis in Table
1, highlighting the most robust factors. We therefore recommend the use of heat maps like these to
evaluate the robustness of the significant discoveries by model selection procedures like ours.

25

3.4.2

Robustness to Test Assets and Regularization Method

In this section we further explore the robustness of our results, with respect to the test assets used for
the estimation and the machine learning methodology used to select the control factors. As before,
we focus our robustness tests on the evaluation of recent factors (Table 1).
Column (1) of Table 3 reports our baseline results for convenience (as in the first column of
Table 1). Column (2) shows that the results are similar when sorting the test assets in 5 × 5 instead
of 3 × 2 portfolios. In Column (3), we show consistent results when using a smaller number of test
assets, the 202 portfolios used in Giglio and Xiu (2016) and described in section 3.1.2.
Columns (4) and (5) show that our results also hold when using different dimension-reduction
procedures. Which method is preferred in each context depends on the underlying model assumptions, and given the assumptions we make, LASSO would be the most suitable model-selection
method. However, Elastic Net is a reasonable alternative to explore in this context: it combines a
penalty from LASSO with that of the Ridge regression. The model selected by the Elastic Net is
naturally larger, but, as column (4) in the table shows, the results are consistent with our benchmark
based on pure LASSO. An alternative, following Kozak et al. (2017), is to first construct PCA of
the factors, and then use LASSO on those. The results are reported in column (5). The results are
statistically weaker but broadly in line with those of the benchmark specification.13
Overall, while across the different robustness tests the significance of some factors varies, the
main conclusions of Table 1 appear quite robust to these changes in specification. That is, several
of the factors introduced recently have significant additional pricing power relative to all factors
introduced in the literature before 2012.

4

Conclusion

In this paper we propose a regularized two-pass cross-sectional regression approach to establish the
contribution to asset pricing of a factor gt relative to a set of control factors ht , where the potential
control set can have high dimensionality and include useless or redundant factors. Our procedure
uses recent model-selection econometric techniques (specifically the double-selection procedure of
Belloni et al. (2014b)) to systematically select the best control model out of the large set of factors,
while explicitly taking into account model selection mistakes.
We apply this methodology to a large set of factors that the literature has proposed in the last
13

We should remark that the standard errors and the test we built are derived exactly for the case of LASSO. In

light of Chernozhukov et al. (2016), we expect the same formulae to work for other machine learning methods, such as
LASSO on PCs, despite the lack of theory (they do perform well in simulations). Nonetheless, it is interesting to see
that the conclusions are broadly similar.

26

30 years. We uncover several interesting empirical findings. First, several newly proposed factors
(especially different versions of profitability) are useful in explaining asset prices, even after accounting for the large set of existing factors proposed up to 2012. Second, the SDF loadings’ estimates
for several factors (and the evaluation of the usefulness of those factors) are robust to changes in
the tuning parameters, despite the fact that the models selected vary substantially when the tuning
parameters are changed. This demonstrates how the two-step procedure is able to produce correct
inference overcoming the model selection mistakes that necessarily arise when applying statistical
selection methods. Third, applying our test recursively over time would have deemed only a small
number of factors proposed in the literature significant. Lastly, we demonstrate how our results differ
starkly from the conclusions one would obtain simply by using the risk premia of the factors or the
standard Fama-French three factor model as control (as opposed to the model selection procedure
we advocate).
Taken together, our results are quite encouraging about the continuing progress of asset pricing
research, and suggest that studying the marginal contribution of new factors relative to the vast set
of existing ones is a conservative and productive way to screen new factors and, going forward, bring
discipline to the “zoo of factors.”

27

References
Abarbanell, J. S. and Bushee, B. J. (1998). Abnormal returns to a fundamental analysis strategy. Accounting
Review, pages 19–45.
Adrian, T., Etula, E., and Muir, T. (2014). Financial intermediaries and the cross-section of asset returns.
The Journal of Finance, 69(6):2557–2596.
Ali, A., Hwang, L.-S., and Trombley, M. A. (2003). Arbitrage risk and the book-to-market anomaly. Journal
of Financial Economics, 69(2):355–373.
Almeida, H. and Campello, M. (2007). Financial constraints, asset tangibility, and corporate investment.
Review of Financial Studies, 20(5):1429–1460.
Amihud, Y. (2002). Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. Journal of financial
markets, 5(1):31–56.
Amihud, Y. and Mendelson, H. (1989). The effects of beta, bid-ask spread, residual risk, and size on stock
returns. The Journal of Finance, 44(2):479–486.
Anderson, C. W. and Garcia-Feijoo, L. (2006). Empirical evidence on capital investment, growth options, and
security returns. The Journal of Finance, 61(1):171–194.
Ang, A., Hodrick, R. J., Xing, Y., and Zhang, X. (2006). The cross-section of volatility and expected returns.
The Journal of Finance, 61(1):259–299.
Asness, C. and Frazzini, A. (2013). The devil in hml’s details. The Journal of Portfolio Management, 39(4):49–
68.
Asness, C. S., Frazzini, A., and Pedersen, L. H. (2014). Low-risk investing without industry bets. Financial
Analysts Journal, 70(4):24–41.
Asness, C. S., Porter, R. B., and Stevens, R. L. (2000). Predicting stock returns using industry-relative firm
characteristics. Technical report, AQR Capital Investment.
Bai, J. and Zhou, G. (2015). Fama–macbeth two-pass regressions: Improving risk premia estimates. Finance
Research Letters, 15:31–40.
Balakrishnan, K., Bartov, E., and Faurel, L. (2010). Post loss/profit announcement drift. Journal of Accounting
and Economics, 50(1):20–41.
Bali, T. G., Cakici, N., and Whitelaw, R. F. (2011). Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and the cross-section of
expected returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 99(2):427–446.
Bandyopadhyay, S. P., Huang, A. G., and Wirjanto, T. S. (2010). The accrual volatility anomaly. Technical
report, working paper, University of Waterloo.
Barbee Jr, W. C., Mukherji, S., and Raines, G. A. (1996). Do sales-price and debt-equity explain stock returns
better than book-market and firm size? Financial Analysts Journal, pages 56–60.
Barillas, F. and Shanken, J. (2018). Comparing asset pricing models. The Journal of Finance, 73(2):715–754.
Barth, M. E., Elliott, J. A., and Finn, M. W. (1999). Market rewards associated with patterns of increasing
earnings. Journal of Accounting Research, 37(2):387–413.
Basu, S. (1977). Investment performance of common stocks in relation to their price-earnings ratios: A test
of the efficient market hypothesis. The Journal of Finance, 32(3):663–682.
Belloni, A., Chen, D., Chernozhukov, V., and Hansen, C. (2012). Sparse models and methods for optimal
instruments with an application to eminent domain. Econometrica, 80(6):2369–2429.

28

Belloni, A. and Chernozhukov, V. (2013). Least squares after model selection in high-dimensional sparse
models. Bernoulli, 19(2):521–547.
Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V., and Hansen, C. (2014a). High-dimensional methods and inference on structural
and treatment effects. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(2):29–50.
Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V., and Hansen, C. (2014b). Inference on treatment effects after selection among
high-dimensional controls. The Review of Economic Studies, 81(2):608–650.
Belo, F. and Lin, X. (2011). The inventory growth spread. The Review of Financial Studies, 25(1):278–313.
Belo, F., Lin, X., and Bazdresch, S. (2014). Labor hiring, investment, and stock return predictability in the
cross section. Journal of Political Economy, 122(1):129–177.
Bhandari, L. C. (1988). Debt/equity ratio and expected common stock returns: Empirical evidence. The
Journal of Finance, 43(2):507–528.
Bickel, P. J., Ritov, Y., and Tsybakov, A. B. (2009). Simultaneous analysis of Lasso and Dantzig selector.
The Annals of Statistics, 37(4):1705–1732.
Bondt, W. F. and Thaler, R. (1985). Does the stock market overreact? The Journal of Finance, 40(3):793–805.
Boudoukh, J., Michaely, R., Richardson, M., and Roberts, M. R. (2007). On the importance of measuring
payout yield: Implications for empirical asset pricing. The Journal of Finance, 62(2):877–915.
Bradshaw, M. T., Richardson, S. A., and Sloan, R. G. (2006). The relation between corporate financing
activities, analysts’ forecasts and stock returns. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 42(1-2):53–85.
Brandt, M. W., Kishore, R., Santa-Clara, P., and Venkatachalam, M. (2008). Earnings announcements are
full of surprises. Technical report, Duke University.
Breeden, D. T. (1979). An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and investment
opportunities. Journal of Financial Economics, 7(3):265–296.
Brown, D. P. and Rowe, B. (2007). The productivity premium in equity returns. Technical report, University
of Wisconsin-Madison.
Bryzgalova, S. (2015). Spurious factors in linear asset pricing models. Technical report, Stanford University.
Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. The Journal of finance, 52(1):57–82.
Chan, L. K., Lakonishok, J., and Sougiannis, T. (2001). The stock market valuation of research and development expenditures. The Journal of Finance, 56(6):2431–2456.
Chandrashekar, S. and Rao, R. K. (2009). The productivity of corporate cash holdings and the cross-section
of expected stock returns. Technical report, University of Texas at Austin.
Chen, L. and Zhang, L. (2010). A better three-factor model that explains more anomalies. Journal of Finance,
65(2):563–595.
Chen, N.-F., Roll, R., and Ross, S. A. (1986). Economic forces and the stock market. Journal of Business,
pages 383–403.
Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D., Demirer, M., Duflo, E., Hansen, C., and Newey, W. K. (2016). Double
machine learning for treatment and causal parameters. Technical report, MIT.
Chernozhukov, V., Hansen, C., and Spindler, M. (2015). Valid post-selection and post-regularization inference:
An elementary, general approach. Annual Review of Economics, 7(1):649–688.
Chordia, T., Subrahmanyam, A., and Anshuman, V. R. (2001). Trading activity and expected stock returns.
Journal of Financial Economics, 59(1):3–32.
Cochrane, J. H. (2009). Asset Pricing:(Revised Edition). Princeton university press.

29

Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. The Journal of Finance, 66(4):1047–1108.
Connor, G., Hagmann, M., and Linton, O. (2012). Efficient semiparametric estimation of the fama–french
model and extensions. Econometrica, 80(2):713–754.
Daniel, K. and Titman, S. (2006). Market reactions to tangible and intangible information. The Journal of
Finance, 61(4):1605–1643.
Datar, V. T., Naik, N. Y., and Radcliffe, R. (1998). Liquidity and stock returns: An alternative test. Journal
of Financial Markets, 1(2):203–219.
Desai, H., Rajgopal, S., and Venkatachalam, M. (2004). Value-glamour and accruals mispricing: One anomaly
or two? The Accounting Review, 79(2):355–385.
Dichev, I. D. (1998). Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk? the Journal of Finance, 53(3):1131–1147.
Eberhart, A. C., Maxwell, W. F., and Siddique, A. R. (2004). An examination of long-term abnormal stock
returns and operating performance following r&d increases. The Journal of Finance, 59(2):623–650.
Eisfeldt, A. L. and Papanikolaou, D. (2013). Organization capital and the cross-section of expected returns.
The Journal of Finance, 68(4):1365–1406.
Fairfield, P. M., Whisenant, S., and Yohn, T. L. (2003). The differential persistence of accruals and cash flows
for future operating income versus future profitability. Review of Accounting Studies, 8(2-3):221–243.
Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal of
financial economics, 33(1):3–56.
Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. (2008). Dissecting anomalies. The Journal of Finance, 63(4):1653–1678.
Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. (2015). A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics,
116(1):1–22.
Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. (2016). Choosing factors. Technical report, University of Chicago.
Fama, E. F. and MacBeth, J. D. (1973). Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal of Political
Economy, 81(3):607–636.
Ferson, W. E. and Harvey, C. R. (1991). The variation of economic risk premiums. Journal of Political
Economy, 99(2):385–415.
Francis, J., LaFond, R., Olsson, P. M., and Schipper, K. (2004). Costs of equity and earnings attributes. The
accounting review, 79(4):967–1010.
Frazzini, A. and Pedersen, L. H. (2014). Betting against beta. Journal of Financial Economics, 111(1):1–25.
Freyberger, J., Neuhierl, A., and Weber, M. (2017). Dissecting characteristics nonparametrically. Technical
report, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. (2009). The Elements of Statistical Learning - Data Mining,
Inference, and Prediction, Second Edition. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag New York.
Gagliardini, P., Ossola, E., and Scaillet, O. (2016). Time-varying risk premium in large cross-sectional equity
data sets. Econometrica, 84(3):985–1046.
Gagliardini, P., Ossola, E., and Scaillet, O. (2017). A diagnostic criterion for approximate factor structure.
Technical report, Swiss Finance Institute.
Gettleman, E. and Marks, J. M. (2006). Acceleration strategies. Technical report, Bentley University.
Gibbons, M., Ross, S., and Shanken, J. (1989). A test of the efficiency of a given portfolio. Econometrica,
57:1121–1152.
Giglio, S., Liao, Y., and Xiu, D. (2018). Thousands of alpha tests. Technical report, University of Chicago.

30

Giglio, S. W. and Xiu, D. (2016). Asset pricing with omitted factors. Technical report, University of Chicago.
Green, J., Hand, J. R., and Zhang, F. (2016). The characteristics that provide independent information about
average u.s. monthly stock returns. Technical report, Penn State University.
Hafzalla, N., Lundholm, R., and Matthew Van Winkle, E. (2011). Percent accruals. The Accounting Review,
86(1):209–236.
Harvey, C. R. and Liu, Y. (2016). Lucky factors. Technical report, Duke University.
Harvey, C. R., Liu, Y., and Zhu, H. (2015). ... and the cross-section of expected returns. Review of Financial
Studies, 29(1):5–68.
Haugen, R. A. and Baker, N. L. (1996). Commonality in the determinants of expected stock returns. Journal
of Financial Economics, 41(3):401–439.
He, Z., Kelly, B., and Manela, A. (2016). Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many asset classes.
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
He, Z., Kelly, B., and Manela, A. (2017). Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many asset classes.
Journal of Financial Economics, 126(1):1–35.
Heston, S. L. and Sadka, R. (2008). Seasonality in the cross-section of stock returns. Journal of Financial
Economics, 87(2):418–445.
Hirshleifer, D., Hou, K., Teoh, S. H., and Zhang, Y. (2004). Do investors overvalue firms with bloated balance
sheets? Journal of Accounting and Economics, 38:297–331.
Holthausen, R. W. and Larcker, D. F. (1992). The prediction of stock returns using financial statement
information. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 15(2-3):373–411.
Hong, H. and Kacperczyk, M. (2009). The price of sin: The effects of social norms on markets. Journal of
Financial Economics, 93(1):15–36.
Hou, K. and Moskowitz, T. J. (2005). Market frictions, price delay, and the cross-section of expected returns.
Review of Financial Studies, 18(3):981–1020.
Hou, K. and Robinson, D. T. (2006). Industry concentration and average stock returns. The Journal of
Finance, 61(4):1927–1956.
Hou, K., Xue, C., and Zhang, L. (2015). Digesting anomalies: An investment approach. The Review of
Financial Studies, 28(3):650–705.
Hou, K., Xue, C., and Zhang, L. (2017). Replicating anomalies. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Huang, A. G. (2009). The cross section of cashflow volatility and expected stock returns. Journal of Empirical
Finance, 16(3):409–429.
Jagannathan, R. and Wang, Z. (1996). The conditional capm and the cross-section of expected returns. The
Journal of finance, 51(1):3–53.
Jegadeesh, N. and Livnat, J. (2006). Revenue surprises and stock returns. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 41(1-2):147–171.
Jegadeesh, N. and Titman, S. (1993). Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications for stock
market efficiency. The Journal of finance, 48(1):65–91.
Jensen, M. C., Black, F., and Scholes, M. S. (1972). The capital asset pricing model: Some empirical tests.
In Studies in the theory of capital markets. New York: Praeger.

31

Jiang, G., Lee, C. M., and Zhang, Y. (2005). Information uncertainty and expected returns. Review of
Accounting Studies, 10(2-3):185–221.
Kama, I. (2009). On the market reaction to revenue and earnings surprises. Journal of Business Finance &
Accounting, 36(1-2):31–50.
Kelly, B., Pruitt, S., and Su, Y. (2017). Characteristics are risk exposures. Technical report, University of
Chicago.
Kozak, S., Nagel, S., and Santosh, S. (2017). Shrinking the cross section. Technical report, University of
Michigan.
Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W. (1994). Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and risk. The
Journal of Finance, 49(5):1541–1578.
Lamont, O., Polk, C., and Saaá-Requejo, J. (2001). Financial constraints and stock returns. The review of
financial studies, 14(2):529–554.
Leeb, H. and Pötscher, B. M. (2005). Model selection and inference: Facts and fiction. Econometric Theory,
21(01):21–59.
Lerman, A., Livnat, J., and Mendenhall, R. R. (2008). The high-volume return premium and post-earnings
announcement drift. Technical report, Yale University.
Lettau, M. and Ludvigson, S. (2001). Resurrecting the (c) capm: A cross-sectional test when risk premia are
time-varying. Journal of Political Economy, 109(6):1238–1287.
Lev, B. and Nissim, D. (2004). Taxable income, future earnings, and equity values. The Accounting Review,
79(4):1039–1074.
Lewellen, J., Nagel, S., and Shanken, J. (2010). A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests. Journal of
Financial economics, 96(2):175–194.
Litzenberger, R. H. and Ramaswamy, K. (1979). The effects of personal taxes and dividends on capital asset
prices: Theory and empirical evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 7:163–195.
Liu, W. (2006). A liquidity-augmented capital asset pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics, 82(3):631–
671.
Lo, A. W. and MacKinlay, A. C. (1990). Data-snooping biases in tests of financial asset pricing models. Review
of financial studies, 3(3):431–467.
Lou, D. (2014).

Attracting investor attention through advertising.

The Review of Financial Studies,

27(6):1797–1829.
Loughran, T. and Ritter, J. R. (1995). The new issues puzzle. The Journal of finance, 50(1):23–51.
Loughran, T. and Wellman, J. W. (2011). New evidence on the relation between the enterprise multiple and
average stock returns. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 46(6):1629–1650.
Lyandres, E., Sun, L., and Zhang, L. (2008). The new issues puzzle: Testing the investment-based explanation.
The Review of Financial Studies, 21(6):2825–2855.
McLean, R. D. and Pontiff, J. (2016). Does academic research destroy stock return predictability?

The

Journal of Finance, 71(1):5–32.
Meinshausen, N. and Yu, B. (2009). Lasso-type recovery of sparse representations for high-dimensional data.
The Annals of Statistics, 37(1):246–270.
Michaely, R., Thaler, R. H., and Womack, K. L. (1995). Price reactions to dividend initiations and omissions:
Overreaction or drift? The Journal of Finance, 50(2):573–608.

32

Miller, M. H. and Scholes, M. S. (1982). Dividends and taxes: Some empirical evidence. Journal of Political
Economy, 90(6):1118–1141.
Mohanram, P. S. (2005). Separating winners from losers among lowbook-to-market stocks using financial
statement analysis. Review of Accounting Studies, 10(2-3):133–170.
Moskowitz, T. J. and Grinblatt, M. (1999). Do industries explain momentum?

The Journal of Finance,

54(4):1249–1290.
Novy-Marx, R. (2011). Logical implications of gasb’s methodology for valuing pension liabilities. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Novy-Marx, R. (2013). The other side of value: The gross profitability premium. Journal of Financial
Economics, 108(1):1–28.
Ortiz-Molina, H. and Phillips, G. M. (2014). Real asset illiquidity and the cost of capital. Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 49(1):1–32.
Ou, J. A. and Penman, S. H. (1989). Financial statement analysis and the prediction of stock returns. Journal
of Accounting and Economics, 11(4):295–329.
Palazzo, B. (2012). Cash holdings, risk, and expected returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 104(1):162–
185.
Pástor, L. and Stambaugh, R. F. (2003a). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of Political
Economy, 111(3):642–685.
Pástor, L. and Stambaugh, R. F. (2003b). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of Political
economy, 111(3):642–685.
Penman, S. H., Richardson, S. A., and Tuna, I. (2007). The book-to-price effect in stock returns: accounting
for leverage. Journal of Accounting Research, 45(2):427–467.
Piotroski, J. D. (2000). Value investing: The use of historical financial statement information to separate
winners from losers. Journal of Accounting Research, pages 1–41.
Pontiff, J. and Woodgate, A. (2008). Share issuance and cross-sectional returns. The Journal of Finance,
63(2):921–945.
Rajgopal, S., Shevlin, T., and Venkatachalam, M. (2003). Does the stock market fully appreciate the implications of leading indicators for future earnings? evidence from order backlog. Review of Accounting Studies,
8(4):461–492.
Raponi, V., Robotti, C., and Zaffaroni, P. (2017). Testing beta-pricing models using large cross-sections.
Technical report, Imperial College London.
Rendleman, R. J., Jones, C. P., and Latane, H. A. (1982). Empirical anomalies based on unexpected earnings
and the importance of risk adjustments. Journal of Financial Economics, 10(3):269–287.
Richardson, S. A., Sloan, R. G., Soliman, M. T., and Tuna, I. (2005). Accrual reliability, earnings persistence
and stock prices. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 39(3):437–485.
Shanken, J. (1992). On the estimation of beta-pricing models. Review of Financial studies, 5(1):1–33.
Sloan, R. G. (1996). Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about future earnings?
Accounting Review, 71(3):289–315.
Soliman, M. T. (2008). The use of dupont analysis by market participants. The Accounting Review, 83(3):823–
853.

33

Thomas, J. K. and Zhang, H. (2002). Inventory changes and future returns. Review of Accounting Studies,
7(2-3):163–187.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series B (Statistical Methodology), 58(1):267–288.
Tibshirani, R. (2011). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso: a retrospective. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 73(3):273–282.
Titman, S., Wei, J., and Xie, F. (2004). Capital investments and stock returns. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 39(4):677–700.
Tuzel, S. (2010). Corporate real estate holdings and the cross-section of stock returns. Review of Financial
Studies, 23(6):2268–2302.
Valta, P. (2016). Strategic default, debt structure, and stock returns. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 51(01):197–229.
Wainwright, M. J. (2009).

Sharp thresholds for high-dimensional and noisy sparsity recovery using l1 -

constrained quadratic programming (lasso). IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 55(5):2183–2202.
Welch, I. (2008). The link between fama-french time-series tests and fama-macbeth cross-sectional tests.
Technical report, UCLA.
Whited, T. M. and Wu, G. (2006). Financial constraints risk. The Review of Financial Studies, 19(2):531–559.
Xing, Y. (2008). Interpreting the value effect through the q-theory: An empirical investigation. The Review
of Financial Studies, 21(4):1767–1795.
Yogo, M. (2006). A consumption-based explanation of the cross-section of expected stock returns. The Journal
of Finance, 61(2):539–580.
Zhang, C.-H. and Huang, J. (2008). The sparsity and bias of the lasso selection in high-dimensional linear
regression. Ann. Statist., 36(4):1567–1594.

34

Table 1: Testing for Factors Introduced in 2012-2016
(1)
DS

id
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150

Factor Description
Cash holdings
HML Devil
Gross profitability
Organizational Capital
Betting Against Beta
Quality Minus Junk
Employee growth
Growth in advertising
Book Asset Liquidity
RMW
CMA
HXZ IA
HXZ ROE
Intermediary Risk Factor
Convertible debt

λs
(bp)
-34
54
20
28
35
73
43
-12
40
160
38
51
77
112
-15

tstat
(DS)
-0.42
1.04
0.48
0.92
1.45
2.03**
1.36
-1.18
1.07
4.45***
1.10
2.11**
3.37***
2.21**
-1.36

(2)
SS
λs
(bp)
15
-13
3
-1
38
4
-4
0
5
15
0
5
23
60
-39

tstat
(SS)
0.17
-0.25
0.06
-0.03
1.50
0.11
-0.12
0.03
0.12
0.41
0.01
0.21
0.83
1.19
-3.22***

(3)
FF3
λs
(bp)
10
-100
23
20
36
39
-12
12
20
20
3
21
33
4
26

tstat
(OLS)
0.54
-2.46**
2.00**
1.91*
2.25**
3.10***
-0.89
1.32
1.59
1.80*
0.28
1.94*
2.92***
0.08
3.32***

(4)
No Selection
λs
(bp)
-18
68
13
16
49
50
18
-2
20
74
7
40
104
22
17

tstat
(OLS)
-0.16
0.84
0.26
0.41
1.49
1.04
0.37
-0.13
0.42
1.48
0.14
1.08
2.87***
0.32
1.01

(5)
Avg. Ret.
avg.ret.
(bp)
13
23
15
21
91
43
8
7
9
34
26
34
57

tstat
0.98
1.46
1.45
2.05**
5.98***
3.87***
0.83
0.84
0.79
3.21***
3.02***
4.17***
4.99***

11

1.70*

Note. The table reports tests for the contribution of factors introduced in 2012-2016 relative to the set of 135 potential
control factors introduced up to 2011. The test assets include 750 3×2 bivariate sorted portfolios published up to 2016.
Sample period is from July 1976 to December 2017. For columns (1) - (4), we show the estimate of the SDF loading
scaled to correspond to a unit beta exposure for ease of interpretation, λs , and the t-statistic. The first column uses the
double-selection (DS) method, our benchmark. The tuning parameters chosen are the average of selections by 10-fold
cross-validation using 200 random seeds. The second column uses the single-selection (SS) method that only controls
for the first stage model. The third column uses the Fama-French three factors as controls. The fourth column uses all
factors as controls, without using dimension-reduction techniques, with simple OLS. The last column reports the risk
premium of each tradable factor.

35

Table 2: Testing Factors Recursively by Year of Publication

Year

(1)

(2)

# Assets

# Controls

(3)
New factors (IDs)

1994

138

25

26

27

1995

150

27

28

29

30

1996

150

30

31

32

33

1997

168

33

34

1998

174

34

35

36

37

38

39

1999

228

44

45

46

2000

234

46

47

48

49

50

51

2001

252

51

52

53

54

55

56

2002

294

58

59

60

61

2003

312

61

62

63

64

65

66

2004

336

66

67

68

69

70

2005

372

74

75

76

77

78

87

88

89

90

2006

456

90

91

92

93

2007

516

102

103

104

2008

552

108

109

110

40

41

57

58

71

72

73

74

79

80

81

94

95

96

105

106

107

108

111

112

113

114

2009

618

120

121

122

123

124

2010

636

124

125

126

127

128

129

2011

666

129

130

131

132

133

134

2012

702

135

136

2013

708

136

137

138

139

2014

720

139

140

141

142

143

144

2015

738

144

145

146

147

148

2016

750

148

149

150

43

44

82

83

84

85

86

97

98

99

100

101

102

115

116

117

118

119

120

42

135

Note. The table reports the results of a recursive factor-testing exercise, from 1994 to 2016. We test the factors using
data available up to the publication year of each paper. For each year t, column (1) reports the number of test assets
available for the test at that point in time, sorted on characteristics published up to then. Column (2) reports the
number of controls available in each year t, i.e. the number of potential controls in ht based on factors published up to
then. Column (3) shows for each year the IDs of the factors that were published with data up to that year. We then
test whether each new factor contributes to explaining asset prices relative to the factors published in previous years,
using only the data up to the publication year t. We underline the IDs in column (3) every time the factor appears
significant and robust based on our double-selection test. The tuning parameters chosen are the average of selections
by 10-fold cross-validation using 200 random seeds.

36

Table 3: Robustness for Factors Introduced in 2012-2016

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Bivariate 3 × 2

Bivariate 5 × 5

202 Portfolios

Elastic Net

PCA

λs

tstat

λs

tstat

λs

tstat

λs

tstat

λs

tstat

id

Factor Description

(bp)

(DS)

(bp)

(DS)

(bp)

(DS)

(bp)

(DS)

(bp)

(DS)

136

Cash holdings

-34

-0.42

34

0.40

131

0.89

-13

-0.14

-65

-0.62

137

HML Devil

54

1.04

15

0.29

56

0.57

62

1.23

-27

-0.51

138

Gross profitability

20

0.48

28

0.66

88

1.42

-11

-0.26

16

0.35

139

Organizational Capital

28

0.92

23

0.75

6

0.16

12

0.38

21

0.57

140

Betting Against Beta

35

1.45

43

1.94*

31

1.03

28

1.12

59

2.56***

141

Quality Minus Junk

73

2.03**

58

1.67

123

2.45**

74

2.13**

71

1.89*

142

Employee growth

43

1.36

12

0.34

54

1.34

51

1.49

-4

-0.09

143

Growth in advertising

-12

-1.18

6

0.57

17

1.30

9

0.74

-6

-0.57

144

Book Asset Liquidity

40

1.07

-24

-0.61

37

0.77

26

0.68

24

0.63

145

RMW

160

4.45***

104

3.13***

112

1.98**

125

3.43***

88

2.11**

146

CMA

38

1.10

19

0.59

33

0.52

32

0.85

18

0.44

147

HXZ IA

51

2.11**

44

1.87*

-45

-1.42

69

2.77***

36

1.31

148

HXZ ROE

77

3.37***

72

2.62***

116

2.22***

103

3.85***

41

1.46

149

Intermediary Risk Factor

112

2.21**

38

0.73

-16

-0.33

-16

-0.33

103

1.92*

150

Convertible debt

-15

-1.36

-6

-0.56

68

5.13***

-12

-1.08

-9

-0.88

Note. The table reports robustness tests for the estimates of SDF loadings for factors introduced in 2012-2016 relative
to the set of 135 factors introduced up to 2011. The first column shows the same results as in the first column of
Table 1 for convenience. The second column shows the results using bivariate-sorted 5×5 portfolios, and the third
column uses 202 downloaded portfolios. In the forth column, we use Elastic Net selection for control factors using
the double-selection method. In the last column, we use the principal components of factors as controls using the
double-selection method. The tuning parameters chosen are the average of selections by 10-fold cross-validation using
200 random seeds.

37

Table 4: Factor Zoo

ID

Description

Year.pub

Year.end

Avg.Ret.

Annual S.R.

Reference

1

Excess Market Return

1972

1965

0.64%

50.6%

Jensen et al. (1972)

2

Market Beta

1973

1968

-0.08%

-5.4%

Fama and MacBeth (1973)

3

Earnings to price

1977

1971

0.28%

29.7%

Basu (1977)

4

Dividend to price

1979

1977

0.01%

0.6%

Litzenberger and Ramaswamy (1979)

5

Unexpected quarterly earnings

1982

1980

0.12%

26.3%

Rendleman et al. (1982)

6

Share price

1982

1978

0.02%

2.2%

Miller and Scholes (1982)

7

Long-Term Reversal

1985

1982

0.34%

36.3%

Bondt and Thaler (1985)

8

Leverage

1988

1981

0.21%

24.3%

Bhandari (1988)

9

Cash flow to debt

1989

1984

-0.09%

-17.0%

Ou and Penman (1989)

10

Current ratio

1989

1984

0.06%

7.7%

Ou and Penman (1989)

11

% change in current ratio

1989

1984

0.00%

0.5%

Ou and Penman (1989)

12

% change in quick ratio

1989

1984

-0.04%

-11.9%

Ou and Penman (1989)

13

% change sales-to-inventory

1989

1984

0.17%

46.2%

Ou and Penman (1989)

14

Quick ratio

1989

1984

-0.02%

-2.9%

Ou and Penman (1989)

15

Sales to cash

1989

1984

0.01%

1.5%

Ou and Penman (1989)

16

Sales to inventory

1989

1984

0.09%

16.1%

Ou and Penman (1989)

17

Sales to receivables

1989

1984

0.14%

22.8%

Ou and Penman (1989)

18

Bid-ask spread

1989

1979

-0.04%

-3.3%

Amihud and Mendelson (1989)

19

Depreciation / PP&E

1992

1988

0.11%

12.1%

Holthausen and Larcker (1992)

20

% change in depreciation

1992

1988

0.08%

23.1%

Holthausen and Larcker (1992)

21

Small Minus Big

1993

1991

0.21%

24.5%

Fama and French (1993)

22

High Minus Low

1993

1991

0.28%

34.3%

Fama and French (1993)

23

Short-Term Reversal

1993

1989

0.15%

21.7%

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)

24

6-month momentum

1993

1989

0.21%

27.8%

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)

25

36-month momentum

1993

1989

0.09%

13.4%

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)

26

Sales growth

1994

1990

0.04%

5.8%

Lakonishok et al. (1994)

27

Cash flow-to-price

1994

1990

0.31%

32.5%

Lakonishok et al. (1994)

28

New equity issue

1995

1990

0.10%

8.7%

Loughran and Ritter (1995)

29

Dividend initiation

1995

1988

-0.03%

-3.4%

Michaely et al. (1995)

30

Dividend omission

1995

1988

-0.18%

-18.0%

Michaely et al. (1995)

Note. The factor zoo contains 150 tradable factors for monthly data from July 1976 to December 2017. In addition
to these publicly available factors, we follow Fama and French (1993) to construct value-weighted portfolios as factors
using firm characteristics collected in Green et al. (2016) and Hou et al. (2017). In the table, we have listed the factor
publication year, the end year of the test sample in the original paper, the monthly average return, the annualized
Sharpe ratios, and the paper references.

38

ID

Description

Year.pub

Year.end

Avg.Ret.

Annual S.R.

Reference

31

Working capital accruals

1996

1991

0.22%

46.0%

Sloan (1996)

32

Sales to price

1996

1991

0.35%

41.8%

Barbee Jr et al. (1996)
Haugen and Baker (1996)

33

Capital turnover

1996

1993

-0.11%

-16.6%

34

Momentum

1997

1993

0.63%

50.2%

Carhart (1997)

35

Share turnover

1998

1991

-0.02%

-2.1%

Datar et al. (1998)

36

% change in gross margin - % change in sales

1998

1988

-0.05%

-12.4%

Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)

37

% change in sales - % change in inventory

1998

1988

0.14%

42.1%

Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)

38

% change in sales - % change in A/R

1998

1988

0.14%

43.5%

Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)

39

% change in sales - % change in SG&A

1998

1988

0.09%

19.6%

Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)

40

Effective Tax Rate

1998

1988

-0.04%

-9.1%

Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)

41

Labor Force Efficiency

1998

1988

-0.03%

-8.5%

Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)

42

Ohlson’s O-score

1998

1995

0.05%

9.3%

Dichev (1998)

43

Altman’s Z-score

1998

1995

0.20%

22.1%

Dichev (1998)

44

Industry adjusted % change in capital expenditures

1998

1988

0.10%

20.5%

Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)

45

Number of earnings increases

1999

1992

0.01%

2.8%

Barth et al. (1999)

46

Industry momentum

1999

1995

0.01%

1.4%

Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999)

47

Financial statements score

2000

1996

0.08%

18.4%

Piotroski (2000)

48

Industry-adjusted book to market

2000

1998

0.22%

38.0%

Asness et al. (2000)

49

Industry-adjusted cash flow to price ratio

2000

1998

0.26%

52.1%

Asness et al. (2000)

50

Industry-adjusted change in employees

2000

1998

-0.01%

-1.5%

Asness et al. (2000)

51

Industry-adjusted size

2000

1998

0.36%

36.3%

Asness et al. (2000)

52

Dollar trading volume

2001

1995

0.38%

35.8%

Chordia et al. (2001)

53

Volatility of liquidity (dollar trading volume)

2001

1995

0.20%

38.8%

Chordia et al. (2001)

54

Volatility of liquidity (share turnover)

2001

1995

0.02%

2.1%

Chordia et al. (2001)

55

Advertising Expense-to-market

2001

1995

-0.13%

-15.6%

Chan et al. (2001)

56

R&D Expense-to-market

2001

1995

0.34%

36.2%

Chan et al. (2001)

57

R&D-to-sales

2001

1995

0.06%

5.5%

Chan et al. (2001)

58

Kaplan-Zingales Index

2001

1997

0.22%

25.3%

Lamont et al. (2001)

59

Change in inventory

2002

1997

0.18%

40.7%

Thomas and Zhang (2002)

60

Change in tax expense

2002

1997

0.09%

18.0%

Thomas and Zhang (2002)

61

Illiquidity

2002

1997

0.34%

28.6%

Amihud (2002)

62

Liquidity

2003

2000

0.38%

38.6%

Pástor and Stambaugh (2003b)

63

Idiosyncratic return volatility

2003

1997

0.07%

5.1%

Ali et al. (2003)

64

Growth in long term net operating assets

2003

1993

0.22%

51.8%

Fairfield et al. (2003)

65

Order backlog

2003

1999

0.05%

5.7%

Rajgopal et al. (2003)

66

Changes in Long-term Net Operating Assets

2003

1993

0.24%

56.0%

Fairfield et al. (2003)

67

Cash flow to price ratio

2004

1997

0.27%

31.7%

Desai et al. (2004)

68

R&D increase

2004

2001

0.06%

11.1%

Eberhart et al. (2004)

69

Corporate investment

2004

1995

0.13%

36.4%

Titman et al. (2004)

70

Earnings volatility

2004

2001

0.10%

10.7%

Francis et al. (2004)

39

ID

Description

Year.pub

Year.end

Avg.Ret.

Annual S.R.

Reference

71

Abnormal Corporate Investment

2004

1995

0.13%

31.2%

Titman et al. (2004)

72

Net Operating Assets

2004

2002

0.31%

66.6%

Hirshleifer et al. (2004)

73

Changes in Net Operating Assets

2004

2002

0.14%

41.6%

Hirshleifer et al. (2004)

74

Tax income to book income

2004

2000

0.14%

28.3%

Lev and Nissim (2004)

75

Price delay

2005

2001

0.07%

16.8%

Hou and Moskowitz (2005)

76

# Years since first Compustat coverage

2005

2001

0.01%

1.1%

Jiang et al. (2005)

77

Growth in common shareholder equity

2005

2001

0.15%

27.6%

Richardson et al. (2005)

78

Growth in long-term debt

2005

2001

0.06%

13.3%

Richardson et al. (2005)

79

Change in Current Operating Assets

2005

2001

0.19%

34.6%

Richardson et al. (2005)

80

Change in Current Operating Liabilities

2005

2001

0.03%

6.3%

Richardson et al. (2005)

81

Changes in Net Non-cash Working Capital

2005

2001

0.11%

25.2%

Richardson et al. (2005)

82

Change in Non-current Operating Assets

2005

2001

0.21%

44.5%

Richardson et al. (2005)

83

Change in Non-current Operating Liabilities

2005

2001

0.04%

9.6%

Richardson et al. (2005)

84

Change in Net Non-current Operating Assets

2005

2001

0.23%

35.4%

Richardson et al. (2005)

85

Change in Net Financial Assets

2005

2001

0.23%

59.0%

Richardson et al. (2005)

86

Total accruals

2005

2001

0.19%

44.8%

Richardson et al. (2005)

87

Change in Short- term Investments

2005

2001

-0.03%

-8.3%

Richardson et al. (2005)

88

Change in Financial Liabilities

2005

2001

0.18%

56.1%

Richardson et al. (2005)

89

Change in Book Equity

2005

2001

0.17%

30.0%

Richardson et al. (2005)

90

Financial statements performance

2005

2001

0.17%

37.1%

Mohanram (2005)

91

Change in 6-month momentum

2006

2006

0.21%

29.8%

Gettleman and Marks (2006)

92

Growth in capital expenditures

2006

1999

0.14%

30.4%

Anderson and Garcia-Feijoo (2006)

93

Return volatility

2006

2000

-0.02%

-1.7%

Ang et al. (2006)

94

Zero trading days

2006

2003

-0.05%

-4.4%

Liu (2006)

95

Three-year Investment Growth

2006

1999

0.11%

23.6%

Anderson and Garcia-Feijoo (2006)

96

Composite Equity Issuance

2006

2003

-0.01%

-2.2%

Daniel and Titman (2006)

97

Net equity finance

2006

2000

0.08%

9.7%

Bradshaw et al. (2006)

98

Net debt finance

2006

2000

0.17%

48.3%

Bradshaw et al. (2006)

99

Net external finance

2006

2000

0.22%

38.6%

Bradshaw et al. (2006)

100

Revenue Surprises

2006

2003

0.05%

9.0%

Jegadeesh and Livnat (2006)

101

Industry Concentration

2006

2001

0.03%

3.8%

Hou and Robinson (2006)

102

Whited-Wu Index

2006

2001

-0.02%

-2.6%

Whited and Wu (2006)

103

Return on invested capital

2007

2005

0.18%

29.3%

Brown and Rowe (2007)

104

Debt capacity/firm tangibility

2007

2000

0.05%

7.1%

Almeida and Campello (2007)

105

Payout yield

2007

2003

0.16%

17.5%

Boudoukh et al. (2007)

106

Net payout yield

2007

2003

0.16%

17.2%

Boudoukh et al. (2007)

107

Net debt-to-price

2007

1950

0.02%

2.5%

Penman et al. (2007)

108

Enterprise book-to-price

2007

2001

0.14%

14.7%

Penman et al. (2007)

109

Change in shares outstanding

2008

1969

0.24%

36.1%

Pontiff and Woodgate (2008)

110

Abnormal earnings announcement volume

2008

2006

-0.08%

-17.0%

Lerman et al. (2008)

40

Description

Year.pub

Year.end

Avg.Ret.

Annual S.R.

Reference

111

Earnings announcement return

2008

2004

0.02%

6.8%

Brandt et al. (2008)

112

Seasonality

2008

2002

0.16%

17.3%

Heston and Sadka (2008)

113

Changes in PPE and Inventory-to-assets

2008

2005

0.19%

42.0%

Lyandres et al. (2008)

ID

114

Investment Growth

2008

2003

0.17%

39.5%

Xing (2008)

115

Composite Debt Issuance

2008

2005

0.08%

21.6%

Lyandres et al. (2008)

116

Return on net operating assets

2008

2002

0.09%

8.6%

Soliman (2008)

117

Profit margin

2008

2002

0.02%

4.4%

Soliman (2008)

118

Asset turnover

2008

2002

0.06%

6.7%

Soliman (2008)

119

Industry-adjusted change in asset turnover

2008

2002

0.14%

41.1%

Soliman (2008)

120

Industry-adjusted change in profit margin

2008

2002

-0.01%

-3.2%

Soliman (2008)

121

Cash productivity

2009

2009

0.27%

37.6%

Chandrashekar and Rao (2009)

122

Sin stocks

2009

2006

0.44%

41.6%

Hong and Kacperczyk (2009)

123

Revenue surprise

2009

2005

0.12%

19.3%

Kama (2009)

124

Cash flow volatility

2009

2008

0.20%

26.6%

Huang (2009)

125

Absolute accruals

2010

2008

-0.05%

-8.6%

Bandyopadhyay et al. (2010)

126

Capital expenditures and inventory

2010

2006

0.19%

42.8%

Chen and Zhang (2010)

127

Return on assets

2010

2005

-0.09%

-13.9%

Balakrishnan et al. (2010)

128

Accrual volatility

2010

2008

0.19%

26.6%

Bandyopadhyay et al. (2010)

129

Industry-adjusted Real Estate Ratio

2010

2005

0.11%

17.3%

Tuzel (2010)

130

Percent accruals

2011

2008

0.16%

35.0%

Hafzalla et al. (2011)

131

Maximum daily return

2011

2005

0.00%

-0.3%

Bali et al. (2011)

132

Operating Leverage

2011

2008

0.20%

32.8%

Novy-Marx (2011)

133

Inventory Growth

2011

2009

0.13%

30.1%

Belo and Lin (2011)

134

Percent Operating Accruals

2011

2008

0.15%

28.9%

Hafzalla et al. (2011)

135

Enterprise multiple

2011

2009

0.11%

17.6%

Loughran and Wellman (2011)

136

Cash holdings

2012

2009

0.13%

15.3%

Palazzo (2012)

137

HML Devil

2013

2011

0.23%

22.6%

Asness and Frazzini (2013)

138

Gross profitability

2013

2010

0.15%

22.5%

Novy-Marx (2013)

139

Organizational Capital

2013

2008

0.21%

31.9%

Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013)

140

Betting Against Beta

2014

2012

0.91%

92.8%

Frazzini and Pedersen (2014)

141

Quality Minus Junk

2014

2012

0.43%

60.1%

Asness et al. (2014)

142

Employee growth rate

2014

2010

0.08%

12.9%

Belo et al. (2014)

143

Growth in advertising expense

2014

2010

0.07%

13.0%

Lou (2014)
Ortiz-Molina and Phillips (2014)

144

Book Asset Liquidity

2014

2006

0.09%

12.3%

145

Robust Minus Weak

2015

2013

0.34%

49.8%

Fama and French (2015)

146

Conservative Minus Aggressive

2015

2013

0.26%

46.8%

Fama and French (2015)

147

HXZ Investment

2015

2012

0.34%

64.7%

Hou et al. (2015)

0.57%

77.5%

Hou et al. (2015)

0.11%

26.4%

148

HXZ Profitability

2015

2012

149

Intermediary Investment

2016

2012

150

Convertible debt indicator

2016

2012

41

He et al. (2017)
Valta (2016)

Figure 1: Subsamples: Factor 1st Selection Rate

Note. The figure reports the control factor selection rates for the tests of Table 1 (i.e., the factors selected by the first
LASSO step of the double-selection procedure by cross-validation), across 200 random seeds shown in the heat maps
(corresponding to the 200 black dots). The figure shows, for each factor identified by the factor ID (on the X axis), in
what fraction of the 200 random seeds each factor is selected by cross-validation.

42

Figure 2: Factors Introduced in 2012-2016: Robustness to Tuning Parameters (t-statistics)

Note. The figures provide heat maps for double-selection tests of factors introduced in 2012-2016, as in the first column
of Table 1, using a wide range of tuning parameters, for the first LASSO stage on the X axis and for the second stage
on the Y axis. The t-statistics for each factor in different models are shown on the heat maps. The dots are the results
of 200 time-series cross-validation estimations of the tuning parameter. The red “×” is the average of the 200 black
dots, which corresponds to the model used in Table 1.

43

Figure 3: Factors Introduced in 2012-2016: Robustness to Tuning Parameters (# selected controls)

Note. The figures provide heat maps for double-selection tests of factors introduced in 2012-2016, as in the first column
of Table 1, using a wide range of tuning parameters, for the first LASSO stage on the X axis and for the second stage
on the Y axis. The numbers of controls selected for each factor are shown in the heat maps. The dots are the results
for 200 time-series cross-validation estimations of the tuning parameter. The red “×” is the average of the 200 black
dots, which corresponds to the model used in Table 1.

44

