                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      UNCERTAINTY ABOUT FUTURE INCOME:
                INITIAL BELIEFS AND RESOLUTION DURING COLLEGE

                                        Yifan Gong
                                     Ralph Stinebrickner
                                    Todd R. Stinebrickner

                                     Working Paper 25485
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25485


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




The project was made possible by generous support from the Mellon Foundation, The Spencer
Foundation, The National Science Foundation, and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council. We would like to thank Charles Leung, Yuxi Yao, Martin Luccioni, and Phuong Vu and
conference participants at the 2018 summer meetings of The Econometric Society and the
Canadian Economic Association for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Yifan Gong, Ralph Stinebrickner, and Todd R. Stinebrickner. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Uncertainty about Future Income: Initial Beliefs and Resolution During College
Yifan Gong, Ralph Stinebrickner, and Todd R. Stinebrickner
NBER Working Paper No. 25485
January 2019
JEL No. I21,J01,J3

                                              ABSTRACT

We use unique data from the Berea Panel Study to characterize how much earnings uncertainty is
present for students at college entrance and how quickly this uncertainty is resolved. We characterize
uncertainty using survey questions that elicit the entire distribution describing one’s beliefs about future
earnings. Taking advantage of the longitudinal nature of the expectations data, we find that roughly
two-thirds of the income uncertainty present at the time of entrance remains at the end of college. Taking
advantage of a variety of additional survey questions, we provide evidence about how the resolution
of income uncertainty is influenced by factors such as college GPA and college major, and also examine
why much income uncertainty remains unresolved at the end of college. This paper also contributes
to a literature interested in understanding the relative importance of uncertainty and heterogeneity
in determining observed earnings distributions.


Yifan Gong                                           Todd R. Stinebrickner
Social Science Centre                                Department of Economics
The University of Western Ontario                    The University of Western Ontario
London, ON                                           London, Ontario, N6A 5C2
Canada                                               CANADA
ygong48@uwo.ca                                       and NBER
                                                     trstineb@uwo.ca
Ralph Stinebrickner
Berea College
Berea, KY 40403
and University of Western Ontario
ralph_stinebrickner@berea.edu
1       Introduction
From a conceptual standpoint, it is clear that the decision to enter or not enter college,
as well as other college decisions, will depend on the amount of uncertainty about future
income that is present at the time of college entrance.1 However, college decisions will
also be influenced by how quickly this initial uncertainty about future income is resolved.
As one example, the option value of entering college will typically be higher when initial
uncertainty is resolved more quickly. Further, the speed at which uncertainty is resolved
is closely related to the important question of whether initial uncertainty is due to, for
example, academic ability, college major, labor market frictions, future aggregate labor
market conditions, or other factors.
    A natural first step towards understanding how income uncertainty influences college
decisions involves characterizing how much income uncertainty is present for students at
the time of college entrance and how quickly (and why) this uncertainty is resolved.2 Un-
fortunately, taking this first step has proven to be difficult (Cunha, Heckman, Navarro,
2005). This paper takes advantage of unique expectations data from the Berea Panel
Study (BPS), which is described in Section 2, to provide new evidence.3 From the stand-
point of characterizing uncertainty, the general benefit of the expectations approach
is that survey questions can be designed to elicit the entire distribution describing a
student’s beliefs about future income, which, for convenience, we often refer to as the
student’s subjective income distribution. Given our need to characterize income uncer-
tainty throughout a student’s entire time in college, a particular virtue of the BPS is that
earnings expectations were collected longitudinally during college, with the first survey
collection taking place at an ideal time – immediately before students began their first
year courses. Our analysis also takes advantage of other unique expectations data avail-
able in the BPS. For example, information characterizing a student’s beliefs about college
grade performance and college major helps us understand why uncertainty is resolved.
    In Section 3, we use beliefs elicited at the time of college entrance to characterize
each student’s initial amount of uncertainty about future earnings. The appeal of our
direct, expectations-elicitation approach is in its simplicity. In contrast, traditional in-
vestigations require that an individual’s beliefs about future earnings be ascertained from
an observed distribution of realized earnings. This involves the challenge of decompos-
ing the total amount of dispersion in realized earnings across workers into the portion
due to individual-level uncertainty and the portion due to heterogeneity in ability and
other income-influencing factors that are known by individuals. One tempting possibility
    1
     More generally, Friedman(1953) suggests the importance of understanding the relative role of labor
market uncertainty in determining distributions of wealth.
   2
     Throughout the paper our focus is on labor market income, and we use the terms earnings and
income interchangeably.
   3
     This approach is motivated by a recognition that individual beliefs about earnings (and other out-
comes) are perhaps best viewed as data that can potentially be elicited using carefully worded survey
questions (Manski, 1993, 2004, Dominitz and Manski, 1997a/b).



                                                  2
might be to equate individual-level uncertainty with the amount of dispersion in earnings
present within groups that are homogeneous in terms of observable earnings-influencing
characteristics. However, when unobserved heterogeneity is prevalent (i.e., when many
earnings-influencing characteristics are known to individuals but are not observed by the
econometrician), this approach will tend to substantially overstate the amount of income
variation that should be attributed to uncertainty.
    In the schooling context, Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) and Cunha, Heck-
man, and Navarro (2004, 2005) develop methods for separating uncertainty from het-
erogeneity that do not require the econometrician to observe all relevant characteristics
that influence earning capabilities.4 Specifically, they take advantage of situations where
economic theory implies that the realization of uncertainty was unanticipated at the mo-
ment of decision making, and, therefore, was independent of the choices that economic
agents made.5 The general conclusion from these papers is that a substantial part of
the variability in the ex post returns to schooling is predictable and acted on by agents.
That is, “variability cannot be equated with uncertainty and this has important empirical
consequences” (Cunha, Heckman, and Navarro, 2005).
    Our results in Section 3 strongly reinforce this general message. At entrance, our
measure of uncertainty, the standard deviation of the distribution describing a student’s
beliefs about her earnings at age 28, ranges from an average of $9, 600 a year to an average
of $14, 100 a year, across the different computational approaches that we take to ensure
robustness. To characterize the relative importance of uncertainty and heterogeneity, we
compute an expectations analog to the realized earnings distribution used in other papers
by aggregating individual beliefs across the sample. The percentage of the total variation
in this analog that should be attributed to (observed and unobserved) heterogeneity is
always above 50% and is as high as 77%, depending on which computational approach is
employed. We find that results do not change substantially when we correct for classical
measurement error that might arise in the responses to the survey questions. This mea-
surement error correction is made possible by the fact that there are two different sets of
survey questions in the BPS that can be used to construct beliefs about future earnings.
    In Section 4, we turn to examining issues related to the resolution of income uncer-
tainty, with a particular focus on what happens during college. Given that empirical
work has not typically examined these issues, it is an open question whether individuals
believe that uncertainty will be resolved quickly after college entrance.6 This issue is
directly linked to the question of why uncertainty exists. For example, one particularly
prominent potential source of uncertainty is college grade point average (GPA), which
   4
     Cunha and Heckman (2007) provides a survey on this series of articles. See also Browning and Carro
(2007) for a further discussion of the difficulties of separating uncertainty from heterogeneity.
   5
     See also Blundell and Preston (1998) for early work using similar methods in a somewhat different
substantive context.
   6
     An exception is Navarro and Zhou (2017) who develop a model that identifies the path of uncertainty
resolution over multiple periods. With each period having a length of six years, their first period (age
18-24) corresponds to the time that our sample spends in college and the first two years in the workforce.


                                                    3
is widely viewed as the best available proxy for human capital at the time of college
graduation. By definition, all uncertainty about final college GPA will be resolved by
the end of college. Thus, if uncertainty about GPA is an important contributor to the
initial uncertainty about earnings, then students will expect much of the uncertainty
about earnings to be resolved at some point during college and that this resolution will
take place early in college if learning about academic ability tends to happen quickly.7
We are able to provide evidence about the importance of grade uncertainty in determin-
ing initial earnings uncertainty by taking advantage of survey questions eliciting beliefs
about grade performance and survey questions eliciting beliefs about future earnings con-
ditional on grade performance. We find that, on average, between 15% and 18% of the
variance representing (age 28) earnings uncertainty at the time of college entrance can
be attributed to uncertainty about grade performance at the time of college entrance. A
related analysis finds that between 11% and 17% of the earnings uncertainty at the time
of college entrance can be attributed to uncertainty about college major at the time of
college entrance. Moreover, when combined, uncertainty about these two factors together
account for about 18% to 24% of overall initial uncertainty about future income.
    The finding that students expect much uncertainty about earnings to remain even
after resolving uncertainty about grade performance and college major raises the pos-
sibility that much uncertainty about earnings remains even at the end of college. The
longitudinal nature of our expectations data allow us to examine this issue. We find that,
on average, about 65% of a student’s initial uncertainty about future earnings remains at
the end of college. Further, this result, combined with the results in the end of the pre-
vious paragraph, suggests that the portion of uncertainty that is resolved during school
can be largely attributed to what one learns about her academic ability and her college
major during school.
    It is worth considering why much of the initial uncertainty about earnings at age 28 is
unresolved during college. We consider two broad explanations that may have different
policy implications. The first explanation is that individuals might be unsure about what
kinds of job offers they will receive at age 28 because of, for example, the existence of
search frictions. The second explanation is that individuals might know the kinds of job
offers they would receive at age 28, but might be unsure about which kinds of available
job offers they will prefer/choose at this age.


2       The Berea Panel Study
Designed and administered by Todd Stinebrickner and Ralph Stinebrickner, the BPS is
a multipurpose longitudinal survey project, which collected detailed information of rel-
    7
    See Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2012, 2014b) and Zafar (2011) for research that uses expecta-
tions data to examine updating of beliefs about grade performance. See Altonji (1993) for early work
recognizing the role that grade updating may play in schooling decisions.



                                                  4
evance for understanding a wide variety of issues in higher education, including those
related to dropout, college major, time-use, social networks, peer effects, and transitions
to the labor market. The BPS took place at Berea College. Located in central Kentucky,
Berea College has some unique features that have been documented in previous work.
For example, it operates under the objective of providing educational opportunities to
“students of great promise, but limited economics resources,” and, as part of this ob-
jective, provides a full tuition subsidy to all students. Thus, as always, it is necessary
to be appropriately cautious about the exact extent to which results from one school
would generalize to other institutions. However, important for the notion that the basic
lessons from our work are likely to be useful for thinking about what takes place else-
where, Berea operates under a standard liberal arts curriculum and students at Berea
are similar in academic quality, for example, to students at the University of Kentucky
(Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2008). Further, academic decisions and outcomes at
Berea are similar to those found elsewhere (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2014a). For
example, dropout rates are similar to the dropout rates at other schools (for students
from similar backgrounds) and patterns of major choice and major-switching are similar
to those found in the NLSY by Arcidiacono (2004).
    The BPS consists of two cohorts. Baseline surveys were administered to the first
cohort (the 2000 cohort) immediately before it began its freshman year in the fall of
2000 and baseline surveys were administered to the second cohort (the 2001 cohort)
immediately before it began its freshman year in the fall of 2001. Our primary sample
consists of the 650 students who answered this survey.8 While observable characteristics
are not the primary focus of this paper, we note that approximately 41% of the students
in the sample are male, 15% of the students in the sample are black, and the average
American College Test (ACT) score in the sample is approximately 25.
    Crucial to our analysis, the BPS was the first comprehensive longitudinal survey with
a central focus on the collection of beliefs (expectations) data. Initial beliefs were elicited
on the baseline survey. An important aspect of the BPS in our context is that substantial
follow-up surveys, which were administered at the beginning and end of each subsequent
semester, documented how beliefs change over time.9
    Our primary survey questions eliciting beliefs about future earnings are of the form
of baseline Survey Question 1A, which is shown in Appendix A.10 Specifically, Survey
Question 1A elicited the minimum, the maximum, and the three quartiles of the subjec-
tive income distribution at three different ages (first year after graduation, age 28, and
age 38), under a scenario in which the student graduates from college. Students received
   8
     Approximately 85% of all students who entered Berea in the fall of 2000 and the fall of 2001 completed
the baseline surveys and, in part because surveys were reviewed before students left the survey site, the
amount of item non-response was trivial.
   9
     The BPS is unique in its frequency of contact; each student was surveyed approximately 12 times
each year while in school.
  10
     For another example of research that uses an expectations-based approach to elicit information about
the entire distribution of future income, see Attanasio and Kaufmann (2014).


                                                    5
detailed classroom instruction related specifically to these questions, with the spirit of the
discussion being similar to written instructions that were included with the survey. An
almost identical set of questions (not shown) was used to elicit beliefs under the scenario
in which the student does not graduate from college. A baseline survey question also
elicited beliefs about earnings conditional on graduating with three particular levels of
GPA (2.00, 3.00, 3.75). Question 1B in Appendix A shows the portion of this question
related to graduating with a 2.00 GPA.
    Table 1 shows descriptive statistics related to Question 1. The entries in the first row
show the median (the second quartile) of the subjective income distribution, averaged over
the sample, for several different age and academic performance scenarios. The first three
columns show that, on average, the median increases with age. The second three columns
show that, on average, the median increases with final grade point average. To provide
some descriptive evidence about uncertainty, the entries in the second row show the
interquartile range (the difference between the third quartile and the first quartile) of the
subjective income distribution, averaged over the sample, for the same age and academic
performance scenarios. The first three rows show that, on average, the interquartile range
increases with age. The second three columns show that, on average, the interquartile
range increases with final grade point average.

              Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Earnings Beliefs at Entrance
                                                                     Age 28       Age 28         Age 28
                        1 Year Out      Age 28          Age 38
                                                                   GPA = 2.00   GPA = 3.00     GPA = 3.75
                          39.5480       49.1923         60.5161      41.8088      48.1623        54.7238
       Median
                         (18.3900)     (21.9922)       (36.7525)    (21.7551)    (23.7830)      (26.3292)
                          12.6773       15.3221         19.2754      12.3756      13.8969        15.9806
 Interquartile Range
                         (10.3599)     (12.8526)       (30.7070)    (10.6551)    (12.1135)      (13.6923)

 Note: The unit of measurement for all entries is one thousand dollars. A particular entry in
the table shows the sample mean and the sample standard deviation of the corresponding
variable. For example, row 1, column 1 shows a sample mean of $39548.00 and a sample
standard deviation of $18390.00 for the median of the distribution describing a student’s beliefs
about income in the first year out of college. Similarly, row 1, column 4 shows a sample mean
of $41808.80 and a sample standard deviation of $21755.10 for the median of the distribution
describing a student’s beliefs about income at age 28 given that her final GPA is equal to 2.00.



    Baseline Survey Question 2, which characterizes beliefs about future grade perfor-
mance by eliciting the probabilities that a student’s future semester grade point average
will fall in the intervals [3.5, 4.00], [3.0, 3.49], [2.5, 2.99], [2.0, 2.49], [1.0, 1.99] and [0.0,
.99], is also shown in Appendix A. In terms of other baseline information, this paper
takes advantage of survey questions eliciting each student’s subjective probability of com-
pleting a degree in different possible major groups (Question 5, Appendix A), and each
student’s belief about how much noise exists in the grade process (Question 3, Appendix
A).


                                                   6
3      Uncertainty about Future Income at College En-
       trance
This section examines uncertainty about future income at the time of college entrance.
In Section 3.1, we characterize the amount of uncertainty that exists at college entrance.
In Section 3.2, we construct an expectations analog to the realized earnings distribution
and examine the relative importance of uncertainty and heterogeneity in determining the
variance of this distribution.


3.1     Characterizing Uncertainty at Time of College Entrance
When measuring earnings uncertainty, we focus on earnings under the scenario in which
a student graduates from college and, unless otherwise noted, examine beliefs about
earnings at the age of 28.11 The general object of interest is the distribution describing a
student’s subjective beliefs about her future income, which, as noted earlier, we often refer
to as the student’s subjective income distribution. While this entire section focuses on
beliefs at the time of entrance, which we often refer to as “initial” beliefs, we include a time
subscript in our notation for use in subsequent sections. We let wi denote the earnings
of person i at age 28, Wit denote the random variable describing student i’s subjective
beliefs at time t about wi , and fWit (wit ) denote the density of Wit . Then, the standard
deviation and variance of Wit are natural measures of a student’s uncertainty about wi at
time t. Our objectives related to the issue of uncertainty motivate a focus on measures of
dispersion, although it is necessary for parts of our analysis to also characterize measures
of central tendency (e.g., the mean of Wit ), which have received substantial attention in
other previous work.
    Our data allow us to take two different approaches for computing the standard devia-
tion (and mean) of Wit from survey information. The first approach, detailed in Section
3.1.1, takes advantage of Survey Question 1A (Appendix A), which directly elicited the
minimum, maximum, and three quartiles of the subjective income distribution. The
standard deviation can be computed directly from this information given a distributional
assumption for Wit . The second approach, detailed in Section 3.1.2, takes advantage of
Survey Question 1B (Appendix A), which elicited the minimum, maximum, and three
quartiles of the subjective income distribution conditional on various levels of grade per-
formance, and Survey Questions 2 and 3 (Appendix A), which provide information about
a student’s subjective grade distribution. While the second approach has the appeal of
explicitly taking into account one particularly prominent source of income uncertainty –
uncertainty about grade performance – it also requires additional survey questions and
additional assumptions. Given the trade-offs between the two approaches, examining
  11
    We focus on the graduation scenario because this is the outcome that students overwhelmingly believe
is most likely. Specifically, at the time of entrance, students believe, on average, that the probability of
dropping out is only 0.14 (Question 4, Appendix A).


                                                     7
whether they yield similar results is valuable as a robustness check. In addition, the
comparison is valuable because each of these approaches is utilized in other parts of our
analysis.

3.1.1      Approach 1 for characterizing the standard deviation of Wit

Our first approach for characterizing income uncertainty takes advantage of information
that was elicited by Question 1A about the unconditional distribution of Wit . We denote
the elicited minimum, first quartile, second quartile, third quartile, and maximum of
the distribution of Wit as Cit1 , Cit2 , Cit3 , Cit4 and Cit5 , respectively. Characterizing the mean
and standard deviation of Wit from this information requires a distributional assump-
tion for Wit . We examine the robustness of our results to three different distributional
assumptions.

a. Log-normal. We first consider the use of a log-normal distribution, following the
suggestions in Manski (2004). The mean and standard deviation for the log-normal
                                            2
                                                                     √
distribution are given by E(Wit ) = C3 eσ /2 and std(Wit ) = E(Wit ) eσ2 − 1, where σ =
     C4
log( Cit2 )/2Φ−1 (0.75) and Φ is the standard normal cumulative distribution function.
      it


b. Normal. The log-normal distribution imposes an asymmetry that may or may not
be present in the data. While the log-normal does have the appealing feature of ruling
out negative income, the probability of negative income will tend to be small for the
normal distribution when, as we find in our data, the mean is relatively large compared
to the standard deviation. As described in Appendix C, we find that the fit of the two
distributions is quite similar with, if anything, the normal having a slightly better fit.
Then, given that these two distributions can potentially have quite different implications
for characterizing the mean and variance, it seems worthwhile for robustness reasons to
consider each of them. The mean and standard deviation of the normal distribution are
given by E(Wit ) = Cit3 and std(Wit ) = (Cit4 − Cit2 )/2Φ−1 (0.75).

c. Stepwise Uniform. The log-normal and normal distributions do not utilize information
about the minimum, Cit1 , or the maximum, Cit5 , because the supports of the distributions
are R++ and R, respectively. To allow for a specification that uses these values along
with the quartiles, we assume that Wit has the stepwise uniform pdf given by:

                                   0.25
               fWit (wit ) =               , if wit ∈ [Citn , Citn+1 ], for n ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}.          (1)
                               Citn+1   n
                                     − Cit
                                                                                 n+1   n
                                                                         P4     Cit  +Cit
  The mean and standard deviation are given by E(Wit ) =                    n=1     8
                                                                                            and std(Wit ) =
q
 P4 (Citn+1 )2 +Citn+1 Citn +(Citn )2
   n=1             12
                                      − (E(Wit ))2 .

   We examine the magnitude of earnings uncertainty at the time of college entrance
(t = 0) for our sample of 650 students. The first three rows of Table 2 summarize the

                                                     8
results for Approach 1. Depending on which distributional assumption is made (log-
normal, normal, stepwise uniform), the average standard deviation of Wi0 for the sample
varies between $9,653 and $13,064 per year and the average standard deviation to mean
ratio in the sample varies between 18.95% and 24.17% per year.12 Thus, the results
are generally quite similar across the three distributional assumptions. The numbers in
parentheses in the standard deviation column of Table 2 indicate that there is substantial
heterogeneity in uncertainty across students.

                             Table 2: Earnings Beliefs at Entrance
                                                                              std(Wi0 )
              # of Observations: 650                    E(Wi0 )    std(Wi0 )   E(Wi0 )
                                                        51.1742     13.0641   0.2417
              Approach 1, Log-normal
                                                       (23.2062)   (15.5580) (0.2055)
                                                        49.1524     11.3152   0.2295
              Approach 1, Normal
                                                       (21.9879)    (9.4768) (0.1617)
                                                        49.7633      9.6529   0.1895
              Approach 1, Stepwise Uniform
                                                       (22.1799)    (8.0391) (0.1165)
                                                        53.3440     14.0952   0.2540
              Approach 2, Log-normal
                                                       (26.3336)   (15.6768) (0.1754)
                                                        51.3609     12.3235   0.2414
              Approach 2, Normal
                                                       (24.9312)   (10.1175) (0.1464)
                                                        51.8350     10.6937   0.2043
              Approach 2, Stepwise Uniform
                                                       (25.0832)    (8.5515) (0.1141)

 Note: The unit of measurement for Wi0 is one thousand dollars. A particular entry in
the table shows the sample mean and the sample standard deviation of the corresponding
variable. For example, row 1, column 1 shows a sample mean of $51,174.20 and a
sample standard deviation of $23,206.20 for E(Wi0 ). Similarly, row 1, column 2 shows a
sample mean of $13,064.10 and a sample standard deviation of $15,558.00 for std(Wi0 ).




3.1.2    Approach 2 for characterizing the standard deviation of Wit

Letting gi denote the final (cumulative) college GPA of person i and letting Git denote the
random variable describing student i’s subjective beliefs at time t about gi , our second
approach for characterizing income uncertainty takes advantage of information that was
elicited about the distribution of Git and about the distribution of Wit conditional on Git .
The relationship between these distributions and the unconditional income distribution
   12
      Using log-normal distributions leads to the largest mean and standard deviation approximations
and using stepwise uniform distributions leads to the smallest. Note that the distributions constructed
using each of these two distributional assumptions share the same median. Hence, loosely speaking,
log-normal distributions tend to have larger expectations because they are more left-skewed than the
stepwise uniform distributions. While log-normal density functions have wider supports than stepwise
uniform density functions, they also have different shapes which, all else equal, can lead to smaller
standard deviations. Hence, the relative size of the standard deviations implied by the two distributions
is theoretically ambiguous. In our case, the wider-support effect dominates the other effect.




                                                   9
is given by:                                          Z
                                      fWit (wit ) =       fWit |Git =git (wit )dFGit (git ),                            (2)

where git is a realization of Git and where FGit (git ) and fWit |Git =git (wit ) denote the cdf of
Git and the pdf of Wit |Git = git , respectively.
    The analysis in this paper mostly utilizes the mean, E(Wit ), and the standard devi-
ation, std(Wit ), of Wit . We first consider E(Wit ), which can be written as the expected
value of E(Wit |Git ) with respect to Git . In cases like this, where an expression of interest
involves iterated expectations (or variances), it is often useful for reasons of clarity to be
explicit about the random variable on which the outer expectation (or variance) operates.
Using this notational device,

                                             E(Wit ) = EGit (E(Wit |Git )).13                                           (3)

    We use a standard simulation-based method to approximate this integral, which re-
quires repeatedly drawing from the distribution of Git and evaluating E(Wit |Git ) at each
of these draws. The complication that arises, in practice, is that E(Wit |Git ) and FGit (git )
are not fully observed.
    With respect to E(Wit |Git ), the complication arises because, as discussed in Section
2, a student reports information about her subjective conditional income distribution for
only three different realizations of Git : 3.75, 3.00, and 2.00. For these three git values,
E(Wit |Git ) can be computed by assuming one of the distributions in Section 3.1.1. As
described in detail in Appendix B.1, we interpolate the value of E(Wit |Git ) conditional
on other realizations of Git using an approach adopted in Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner
(2014b).
    With respect to FGit (git ), the complication arises because the BPS did not directly
elicit Git , a student’s beliefs at time t about final cumulative GPA, Gi . Given that
a student’s grades before time t are observed in administrative data, the challenge in
determining Git comes from the need to characterize the student’s beliefs at t about
the average GPA (i.e., the cumulative GPA) she will receive over all remaining (future)
semesters in school. The primary source of information used to construct these beliefs
is Survey Question 2 (Appendix A), which elicits beliefs about semester GPA. However,
even making the natural assumption that Question 2 represents a student’s beliefs about
semester GPA in each future semester, Question 2 alone is not enough to determine
how uncertain a student is about the average GPA she will receive over all remaining
semesters. This is the case because one’s uncertainty about average GPA over multiple
semesters will depend on beliefs about the correlation in semester GPA across semesters.
For example, if uncertainty about semester GPA arises because of uncertainty about a
factor such as ability that is permanent in nature, and, therefore, will tend to influence
    13
                                       R
R     EGit (E(Wit |Git ))        =         E(Wit |Git     =     git )dFGit (git ),   with      E(Wit |Git   =   git )    =
    wit fWit |Git =git (wit )dwit .


                                                               10
grades in each semester, then the uncertainty about semester GPA expressed in Question
2 will tend to be a good indicator of the student’s uncertainty about average GPA over
multiple semesters. On the other hand, if uncertainty about semester GPA arises because
of semester-specific randomness in grades which is transitory in nature, and, therefore,
will tend to average out to some extent over multiple semesters, then the uncertainty
about semester GPA expressed in Question 2 might substantially overstate the student’s
uncertainty about average GPA over multiple semesters.14 Our approach for character-
izing a student’s subjective beliefs about the cumulative GPA she will receive over all
remaining semesters differentiates between these two types of possibilities by taking ad-
vantage of a novel survey question (Question 3 in Appendix A), which elicited beliefs
about the importance of the semester-specific randomness. Appendix B.2 describes this
approach in detail, focusing, for illustrative purposes, on the case of t = 0, which is of
relevance in this section.
    We now turn our attention to the measure of dispersion, std(Wit ), which is given by:
                                 p
                   std(Wit ) =    varGit (E(Wit |Git )) + EGit (var(Wit |Git )).15                      (4)

    The value of std(Wit ) can be approximated in a manner very similar to that described
in the previous paragraphs for the approximation of E(Wit ). Equation (4) shows that, in
addition to using an interpolation approach to deal with the issue that E(Wit |Git ) and
FGit (git ) are not fully observed, it is also necessary to interpolate the value of var(Wit |Git )
at realizations of Git other than 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75. The details of our interpolation
approach are described in Appendix B.1.
    Using Approach 2, we examine the magnitude of earnings uncertainty for the same
sample of 650 students as in Section 3.1.1. Results are summarized in the last three
rows of Table 2. Depending on which distributional assumption is made, the average
standard deviation of Wi0 for the sample varies between $10,694 and $14,095 per year and
the average standard deviation to mean ratio in the sample varies between 20.43% and
25.40% per year. Thus, we find that the results are reasonably robust to two computation
approaches. In fact, results change more due to the choice of distribution than to the
choice of computational approach.

3.1.3    Demographic Variables

It is worth examining whether the amount of uncertainty that is present at the time of
entrance varies systematically with demographic information. To examine this issue, we
regress std(Wi0 ) on Black, Male and ACT score for each of the six different distribution-
  14
      This randomness might be due to, for example, bad matches with instructors, sicknesses at inop-
portune times, or temporary personal      problems.
   15
                                      (E(Wit |Git = git )) − EGit (E(Wit |Git = Rgit ))2 dFGit (git ) and
                                    R
      V arGit (E(Wit |Git ))R =
EGit (V ar(Wit |Git )) = V ar(Wit |Git = git )dFGit (git ), with V ar(Wit |Git = git ) = (wit − E(Wit |Git =
git ))2 fWit |Git =git (wit )dwit .



                                                    11
approach combinations in Table 2. We find a seemingly important role for race. While
full regression results are not shown, taking the average of estimated coefficients over
the six different combinations, we find that black students have a standard deviation
that is approximately $1,536 higher than non-blacks. Further, the Black coefficient has
a t-statistic greater than 1.5 in four of the six distribution-approach combinations, with
the maximum t-statistic having a value of 2.6. Comparing these findings to those for our
other binary variable, Male, we find that the coefficient for Male also has a t-statistic
greater than 1.5 for four of the six combinations, but that the average coefficient for
Male over the six distribution-approach combinations is only approximately 62% of the
average coefficient for Black.
    We stress that understanding the exact interpretation of these results is beyond the
scope of this paper. Among other things, interpretation is complicated by the fact that
uncertainty could be caused by a lack of information, but it could also be caused by
potential access to a wide range of job opportunities. The possibility that these two
effects may sometimes push in opposite directions may explain, for example, why we do
not find evidence of a relationship between ACT score and uncertainty.


3.2     Heterogeneity vs. Uncertainty
Traditionally, estimating the amount of uncertainty about earnings that is present at col-
lege entrance requires separating the importance of this uncertainty from the importance
of heterogeneity - differences in ability and other income-influencing factors known by
individuals - in determining a realized distribution of income. Thus, while characterizing
the amount of uncertainty that is present at the time of college entrance is reasonably
viewed as the primary goal, past work has found it natural to also report the percentage
of the total variation in earnings that is due to this uncertainty. In Section 3.2.1 we
compute an expectations analog to this percentage. In Section 3.2.2, we examine the
robustness of our results to a measurement error correction. In Section 3.2.3, we describe
how our expectations analog relates to the approach surveyed in Cunha and Heckman
(2007). Given this discussion, we conclude that our results reinforce their findings.

3.2.1    Decomposition of heterogeneity and uncertainty

Suppose that a person’s earnings in a future year (e.g., age 28) are determined by a
vector of finitely many random variables Xi .16 Further decompose Xi into factors that
are observed by the students at t, Xit− , and those that are not, Xit+ , and define Xi ≡
(Xit− , Xit+ ). Then, we can write the future income of student i, Wi , as:

                                        Wi ≡ W(Xit− , Xit+ ).                                       (5)
  16
    Note that these random variables represent both factors related to the worker and factors related to
the labor market.



                                                  12
    Although, a priori, individuals have identical distributions of Xit− and Xit+ , realiza-
tions of these random variables vary across people. It is differences in these realizations
that produce variation in the empirical earnings distribution. At the time t when individ-
uals answer the survey, they have already observed Xit− . Heterogeneity in Xit− produces
differences in the beliefs we observe as given by the distribution of Wit . To construct
the expectations analog to the empirical earnings distribution, we take advantage of the
fact that var(Wi ) can be written as a function of the conditional distributions that we
observe:

                   var(Wi ) = EXit− (var(Wi |Xit− )) + varXit− (E(Wi |Xit− )).                 (6)

    Under the assumption that Xi is independently distributed across students, taking an
expectation with respect to Xit− is, in essence, averaging across individuals (whose beliefs
about income at time t differ only through Xit− ).17 The first term on the right hand side
of equation (6) shows, on average, how uncertain individuals are about earnings. Thus,
this term represents the contribution of uncertainty to total variation. Using either of
the two approaches in Section 3.1, we are able to compute the sample analog of this term
as the sample mean of var(Wit ). Similarly, taking a variance with respect to Xit− is, in
essence, measuring dispersion across individuals. The second term on the right hand side
shows how much dispersion exists in expected earnings across individuals, arising from
the heterogeneity term Xit− . Therefore, this second term represents the contribution of
heterogeneity to total variation. Using either of the two approaches in Section 3.1, we
are able to compute the sample analog of this term as the sample variance of E(Wit ).
    Note that if beliefs are correct, i.e., if Wit ≡ Wi |Xit− , the sum of the two terms will
correspond to the variance of the realized income distribution. If beliefs are not correct,
the sum of the terms corresponds to what individuals believe about the the variance of
the realized income distribution.
    For each of our six approach-distribution combinations, the first column of Table 3
shows the first (uncertainty) term from equation (6), the second column shows the second
(heterogeneity) term from equation (6), the third column shows the sum of the first two
columns (the total variation), and the final column shows the ratio of the second column
(heterogeneity) to the third column (total variation).
    Consistent with what we found earlier, Approach 1 and Approach 2 deliver results that
are quite similar. While larger differences in results are generated by the distributional
assumption than by the choice of computational approach (Approach 1 and Approach
2 in Section 3.1.1 and 3.1.2), all three of the distributional assumptions suggest a large
role for heterogeneity. For the stepwise uniform distribution, heterogeneity accounts for
over 75% of overall variation. This percentage is approximately 60% and 70% for the
log-normal distribution and the normal distribution, respectively.
  17
    In Section 3.2.3, we discuss scenarios under which the independence assumption would tend to be
violated and the implications of these scenarios.


                                                13
                           Table 3: Heterogeneity and Uncertainty
                                    Uncertainty: Sample    Heterogeneity: Sample              Heterogeneity
 # of Observations: 650                                                            Total
                                     Mean of var(Wi0 )      Variance of E(Wi0 )                   Ratio
 Approach   1,   Stepwise Uniform          157.7                   491.9            649.7        75.72%
 Approach   1,   Log-normal                412.4                   538.5            950.9        56.63%
 Approach   1,   Normal                    217.7                   483.5            701.2        68.95%
 Approach   2,   Stepwise Uniform          187.4                   629.2            816.5        77.05%
 Approach   2,   Log-normal                444.1                   693.5           1,137.5       60.96%
 Approach   2,   Normal                    254.1                   621.6            875.6        70.98%

 Note: The unit of measurement for Wi0 is one thousand dollars. The third column (Total) is
the sum of the first two columns. The fourth column (Heterogeneity Ratio) is the ratio of
column 2 (Heterogeneity) to column 3 (Total).



3.2.2   Allowing for measurement error

While the conceptual virtues of expectations data are well-recognized, it is generally
difficult to know the extent to which the benefits of this approach are mitigated by,
for example, measurement error in responses to expectations questions. In our context,
classical measurement error in the income expectations responses would tend to lead to
an overstatement of the importance of heterogeneity relative to the importance of uncer-
tainty. This is the case because, as can be seen in equation (6), the measured contribution
of heterogeneity (the second term) is represented by a sample variance (which will tend
to increase with the amount of classical measurement error), while the measured contri-
bution of uncertainty (the first term) is represented by a sample mean (which will tend
to be consistent even in the presence of classical measurement error). To provide some
evidence about the quantitative importance of measurement error, we take advantage
of the fact that our two computational approaches in Sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 allow us
to compute E(Wit ) in two separate ways. We refer to the computed values from Ap-
proach 1 and Approach 2 as E  f1 (Wit ) and E
                                            f2 (Wit ), respectively. The intuition underlying
the measurement error correction is that, in an environment with no interpolation, the
two computed values will be identical if the responses to the survey questions used to
compute these values are not affected by measurement error. However, when the two
computed values are different, the importance of measurement error can be ascertained
if one specifies the manner in which measurement error affects the responses to the survey
questions.
    Starting with Approach 1, the computed value E     f1 (Wit ) comes directly from Question
1A (which elicits the unconditional subjective income distribution). We assume that
measurement error enters the computed value E     f1 (Wit ) in a classical manner;

                                    f1 (Wit ) = E(Wit ) + ςi ,
                                    E                                                        (7)

where ςi is the classical measurement error attached to the true value E(Wit ). Dispersion


                                               14
in the computed value, E f1 (Wit ), across students originates from both dispersion in the
true value, E(Wit ), across students and randomness caused by measurement error, ςi .
This can be seen by taking the variance of both sides of equation (7):

                                  f1 (Wit )) = var(E(Wit )) + var(ςi ).
                              var(E                                                                      (8)

Equation (8) reveals that the true contribution of heterogeneity, var(E(Wit )), can be
obtained by subtracting the variance of the measurement error, ςi , from the measured
contribution of heterogeneity, var(Ef1 (Wit )). Thus, the remainder of this section focuses
on estimating the variance of ςi .
    Turning to Approach 2, the value Ef2 (Wit ) is computed from the responses to questions
eliciting beliefs about income conditional on the three particular realizations of final GPA
(questions such as 1B) as well as questions eliciting beliefs about grade performance
(Questions 2 and 3). Similar to the assumption made in equation (7), we assume that
measurement error influences the responses to questions such as 1B in a classical manner,
that is,

        e it |Git = git ) = E(Wit |Git = git ) + ς git
        E(W                                                                 git = 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75,    (9)
                                                  i

        e it |Git = git ) is the measured value of the true value E(Wit |Git = git ) and ς git ,
where E(W                                                                                    i
git = 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75, are the corresponding classical measurement errors.
    As discussed in Section 3.1.2, the computation of E     f2 (Wit ) requires information on
 e it |Git ) at all realizations of Git and the distribution of Git . However, because we
E(W
only observe the measured value E(W e it |Git ) for three specific realizations of Git , we need
to interpolate the value of E(W e it |Git ) at other realizations. Under the interpolation
approach that we adopted in Section 3.1.2, E   f2 (Wit ) can be written as a weighted sum of
 e it |Git = 2.0), E(W
E(W                  e it |Git = 3.0), and E(W
                                             e it |Git = 3.75):

                      X
        f2 (Wit ) =
        E                   λgi it E(W
                                   e it |Git = git )                        git = 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75,   (10)
                      git

where, as shown in Appendix D, the weights λ2.0          3.0      3.75
                                                    i , λi , and λi    are integrals that de-
pend on the distribution of Git . Here, we assume that no errors are introduced by the
interpolation approach. However, in Appendix F we discuss why our conclusion about
the importance of heterogeneity in this section will tend to be conservative if this type
of interpolation error exists or if error is introduced during the computation of Git .
    Combining equation (9) and equation (10), we obtain the following equation:


                                      X                                     X
                      f2 (Wit ) =
                      E                      λgi it E(Wit |Git = git ) +           λgi it ςigit
                                       git                                   git
                                                    X
                                   = E(Wit ) +             λgi it ςigit .                               (11)
                                                     git



                                                       15
   Taking the difference between the mean computed using Approach 1 and the mean
computed using Approach 2, we obtain:

                                                              X
                              f1 (Wit ) − E
                              E           f2 (Wit ) = ςi −           λgi it ςigit .                   (12)
                                                               git

    Using equation (12) to estimate var(ςi ) requires assumptions about the joint distri-
bution of ςi , ς 2.0 , ς 3.0 and ς 3.75 . The prior assumption that ςi and ςigit s represent classical
measurement error implies that they have mean zero and are independent of other fac-
tors. In addition, we assume that the four measurement error terms are independent and
identically distributed.
    Under these assumptions, as shown in Appendix E,

                                                 f1 (Wit ) − E
                                             var(E           f2 (Wit ))
                                var(ςi ) =                              .                             (13)
                                               1 + git E((λgi it )2 )
                                                   P

    Note that we can compute the sample analogs of var(E             f2 (Wit )) and E((λgit )2 )
                                                           f1 (Wit )−E
                                                                                        i
                           18
from data available to us. Hence, var(ςi ) can be estimated. The first column of Ta-
ble 4 reports the estimates of var(ςi ). Subtracting the measurement error component
from measured heterogeneity (column 2 in Table 4 for the three rows associated with
Approach 1) yields the magnitude of true heterogeneity var(E(Wit )), which is reported
in the second column. In the third column, we report the adjusted heterogeneity ratio,
which is defined as the ratio of true heterogeneity (column 2 in Table 4) to the sum of
true heterogeneity (column 2 in Table 4) and uncertainty (column 1 in Table 3).
    We find that the magnitude of measurement error is relatively small compared to mea-
sured heterogeneity across all specifications so that the true contribution of heterogeneity
to overall earnings dispersion remains large.

         Table 4: Heterogeneity and Uncertainty (Measurement Error Adjusted)
                                Measurement Error                                         Adjusted Heterogeneity
 # of Observations: 650                                    Adjusted Heterogeneity
                                     var(ςi )                                                     Ratio
 Stepwise Uniform                     79.0                               413.0                   72.37%
 Log-normal                           110.9                              427.6                   50.91%
 Normal                               90.6                               392.8                   64.34%

 Note: The second column (Adjusted Heterogeneity) is found by subtracting column 1,
Table 4 from column 2, Table 3. The third column (Adjusted Heterogeneity Ratio) is the
ratio of column 2, Table 4, to the sum of column 2, Table 4 and column 1, Table 3.


  18                                        f1 (Wit ) − Ef2 (Wit )) involves finding the difference between
     For example, the sample analog of var(E
the mean computed by Approach 1 and the mean computed by Approach 2 for each individual and then
computing the variance of this difference across all individuals in the sample.




                                                    16
3.2.3    Discussion

There are reasons that our results are not directly comparable to the results surveyed
in Cunha and Heckman (2007), which are obtained using a realized income distribution.
One particularly notable difference is that our analysis is based on a sample of relatively
homogeneous students from one college. A second difference is that our survey questions
(Question 1A/B) are able to take into account individual-level uncertainty due to a
potentially important factor, the aggregate state of the economy in the future, which does
not generate variation in the realized income distribution in a particular year. However,
if we were to broaden our sample to include students who are likely to have systematically
different views about future earnings (e.g., students who do not attend college) or if we
were to remove any uncertainty that exists due to business cycles, then we would tend
to find an even more prominent role for heterogeneity relative to uncertainty.19 Thus, it
is reasonable to conclude that our findings reinforce the strong message in Cunha and
Heckman (2007) that taking into account heterogeneity is essential for characterizing the
amount of uncertainty that exists about future earnings at the time of college entrance.


4       Uncertainty Resolution
In this section, we turn to examining when and why initial uncertainty about income
is resolved. In Section 4.1, we examine one particularly prominent potential source of
uncertainty, one’s college grade point average. By definition, all uncertainty about final
college GPA will be resolved by the end of college. Thus, if uncertainty about GPA is
an important contributor to overall earnings uncertainty, then students will expect much
earnings uncertainty to be resolved at some point during college, and much resolution
may be expected to take place early in school if students tend to learn quickly about
their academic ability (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2012, 2014b). In Section 4.2, we
perform a related analysis to examine how much earnings uncertainty at the time of en-
trance can be attributed to uncertainty about college major. The findings in Section 4.1
and Section 4.2 raise the possibility that much uncertainty about earnings may remain
unresolved at the end of college. Section 4.3 takes advantage of the longitudinal expec-
tations data in the BPS to show that this is the case, and, finally, Section 4.4 explores
the factors that could contribute to this finding.
  19
     The former is true if, e.g., the amount of uncertainty in other groups tends to be roughly similar to
that of students in our sample. The latter statement holds if aggregate and individual income-influencing
factors are multiplicatively separable. The proof is available upon request.
   Another difference is that, unlike articles surveyed in Cunha and Heckman (2007), we do not control
for observed characteristics before computing the relative importance of uncertainty and heterogeneity.
However, this difference is unlikely to be important: we find that observable characteristics explain
relatively little of the total variation in E(Wit ).




                                                   17
4.1     How Much Does Grade Uncertainty Contribute to Earnings
        Uncertainty?
In addition to being useful for examining robustness and correcting for measurement er-
ror, our second computational approach (Section 3.1.2) provides a natural way to quantify
the importance of uncertainty about final GPA in determining overall uncertainty about
future income. Equation (4) yields a natural decomposition of income uncertainty. The
first term in the square root shows the degree to which a student believes that the mean
of Wit varies across different final GPA realizations. Thus, it measures the contribution
of uncertainty about grade performance to income uncertainty. The second term is an
average (across GPA realizations) of how much uncertainty is present conditional on a
particular realization of final GPA. Thus, it measures the contribution of other factors to
income uncertainty, including, for example, uncertainty about major choice, labor market
frictions, and future labor market conditions.20
    Formally, we define the contribution of grade uncertainty to income uncertainty as
the fraction of overall uncertainty that can be attributed to the first term:


                              varGit (E(Wit |Git ))
                        RitG =                                                                      (14)
                                  var(Wit )
                                        varGit (E(Wit |Git ))
                            =                                               .
                              varGit (E(Wit |Git )) + EGit (var(Wit |Git ))


                                                G
                      Table 5: Contribution of Ri0 : Mean and Quartiles
                 # of Observations: 650         Mean       25%        50%       75%
                 Stepwise Uniform               0.1819    0.0120     0.0737    0.2709
                 Log-normal                     0.1535    0.0090     0.0573    0.2054
                 Normal                         0.1580    0.0102     0.0613    0.2258
                                                                           G
 Note: The first column shows the mean of the sample distribution of Ri0     . The final
                                                                      G
three columns show the three quartiles of the sample distribution of Ri0 .


    Table 5 summarizes the results for the time of entrance. The first column shows
that, on average, 18% of income uncertainty is due to uncertainty about final GPA
when we use the stepwise uniform assumption and that, on average, 15% to 16% of
income uncertainty is due to uncertainty about final GPA when we use the log-normal
or normal distributions. The final three columns show the three quartiles for the three
distributional assumptions. For the log-normal and normal distributions, only roughly
  20
    Of course, it is desirable to directly investigate the importance of each of the “other” factors as
thoroughly as possible. In Section 4.2 we do examine the contribution of major choice to overall earnings
uncertainty, and in Section 4.4 we do investigate the relative importance of labor market frictions and
future labor market conditions in determining the substantial uncertainty that is found to remain at the
end of college.


                                                   18
25% of students believe that more than roughly 21% to 23% of overall income uncertainty
is due to uncertainty about final GPA. For the stepwise uniform case, only 25% of students
believe that more than 27% of income uncertainty is due to uncertainty about final GPA.
Hence, we conclude that, while uncertainty about grade performance has a non-trivial
effect on overall earnings uncertainty, the large majority of uncertainty exists for other
reasons.
    We can also provide evidence about the determinants of the heterogeneity in the
Table 5 fractions. While individuals with higher fractions do tend to have slightly less
income uncertainty because of factors other than GPA, they have much more income
uncertainty because of GPA. For example, splitting the sample based on the median in
the third (Normal) row of Table 5, the first term in the denominator of equation (14) is 11
times larger for students above the median and the second term in the denominator is 51%
smaller for students above the median. Differences in the amount of income uncertainty
that is due to GPA could arise, not only because of differences in uncertainty about GPA,
but also because of differences in beliefs about how GPA translates to income. We find
evidence that, in practice, both of these sources of heterogeneity matter.21


4.2     How Much Does Major Uncertainty Contribute to Earnings
        Uncertainty?
Another important determinant of income that is fully realized during college is college
major (Altonji, Blom, and Meghir, 2012, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2014a, Altonji,
Arcidiacono, and Maurel, 2016). A decomposition relevant for investigating the role that
uncertainty about major plays in determining total income uncertainty can be obtained
in a way similar to the decomposition for GPA in equation (4):

                    var(Wit ) = varMit (E(Wit |Mit )) + EMit (var(Wit |Mit )),                        (15)

where Mit is a discrete random variable describing student i’s beliefs about final major
at time t, which takes on one of seven possible majors j with probability Pijt .22 The
first term on the right side of equation (15) shows how the mean of Wit varies across
  21
      Evidence about the importance of the first source of heterogeneity can be seen by computing the sam-
ple interquartile range of varGi0 (E(Wi0 |Gi0 )) assuming that, conditional on a given realization of GPA,
all students have identical beliefs about the mean of the subjective conditional income distribution. In
practice, we set these means equal to their sample averages. Evidence about the importance of the second
source of heterogeneity can be seen by computing the sample interquartile range of varGi0 (E(Wi0 |Gi0 ))
assuming that all students have identical beliefs about final GPA. In practice, we set the parameters of
the subjective GPA distribution equal to their sample averages. We find that, depending on which of
the three distributional assumptions is used, the interquartile range for the first source of heterogeneity
is roughly 35% to 40% as large as the interquartile range for the second source of heterogeneity.
   22
      The numbers 1, ..., 7 correspond to the following eight major groups: 1. Agricultural and Physical
Education; 2. Business; 3. Elementary Education; 4. Humanities; 5. Natural Sciences/Math; 6.
Professional Programs; 7. Social Sciences, where Economics is included in Social Sciences and where,
for convenience, we have grouped Agriculture and Physical Education together because of their small
sizes.


                                                    19
different majors. Thus, it measures the contribution of uncertainty about major to
income uncertainty. The second term is an average (across major realizations) of how
much uncertainty is present conditional on a particular realization of final major. Thus,
it measures the contribution of other factors to income uncertainty. Then, analogous to
our GPA analysis, the goal is to estimate the fraction of total income uncertainty that is
due to major uncertainty using the following formula:

                                           varMit (E(Wit |Mit ))
                       RitM =                                                 .                       (16)
                                varMit (E(Wit |Mit )) + EMit (var(Wit |Mit ))
    Unfortunately, unlike what was the case for our GPA analysis in Section 4.1, the data
do not include all of the information that would allow us to directly compute the two
terms, varMit (E(Wit |Mit )) and EMit (var(Wit |Mit )), that enter this fraction. Specifically,
while our analysis in Section 4.1 took advantage of the fact that var(Wit |Git ) is available
in the data, var(Wit |Mit ) is not available. However, given information that is observed
about E(Wit ), var(Wit ) and the probabilities Pijt , j = 1, ..., 7, we are able to estimate
the two terms if we make additional assumptions about how the mean and variance of
the subjective income distribution conditional on a major varies across students.

4.2.1    Estimation

The objective of this section is to examine the fraction of income uncertainty that is due
to uncertainty about major at the time of entrance (t = 0). With Pij0 observed from
Survey Question 5 in Appendix A for j = 1, ..., 7, Equation (15) shows that estimating
the two terms requires knowledge of E(Wi0 |Mi0 ) and var(Wi0 |Mi0 ). We estimate these
conditional means and conditional variances under the assumption that they are homo-
geneous across students conditional on observable characteristics, Xi , that are known to
the student at time t = 0,



                                  E(Wi0 |Mi0 = j) = αw + Xi β + δj                                    (17)
                                var(Wi0 |Mi0 = j) = αv + Xi γ + θj ,

where δj , j = 1, ..., 7 and θj , j = 1, .., 7 represent differences in the conditional means and
the conditional variances, respectively, across majors.23
    The unconditional mean E(Wi0 ) can be written as EMi0 (E(Wi0 |Mi0 )), and, there-
fore, is a function of E(Wi0 |Mi0 ) and the random variable Mi0 . Similarly, the uncon-
ditional variance var(Wi0 ) can be written as varMi0 (E(Wi0 |Mi0 )) + EMi0 (var(Wi0 |Mi0 )),
  23
    While the linear specification does not restrict the conditional means and variances in equation (17)
to be positive, in practice we find that these objects are typically estimated to be positive. Nonetheless,
we also estimated a specification in which we assumed that the conditional means and variances were
exponential functions. This specification, in which the means and variances are restricted to be positive,
produces results that are quite similar to those obtained for the linear case.



                                                    20
and, therefore is a function of E(Wi0 |Mi0 ), var(Wi0 |Mi0 ), and the random variable Mi0 .
Then, following the same assumption as in Section 3.2.2, the unconditional mean that
is computed from Survey Question 1A using Approach 1, E         f1 (Wi0 ), is determined by
adding classical measurement error, ςi , to the true unconditional mean, E(Wi0 ). Simi-
larly, the unconditional variance, Vg
                                    ar(Wi0 ), that is computed from Survey Question 1A
using Approach 1 is determined by adding classical measurement error, ui , to the true
unconditional variance, var(Wi0 ). This implies that


                                                        7
                                                        X
            f1 (Wi0 ) = EM (E(Wi0 |Mi0 )) + ςi =
            E                                                 Pij0 E(Wi0 |Mi0 = j) + ςi       (18)
                          i0
                                                        j=1
                                       7
                                       X
                      = αw + Xi β +          Pij0 δj + ςi
                                       j=1




                ar(Wi0 ) = varMi0 (E(Wi0 |Mi0 )) + EMi0 (var(Wi0 |Mi0 )) + ui
               vg                                                                             (19)
                                                            7
                                                            X
                          = varMi0 (δj ) + αv + Xi γ +            Pij0 θj + ui
                                                            j=1


    Normalizing the Social Science coefficients δ7 and θ7 to zero, we estimate the remaining
parameters, αw , β, δj , j = 1, ..., 6, αv , γ, and θj , j = 1, ..., 6, which are needed to
estimate E(Wi0 |Mi0 = j), j = 1, ..., 7 and var(Wi0 |Mi0 = j), j = 1, ..., 7 (equation 17),
                                                                M
and, therefore, the two terms that appear in the fraction Ri0      (equation 16). We obtain
estimates by:

  1. Regressing E   f1 (Wi0 ) on Xi and Pij0 , j = 1, ..., 7 to obtain estimates of αw , β and
     δj , j = 1, ..., 6.

  2. Using the estimates δbj , j = 1, ..., 6 and the normalized value δ7 = 0 to compute an
     estimate of varMi0 (δj ), j = 1, ..., 7 for each person i.

  3. Regressing vg ar(Wi0 ) − vd  arMi0 (δj ) on Xi and Pij0 , j = 1, ..., 7 to obtain estimates of
     αv , γ and θj , j = 1, ..., 6.

4.2.2   Results

Including Black, Male, and ACT score in Xi , Table 6 shows the results. The first column
shows that, on average, 17% of income uncertainty is due to uncertainty about final major
when we use the stepwise uniform assumption, on average, 12% of income uncertainty
is due to uncertainty about final major when we use the log-normal assumption, and,
on average, 11% of income uncertainty is due to uncertainty about final major when we
use the normal assumption. Thus, the conclusions for major are fairly similar to the

                                                 21
conclusions for GPA - while students believe that uncertainty about major plays non-
trivial role in creating the overall uncertainty about income, much of the uncertainty
about income is present for other reasons.
                                             M
                   Table 6: Contribution of Ri0 : Mean and Quartiles
               # of Observations: 682     Mean       25%       50%       75%
               Stepwise Uniform           0.1669    0.0419    0.1458    0.2508
               Log-normal                 0.1152    0.0333    0.0932    0.1645
               Normal                     0.1125    0.0407    0.0957    0.1672
                                                                        M
Note: The first column shows the mean of the sample distribution of Ri0    . The final
                                                                      M
three columns show the three quartiles of the sample distribution of Ri0 .



                             Table 7: Estimates for δj and θj
                           j=1       j=2          j=3        j=4         j=5        j=6      j=7
                          -1.3487    8.8563     -11.3784    -3.7377     -3.8968    -2.6666     0
      Stepwise Uniform   (0.7612)   (0.0380)    (0.0176)   (0.3542)    (0.2932)   (0.5168)   N.A.
                             [3]       [1]         [7]         [5]         [6]        [4]     [2]
                          -2.6844    8.0725     -13.2090    -6.0781     -2.4133    -3.5936     0
 δj   Log-normal         (0.5554)   (0.0720)    (0.0098)   (0.1498)    (0.5350)   (0.3994)   N.A.
                             [4]       [1]         [7]         [6]         [3]        [5]     [2]
                          -2.8511    7.2972     -11.4803    -6.7927     -1.9434    -3.2801     0
      Normal             (0.5080)   (0.0780)    (0.0156)   (0.0926)    (0.5954)   (0.4164)   N.A.
                             [4]       [1]         [7]         [6]         [3]        [5]     [2]
                         32.6860    12.2821     -86.5519   16.8320     -11.6128   -30.0232     0
      Stepwise Uniform   (0.3368)   (0.7798)    (0.0676)   (0.6150)    (0.6676)   (0.3176)   N.A.
                             [1]       [3]         [7]         [2]         [5]        [6]     [4]
                         68.7708    24.4051    -139.0690   47.7077      18.9153   -41.2298     0
 θj   Log-normal         (0.2612)   (0.7140)    (0.0696)   (0.4082)    (0.7582)   (0.4746)   N.A.
                             [1]       [3]         [7]         [2]         [4]        [6]     [5]
                         50.8042     8.6432     -93.4664    1.4545       8.4128   -40.2733     0
      Normal             (0.2824)   (0.8916)    (0.1060)   (0.9932)    (0.8628)   (0.3514)   N.A.
                             [1]       [2]         [7]         [4]         [3]        [6]     [5]

 List of majors: 1. Agricultural and Physical Education; 2. Business; 3. Elementary
Education; 4. Humanities; 5. Natural Sciences/Math; 6. Professional Programs; 7. Social
Sciences.
Note: Equal-tail bootstrap P-values are in the parenthesis. Ranks are in the brackets.


    Table 7 reports the estimates for δj and θj . The first three rows indicate that students
believe there are substantial differences in mean earnings across majors. For example,
the Business major (j = 2) has a significantly higher mean than the Social Science major
(j = 7), while the Education major (j = 3) has a significantly lower mean than the Social
Science major. The last three rows indicate that there are also differences in uncertainty
about income across majors. Most notably, consistent with the rigid pay scale that exists
in public schools, the variance is estimated to be the smallest for Elementary Education.


                                               22
4.3     Total Uncertainty Resolution
The findings in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 raise the possibility that much uncertainty
about earnings may remain unresolved at the end of college. However, while grade per-
formance (academic ability) and college major are prominent income-influencing factors
that a student could learn about during college, they are not the only possible factors of
relevance. In this section, we examine the actual evolution of income uncertainty over
time during school, by taking advantage of the fact that the BPS elicited information
about subjective income distributions in each year of school (using questions such as
Question 1A in Appendix A). We again focus on subjective beliefs about income at age
28 under the scenario in which a student graduates from college.
                                 Table 8: Uncertainty Resolution
 # of Observations: 246                     Beginning Year 1          Year 2      Year 3   End
 Sample         Stepwise Uniform             10.1310   9.1084         8.3859       8.2887 8.2874
 Average        Log-normal                   13.4582  11.8160         11.0484     11.0632 10.7536
 of std(Wit )   Normal                       11.7686  10.7123         10.0112     9.6912 9.6384
 Percentage of Stepwise Uniform               N.A.     0.1917         0.3148      0.3306 0.3308
 Uncertainty    Log-normal                    N.A.     0.2291         0.3261      0.3242 0.3615
 Resolved       Normal                        N.A.     0.1714         0.2764      0.3219 0.3292

 Note: The unit of measurement for Wit is one thousand dollar. The percentage of
initial uncertainty resolved by Year t (row 4-6) is obtained in the manner described in
the text.


    The first three rows of Table 8 report the average standard deviation of the subjective
earnings distribution at five different points in college - the beginning of college, the end
of the first year, the end of the second year, the end of the third year, and the time of
graduation (End) - for each of our three distributional assumptions, using Approach 1.24
We restrict our sample to students who answered income expectations questions at all
five points. Looking across columns, as would be expected, students become increasingly
certain about their future income as they progress through college.25
    In order to facilitate a comparison between total uncertainty resolution and the find-
ings in Section 4.1 and 4.2, we define the percentage of uncertainty resolution as the
percentage decrease in the variance of the subjective income distribution. Since the vari-
ance is simply the square of the standard deviation, we compute these percentages using
entries in the first three rows of Table 8. As an example, the second column in the fourth
                       9.10842
row shows that 1 − 10.1310    2 = 19.17% of total income uncertainty was resolved during the

first year of college, when we use the stepwise uniform distribution.
  24
     For t greater than zero, computing std(Wit ) using Approach 2 requires using a student’s cumulative
GPA at time t to construct the distribution describing subjective beliefs about final grades at time t.
We avoid this complication by computing std(Wit ) using only Approach 1.
  25
     The only exception is a slight increase of sample average of std(Wit ) from the end of Year 2 to the
end of Year 3 when using log-normal distribution. This increase, however, is quite small and can be
reasonably attributed to measurement error.

                                                   23
    The last three rows of Table 8 show the percentage of uncertainty that is resolved
as of the five different points. The results indicate that, depending on the distributional
assumption that is made, between 33% and 36% of uncertainty is resolved by the end
of college. Thus, the evidence indicates that much uncertainty does remain unresolved
during college. Further, comparing the last three columns, we find that the majority of
uncertainty resolution took place in the first two years of college, with little uncertainty
resolved after the end of the third year. This finding suggests that learning about future
income happens relatively quickly in college. Given evidence that uncertainty about
grade performance and major is resolved relatively quickly, the finding is consistent with
an environment where learning about grade performance (ability) and major contribute
heavily to the total resolution of income uncertainty.
    Further, comparing the sum of the contribution of GPA uncertainty (Table 5) and
major uncertainty (Table 6) to the results in the last three rows of Table 8 provides
some direct evidence about whether this is the case. However, this sum would give a
biased view of the joint contribution of GPA and major if these two factors tend to
be correlated. The joint contribution of GPA and major is determined by an equation
analogous to Equation (4) and Equation (15):

          var(Wit ) = varGit ,Mit (E(Wit |Git , Mit )) + EGit ,Mit (var(Wit |Git , Mit )).   (20)

The first term on the right side of Equation (20), which is the variance of E(Wit |Git , Mit )
over the joint distribution of Git and Mit , represents the joint contribution of uncertainty
about final GPA and major to total income uncertainty. The second term on the right side
of Equation (20), which is the mean of var(Wit |Git , Mit ) over the joint distribution of Git
and Mit , represents the contribution of other factors to total initial income uncertainty.
Analogous to Equation (14) and Equation (16), we define the contribution of final GPA
and major to total income uncertainty, RitGM , as the ratio of the first term to the sum of
the two terms.
    We compute RitGM for the time of entrance (t = 0) using a method described in
Appendix G. Table 9 summarizes the results. The first column shows that, on average,
24% of initial income uncertainty is due to uncertainty about final GPA and major when
we use the stepwise uniform assumption, on average, 18% of initial income uncertainty is
due to uncertainty about final GPA and major when we use the log-normal assumption,
and, on average, 22% of initial income uncertainty is due to uncertainty about final GPA
and major when we use the normal assumption. Thus, the results in Table 9 along with
the results in the last three rows of Table 8 do indicate a very substantial role for final
GPA and major in the resolution of uncertainty.




                                                24
                                            GM
                  Table 9: Contribution of Ri0 : Mean and Quartiles
               # of Observations: 588    Mean      25%      50%      75%
               Stepwise Uniform          0.2379   0.0926   0.1993   0.3156
               Log-normal                0.1781   0.0589   0.1307   0.2279
               Normal                    0.2156   0.0864   0.1734   0.2839
                                                                        GM
Note: The first column shows the mean of the sample distribution of Ri0    . The final
                                                                      GM
three columns show the three quartiles of the sample distribution of Ri0 .


4.3.1   Selection

In order to keep the sample constant across columns in Table 8, the sample used includes
only students who graduated. A natural question is how the results in Table 8 would
change if no selection issues were present, that is, if we could compute these numbers for
the full sample of all students who entered college - both those who graduated and those
who dropped out. Thinking about how the full sample might differ from the sample of
graduates, it is not clear from a conceptual standpoint whether individuals who drop out
of school would tend to resolve more uncertainty or less uncertainty than individuals who
remain in school. This is the case because students who drop out could tend to be those
that resolve a substantial amount of uncertainty or could be students who were very close
to the margin of indifference at the time of entrance, and, therefore, could be induced to
leave school even without resolving much uncertainty. As such, whether the amount of
uncertainty that would be resolved for the full sample would tend to be higher or lower
than the amount of uncertainty that is resolved for the sample of graduates is an empirical
question. We are able to provide some evidence about this question by taking advantage
of the fact that income expectations were elicited twice during the first year, before
much dropout occurs. We find that, depending on the distributional assumption we use,
individuals in the full sample resolve between 7% and 9% of initial uncertainty during
this period, while individuals who graduate resolve between 15% and 17% of uncertainty
during the first year. Thus, the amount of uncertainty that is resolved for students in the
full sample seems to be, if anything, lower than the amount of uncertainty that is resolved
for students who graduated. This suggests that our conclusion from Table 8 - that much
uncertainty remains unresolved at the time of graduation - would be strengthened further
if we were able to examine the resolution of earnings for our full sample of students who
answered the baseline survey.
    It is worth considering whether it seems generally plausible that much uncertainty
may remain unresolved at the end of college. Of central relevance, it seems reasonable
to believe that, during college, a student may be able to resolve uncertainty about her
own ability or other permanent factors, but it may be, by definition, difficult to resolve
uncertainty about transitory shocks that could occur in the labor market. Then, the
notion that substantial uncertainty remains at the end of college may not be entirely sur-


                                            25
prising given that a broad literature finds that transitory components play an important
role in the earnings process (Blundell and Preston, 1998, Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004).
Consistent with these findings, using our post-college data to estimate a random effects
model of earnings, we find that the transitory component has a standard deviation of
approximately $9,000.26 While a variety of concerns could arise from comparing this
standard deviation from the realized earnings data to standard deviations elicited using
expectations questions, it does seem generally relevant that $9,000 is non-trivial when
viewed next to the standard deviations in Table 8.


4.3.2    Demographic Variables

In Section 3.1.3 we found that black students are particularly uncertain about income at
the time of entrance. A natural question is whether these students resolve more uncer-
tainty early in college, so that they ultimately end up with similar amounts of uncertainty
as other students. Given that Table 8 found that the majority of resolution during col-
lege takes place during the first two years, we regress std(Wi2 ) on Black, Male and ACT
score for the three different distributional assumptions associated with Approach 1. We
find that black students are no longer more uncertain at the end of the second year; the
estimated coefficient on Black in all three regressions is slightly negative.
    The previous paragraph suggests that black students are resolving more uncertainty
than other students. To provide more direct evidence, we regress the change in uncer-
tainty, as measured by std(Wi2 ) − std(Wi0 ), on Black, as well as Male and ACT score for
the three distributional assumptions associated with Approach 1. As expected, we find
that the coefficient on Black is significant at a .1 level in all three regressions, with the
largest t-statistic having a value of 2.31. Averaging the coefficient for Black across the
three regressions, we find that the decrease in uncertainty is $3088 larger for blacks than
for non-blacks.


4.4     What Factors Account for End-of-College Income Uncer-
        tainty?
With the goal of providing a more concrete understanding of why a substantial amount
of uncertainty about income at age 28 remains unresolved at the end of college, we
consider two broad explanations. The first explanation is that individuals might be
unsure about what kinds of job offers they will receive at age 28. The second explanation
is that individuals might know the kinds of job offers they will receive, but might be
unsure about what kinds of jobs they will prefer to hold/choose in the future. These two
explanations may have different policy implications for a variety of reasons, including the
  26
    We estimate a random effects model with annual income as the dependent variable and Black, Male,
ACT score, cohort dummy and year dummy as regressors. We use data during 2009-2012 for estimation
because most students in our sample turn 28 around year 2010 or 2011.


                                                26
fact that the latter represents variation in future income that is at least partially under
the control of individuals.
    We begin by considering the second explanation. Traditionally, especially for women,
uncertainty about hours of work would have represented a particularly salient reason for
this explanation, with uncertainty about hours of work having an obvious, direct link to
uncertainty about income. However, Stinebrickner, Stinebrickner, and Sullivan (2018)
find that this reason is unlikely to be of particular importance for our recent cohort of
college graduates; the large majority of both men and women work full-time throughout
their first decade in the labor force, with even departures for children tending to be short.
    A second possible reason for the second explanation is that individuals may be uncer-
tain about what types of work they will prefer to perform in the future, with uncertainty
about types of work having a link to uncertainty about income because income varies sub-
stantially across different types of work (Gibbons and Katz, 1992, Heckman and Sedlacek,
1985, Acemoglu and Autor, 2011, Autor and Handel, 2013). We use Survey Question
7 to look for evidence of this type of uncertainty. Because it is not possible to elicit
preferences about all types of work, the question stratifies the set of possible jobs into
three broad categories: jobs that do not require a college degree (No-Degree-Needed),
jobs that require a college degree in a student’s specific area of study (Degree-My-Area),
and jobs that do not require a college degree in a student’s specific area of study (Degree-
Any-Area).
    Uncertainy about preferences towards the three categories in Question 7 would be
particularly relevant for creating income uncertainty if individuals tend to be uncertain
about whether they will wish to work in No-Degree-Needed jobs, because these jobs
tend to pay substantially less than jobs that require a college degree. However, Survey
Question 7 suggests that this is unlikely. Only between 2-3% of all students prefer No-
Degree-Needed jobs to jobs that require a college degree and the preference for the types
of work in college jobs is very strong, with the average respondent requiring an income
premium of over 50% ($45, 500 v.s. $30, 000) to change from her preferred college job to
a No-Degree-Needed job. Further, there seems to be relatively little uncertainty about
what types of jobs students prefer even when we take a further step and differentiate
between Degree-Any-Area jobs and Degree-My-Area jobs. More than 80% of students
prefer Degree-My-Area jobs, and, on average, these individuals would have to be paid a
roughly 47% income premium to accept Degree-Any-Area jobs instead.27 Thus, Question
7 does not provide evidence that the second explanation is important. However, we can
not rule out that the second explanation is important because it is possible that workers
are uncertain about their preferences towards the different types of jobs that are present
within each of the broad categories in Question 7.
    We consider several possible reasons for the first explanation. The first reason we
  27
   In addition, the 16% of students who prefer a Degree-Any-Area job also seem to be quite certain
about their preferences. On average, these students would have to be paid around 44% more to accept
Degree-My-Area jobs.

                                                27
consider is that uncertainty may exist about the state of the economy at age 28. To
examine this reason, we take advantage of the fact that, as students approached the end
of college, the BPS elicited beliefs about not only earnings at the age of 28, but also about
earnings in the first year out of college. As shown in the first column of Table 10, at the
end of college (t = 4), the average standard deviation of the subjective distribution of
earnings in the first post-college year is between six thousand and nine thousand dollars,
depending on the distributional assumption that is employed. This standard deviation
tends to be approximately 75% of the standard deviation associated with age 28 (second
column) and approximately 60% of the standard deviation associated with age 38 (third
column). The fact that much uncertainty exists for the first year out of school suggest
that, at the very least, factors other than the state of the economy are influencing income
uncertainty.

                     Table 10: Earnings Beliefs at the End of College
                                                    std(Wi4a,1 )
            # of Observations: 359
                                       a = 1 Year Out    a = 28   a = 38
                                            6.3281       8.6233   10.9518
            Stepwise Uniform
                                           (4.9854)     (6.9139) (9.3353)
                                            9.0638      11.4029   14.1175
            Log-normal
                                          (13.0912)    (11.7530) (14.5838)
                                            7.2301       9.9188   12.5319
            Normal
                                           (5.6186)     (7.9017) (10.3720)

 Note: For different ages a, the table shows the standard deviation of the subjective
income distribution at the end of college (t = 4) for the graduation scenario (s = 1).
The unit of measurement for Wi4a,1 is one thousand dollars. A particular entry in the
table shows the sample mean and standard deviation of std(Wi4a,1 ) for a particular age a.
For example, row 1, column 1 shows a sample mean of $6,328.10 and a sample standard
deviation of $4,985.40 for std(Wi4a,1 ) for the age a corresponding to the first post-college
year.


    Roughly speaking, we could group the remaining reasons for the first explanation un-
der the heading of frictions. One possibility is that information frictions are present. For
example, students may begin school with uncertainty about the type of job opportunities
that tend to be available for college graduates, and this uncertainty may not be entirely
resolved even by the end of college (Betts, 1996). It is somewhat difficult to provide
direct evidence about the importance of this type of friction. However, we are able to
provide some evidence about a second potential type of frictions - labor market/search
frictions. The first piece of evidence comes from Survey Question 6. Although we found
that more than 80% of students prefer a Degree-My-Area job, Question 6 indicates that,
on average, students believe there is only a 50% chance of ending up in such a job in the
first year. Further, while almost no students prefer a No-Degree-Needed job, on average,
students believe there is almost a 20% chance of being forced to accept this type of job.

                                             28
The second piece of evidence comes from Survey Question 8. On average, students be-
lieve that there is a 22% probability that it will take five or more months of search to find
a job. Further, on average, students believe that there is only a 20% chance of obtaining
a job with less than one month of search.28 While we stress that it is not possible to
determine the relative importance of the different reasons for the first explanation, the
results suggest that search frictions are likely to be relevant.


5      Conclusion
Whether large amounts of uncertainty about future earnings tend to be resolved during
college has been an open question. Large amounts would tend to be resolved if: 1) the
substantial dispersion found in realized earnings is indicative of substantial amounts of
uncertainty at the time of college entrance, and 2) much of this initial uncertainty is
resolved during college as students learn about earnings-influencing factors.
    Prior evidence about 1) is provided by research such as Cunha, Heckman, and Navarro
(2005). They conclude that only a relatively small portion of the variation in realized
earnings should be attributed to uncertainty, leaving a large role for heterogeneity. We
find direct evidence in support of their conclusion when, taking advantage of expectations
data collected at the time of college entrance, we decompose an expectations analog to
the realized wage distribution into the portion due to uncertainty and the portion due
to heterogeneity.
    Very little evidence about 2) is present in the literature. Taking advantage of the
longitudinal nature of our expectations data, we find that much of the income uncertainty
that is present at the time of entrance remains unresolved at the time of graduation.
Further, taking advantage of a variety of unique data features, we provide evidence about
the amount of initial income uncertainty that is and is not resolved. Our findings suggest
that the portion of uncertainty that is resolved during school can be largely attributed to
what one learns about her academic ability and her college major during school. As for
why some uncertainty remains unresolved, we find evidence that transitory factors, such
as search frictions, are likely to play an important role in creating initial uncertainty.




  28
    The survey question elicits beliefs about search frictions during school. The assumption in this
discussion is that these beliefs are related to beliefs about search frictions in the post-schooling period.
This assumption is consistent with the assumptions made, out of necessity, in a broader search literature.


                                                    29
Appendices
A     Survey Questions
Question 1. The following questions will ask you about the income you might earn
in the future at different ages under several hypothetical scenarios. We first ask you to
indicate the lowest possible amount of money you might make and the highest amount of
money you might make. We then ask you to divide the values between the lowest and the
highest into four intervals. Please mark the intervals so that there is a 25% chance that
your income will be in each of the intervals. When reporting incomes, take into account
the possibility that you will work full-time, the possibility that you will work part-time,
the possibility that you will not be working, and (for the hypothetical scenarios which
involve graduation) the possibility that you will attend graduate or professional school.
When reporting income you should ignore the effects of price inflation.
Question 1A. For ALL of question 1A, assume that you graduate from Berea.
Think about the kinds of jobs that will be available for you and those that you would
accept. Please write the FIVE NUMBERS that describe the income which you would
expect to earn at the following ages or times under this hypothetical scenario.
I. Your income during the first full year after you leave school
    |                                                                                     |
lowest                                                                              highest


II. Your income at age 28 (note: if you are 20 years of age or older, give your income 10
years from now)
    |                                                                                     |
lowest                                                                              highest


III. Your income at age 38 (note: if you are 20 years of age or older, give your income 20
years from now)
    |                                                                                      |
lowest                                                                               highest


Question 1B. For ALL of question 1B, assume that you graduate from Berea. Question
1A did not make any assumptions about your final grade average. For this question,
assume that you graduate with a grade point average of 2.0 (a C average).
Please describe the income which you would expect to earn at the following ages or times
under this hypothetical scenario.
  NOTE: The remainder of 1B (note shown) was identical to parts I, II, and III of
Question 1A.

                                            30
NOTE TO READER: In the paper, we also take advantage of close variants of Question
1, in which students were asked to consider scenarios in which they graduate with other
grade point averages (GPA) (3.00 and 3.75).
Question 2. We realize that you do not know exactly how well you will do in classes.
However, we would like to have you describe your beliefs about the grade point average
that you expect to receive in the first semester. Given the amount of study-time you
indicated, please tell us the percent chance that your grade point average will be in each
of the following intervals. That is, for each interval, write the number of chances out of
100 that your final grade point average will be in that interval.
Note: The numbers on the six lines must add up to 100.

Interval                             Percent Chance(number of chances out of 100)


[3.5,4.00]
[3.0,3.49]
[2.5,2.99]
[2.0,2.49]
[1.0,1.99]
[0.0,0.99]
Note: A=4.0, B=3.0, C=2.0, D=1.0, F=0.0

Question 3. Your grades are influenced by your academic ability/preparation and how
much you decide to study. However, your grades may also be influenced to some extent
by good or bad luck which may vary from term to term and may be out of your control.
Examples of “luck” may include (note: examples omitted due to space considerations).
We would like to know how important you think “luck” is in determining your grades in
a particular semester. We’ll have you make comparisons relative to a semester in which
you have “average” luck. Average luck means that a usual number of things go right and
wrong during the semester. Assume you took classes at Berea for many semesters.
BAD LUCK IN A TERM MEANS THAT YOU HAVE WORSE THAN AV-
ERAGE LUCK IN THAT TERM. Assume for this section that you are in a
semester in which you have bad luck.
In what percentage of semesters that you have bad luck would bad luck lower your grade
point average (GPA) by between 0.00 points and 0.25 points?
NOTE: Two subsequent (identical) questions (not shown) asked about the percentage of
semesters that bad luck would lower GPA by 1) between .26 and .50 points and 2) by
more than .51 points.


                                           31
GOOD LUCK IN A TERM MEANS THAT YOU HAVE BETTER THAN
AVERAGE LUCK IN THAT TERM. Assume for this section that you are in
a semester in which you have good luck.
NOTE: The three questions in this section (not shown) followed closely the questions in
the BAD LUCK section, eliciting the percentage of semesters that good luck would raise
GPA by: 1) between 0.00 and .25 points, 2) between .26 and .50 points, and 3) greater
than .51 points or more.

Question 4. What is the percent chance that you will eventually graduate from Berea
College?            Note: Number should be between 0 and 100 (could be 0 or 100).


Question 5. We realize that you may not be sure exactly what area of study you will
eventually choose. In this first column below are listed possible areas of study. In the
second column write down the percent chance that you will have this area of study (note:
the percent chance of each particular area of study should be between 0 and 100 and
the numbers in the percent chance column should add up to 100). In the third column,
please write down the grade point average (GPA) you would expect to receive in a typical
semester in the future if you had each of these areas of study.
Humanities include Art, English, Foreign Languages, History, Music, Philosophy, Reli-
gion, and Theatre.
Natural Science and Math includes Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Physics
and Mathematics.
Professional Programs include Industrial Arts, Industrial Technology, Child Develop-
ment, Dietetics, Home Economics, Nutrition, and Nursing.
Social Sciences include Economics, Political Science, Psychology and Sociology.
Area of Study                             Percent Chance                 Expected GPA
1. Agricultural (and Natural Resources)
2. Business
3. Elementary Education
4. Humanities
5. Natural Science & Math
6. Physical Education
7. Professional Programs
8. Social Sciences


Question 6. After graduating there are different types of jobs that you may hold.
For Question 6 and 7, NO-DEGREE-NEEDED means all jobs that do not require a
college degree. DEGREE-ANYAREA means all jobs that require a college degree of


                                          32
any type. DEGREE-MYAREA means all jobs that require a college degree specifically
in your area of study. Please tell us the percent chance that your first job after graduating
will be in each of these types of jobs.
Job-Type                                                      Percent Chance
NO-DEGREE-NEEDED
DEGREE-ANYAREA
DEGREE-MYAREA
Note: The numbers should add up to 100 and all numbers should be between 0 and 100.
Write 0 if there is no chance that you will have a particular type of job. Write 100 if you
know for sure that you will have a particular type of job.

Question 7. It is possible that how happy you will be in your job will depend on what
type of job you have since different types of jobs require different types of work. Suppose
you were offered the same pay to work in a NO-DEGREE-NEEDED job, a DEGREE-
ANYAREA job, and a DEGREE-MYAREA job. Which would you choose? Circle one.


NO-DEGREE-NEEDED                       DEGREE-ANYAREA                      DEGREE-MYAREA


7.1 IF you circled NO-DEGREE-NEEDED
You have indicated that you would enjoy working in a NO-DEGREE-NEEDED job more
than in either a DEGREE-ANYAREA job or a DEGREE-MYAREA job if all the jobs
had the same pay. Therefore, in order to be convinced to choose a DEGREE-ANYAREA
job or a DEGREE-MYAREA job, you would have to receive a job offer which paid more
money than the job offer in your NO-DEGREE-NEEDED job.
If the NO-DEGREE-NEEDED job paid $30,000, how much would you have to be paid
by the DEGREE-ANYAREA job to convince you to choose the DEGREE-ANYAREA
job instead?        Note: should be more than $30,000.
If the NO-DEGREE-NEEDED job paid $30,000, how much would you have to be paid
by the DEGREE-MYAREA job to convince you to choose the DEGREE-MYAREA job
instead?          Note: should be more than $30,000.
7.2 IF you circled DEGREE-ANYAREA
   NOTE: The wording of 7.2 (not shown) is identical to the wording of 7.1 with
DEGREE-ANYAREA replacing NO-DEGREE-NEEDED, and NO-DEGREE-NEEDED
replacing DEGREE-ANYAREA.
7.3 IF you circled DEGREE-MYAREA
   NOTE: The wording of 7.3 (not shown) is identical to the wording of 7.1 with
DEGREE-MYAREA replacing NO-DEGREE-NEEDED, and NO-DEGREE-NEEDED
replacing DEGREE-MYAREA.


                                             33
Question 8. Suppose during this school year that you searched seriously for a job. You
may not know exactly how long it would take to find a job. What is the percent chance
that it would take the following amounts of time to receive a job offer from the time you
start searching seriously?
Note: A serious job search is one that involves actively looking for a job by participating
in activities such as on-campus interviewing, reading and responding to want-ads, or
contacting potential employees even if they have not posted want ads.
Amount of time to find a job-Interval                         Percent Chance
[0,1) months
[1,2) months
[2,3) months
[3,5) months
[5,6) months
6 months or more




                                            34
B      Approach 2: Computation Details
B.1     Construction of E(Wit |Git = git ) and std(Wit |Git = git ) (or,
        equivalently, var(Wit |Git = git )) at Realizations of Git Other
        than 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75
Survey questions eliciting subjective income distributions conditional on final GPA are in
the same form as the survey questions eliciting unconditional subjective income distribu-
tions shown in Question 1 of Appendix A. Hence, assuming either a log-normal, normal,
or stepwise uniform distribution, Approach 1 can be used to compute E(Wit |Git = git )
(henceforth, E(Wit |git ), for the ease of notation) and std(Wit |Git = git ) (henceforth,
std(Wit |git )) for git = 2.00, 3.00, or 3.75. However, we need to approximate E(Wit |git )
and std(Wit |git ) for all other possible values of git . Following a straightforward inter-
polation approach adopted in Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2014b), we assume that
both E(Wit |git ) and std(Wit |git ) are linear between git = 2.00 and git = 3.00. We also
assume that E(Wit |git ) and std(Wit |git ) are linear between git = 3.00 and git = 4.00, with
the slope being identified by the observed values at git = 3.00 and git = 3.75 (i.e., we
extrapolate values of E(Wit |git ) and std(Wit |git ) between git = 3.75 and git = 4.00).


B.2     Construction of the subjective final GPA distribution, FGit (git )
In this subsection we discuss how we construct the subjective distribution Gi0 describing
beliefs, at the time of college entrance, about final cumulative GPA. A student’s final
GPA, Gi , is the average of the student’s semester GPA over her eight semesters, k=1,...,8,
subject to the constraint that the student obtains the 2.0 average that is needed to
graduate. Thus, Gi0 is given by:

                                      8
                                      X                     8
                                                            X
                              Gi0 =         Gki0 /8,   if         Gki0 /8 ≥ 2,               (21)
                                      k=1                   k=1


where Gki0 is the subjective distribution describing beliefs, at time t = 0, about semester
GPA in semester k.
     We view Question 2 in Appendix A as eliciting a student’s subjective distribution
about GPA in a typical future semester. That is, it elicits the marginal distributions of
Gki0 , k = 1, ..., 8. The fact that Gi0 is the average of the Gki0 ’s implies that the mean of Gi0
is given by the mean of the distribution elicited by Question 2. However, computing the
variance of Gi0 requires additional information describing beliefs about how the Gki0 ’s are
correlated across semesters. For example, if students believe that grades are independent
across time, then the variance of Gi0 would be found by dividing the variance elicited
by Question 2 by the number of semesters (eight). On the other hand, this type of
“averaging out” would not occur and the variance of Gi0 would tend to be considerably


                                                   35
larger if a student believes that grade performance is highly (positively) correlated across
time. To formalize this notion, we denote a latent grade belief variable:

                 k
 G̃ki0 = ai0 + ξi0 , where Gki0 = 0 if G̃ki0 < 0, Gki0 = 4 if G̃ki0 > 4, and Gki0 = G̃ki0 , otherwise.
                                                                                                  (22)
                                                                                                     k
     ai0 represents student i’s (t = 0) beliefs about permanent (academic) ability and ξi0
describes i’s (t = 0) beliefs about the mean-zero transitory shock component of grades
which is independent across semesters k. Thus, the Gki0 ’s will tend to be highly correlated
if uncertainty in Survey Question 2 reflects uncertainty about ability and will have a
smaller correlation if uncertainty in Survey Question 2 reflects a belief that there exists
substantial transitory variation. Survey Question 2 alone provides only information about
the total amount of uncertainty about grade performance. To differentiate between the
two sources of uncertainty, we take advantage of Survey Question 3, which quantifies the
importance of uncertainty due to the transitory shock component by asking students to
report the probability that their grades in a semester would turn out to be 0.25 points
and 0.5 points higher than expected due to good luck (and also bad luck).
                                                                       k
     In terms of implementation, we assume that ai0 and ξi0               are normally distributed:
                                       ξ
                 a
ai0 ∼ N (µai0 , σi0        k
                    ) and ξi0 ∼ N (0, σi0 ). For each student, we numerically search for the set
                      a  a    ξ
of parameters {µi0 , σi0 , σi0  } that minimizes a weighted sum of the discrepancies between
observed and model implied probabilities. We weight each category by its associating
probability to account for the fact that errors in categories with lower probability have less
impact on the computation of unconditional moments of subjective income distribution.29
Formally, we have:



                ξ
                                         X
    a c   a c
    i0 , σi0 , σi0 } = argmin
  {µc                                                P rmodel (Gki0 ∈ catgj )(P robs (Gki0 ∈ catgj )−P rmodel (Gki0 ∈ catgj ))2
                                      catgj ∈CAT g
                       X
                +                             k
                                   P rmodel (ξi0 ∈ catξj )(P robs (ξi0
                                                                    k
                                                                       ∈ catξj ) − P rmodel (ξi0
                                                                                              k
                                                                                                 ∈ catξj ))2 , (23)
                    catj ∈CAT ξ


where CAT g = {[3.5, 4.00], [3.0, 3.49], [2.5, 2.99], [2.0, 2.49], [1.0, 1.99], [0.0, .99]} and CAT ξ =
{(−∞, −0.5], (−0.5, −0.25], (−0.25, 0], (0, 0.25], (0.25, 0.5], (0.5, ∞)}.
                                  ξ
   Once parameters {µai0 , σi0
                             a
                               , σi0 } are estimated, we can approximate the distribution of
Gi0 by simulation using equation (21) and (22).


C         Approximation Error: Normal Versus Log-normal
When computing subjective income distributions using either normal or log-normal dis-
tributions, we have only used data on the median (Cit3 ) and the difference between first
  29
       We have also estimated a non-weighted version. The results are similar.



                                                              36
and third quartiles (Cit4 − Cit2 or Cit4 /Cit2 ). Hence, for either the normal and log-normal
distributions, the three quartiles reported in the data (Cit2 , Cit3 , Cit4 ) will not partition
the support of the subjective income distribution into four segments that each have a
probability of .25, unless the distributional assumption is exactly correct. Therefore, we
evaluate the validity of a particular distributional assumption using the loss function:


               N
            1 X
 AE(D) =          [(F (Cit3 ; D) − F (Cit2 ; D) − 0.25)2 + (F (Cit4 ; D) − F (Cit3 ; D) − 0.25)2 ], (24)
            N i=1

where F (w; D) is the cdf of the distribution computed using distributional assumption
D.
   Using the same sample as in Section 3, we compute the value of AE(D) for D =
normal and D = log-normal. We find that AE(normal) = 0.0101 and AE(log-normal) =
0.0103. Hence, we conclude that the fit of the two distributions is quite similar with, if
anything, the normal having a slightly better fit.


D      Expressing E(Wit) as a weighted sum of E(Wit|Git =
       2.00), E(Wit|Git = 3.00), and E(Wit|Git = 3.75)
We show that E(Wit ) can be expressed as a weighted sum of E(Wit |Git = 2.00), E(Wit |Git =
3.00), and E(Wit |Git = 3.75). For the ease of notation, we write E(Wit |Git = git ) as
E(Wit |git ). Hence,

                                       Z   4
    E(Wit ) = EGit (E(Wit |Git )) =     E(Wit |git )dFGit (git )
                                     2
              Z 3
                                   E(Wit |3.00) − E(Wit |2.00)
            =     [E(Wit |2.00) +                                (git − 2)]dFGit (git )
               2                           3.00 − 2.00
              Z 4
                                   E(Wit |3.75) − E(Wit |3.00)
            +     [E(Wit |3.00) +                                (git − 3)]dFGit (git )
               3                           3.75 − 3.00
              Z 3
                                       git − 2                         git − 2
            =     [E(Wit |2.00)(1 −              ) + E(Wit |3.00)               ]dFGit (git )
               2                     3.00 − 2.00                    3.00 − 2.00
              Z 4
                                       git − 3                         git − 3
            +     [E(Wit |3.00)(1 −              ) + E(Wit |3.75)               ]dFGit (git )
               3                    3.75 − 3.00                     3.75 − 3.00
              X
            =      λG
                    it E(Wit |G)                       G = 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75,                (25)
                 G

               R3                              R3                        R4           git −3
where λ2.00
        i   = 2 (3 − git )dFGit (git ), λ3.00
                                         i    = 2 (git − 2)dFGit (git ) + 3 (1 −       0.75
                                                                                             )dFGit (git )
            R 4 it −3
and λ3.75
     i    = 3 g0.75   dFGit (git ).




                                                 37
E     Magnitude of the Measurement Error
In this section, we show that equation (12), along with additional assumptions, implies
equation (13). Recall that equation (12) states:

                                                         X
                    f1 (Wit ) − E
                    E           f2 (Wit ) = ςi −                   λgi it ςigit .                   (12 revisited)
                                                             git

Taking the variance of both sides, we have:


                                             X
         f1 (Wit ) − E
     var(E           f2 (Wit )) = var(ςi −              λgi it ςigit )
                                                 git
                                                 X
                                  = var(ςi ) +           var(λgi it ςigit )             (independence of MEs)
                                                  git
                                                 X
                                  = var(ςi ) +           E((λgi it )2 )E((ςigit )2 ) − (E(λgi it )E(ςigit ))2
                                                  git

                                                                                                       (λgi it        ςigit )




                                                                                                                 |=
                                                 X
                                  = var(ςi ) +           E((λgi it )2 )var(ςigit )
                                                  git

                                                                                    (E(ςi ) = 0 and E(ςigit ) = 0)
                                                       X
                                  = var(ςi )[1 +              E((λgi it )2 )].              (var(ςi ) = var(ςigit ))
                                                       git


Therefore,

                                      f1 (Wit ) − E
                                  var(E           f2 (Wit ))
                     var(ςi ) =                              .                                      (13 revisited)
                                    1 + git E((λgi it )2 )
                                        P


F     Taking into Account Interpolation Errors
In Section 3.2.2, we note that interpolation error could be introduced into our computa-
tions because it is necessary to interpolate the means of subjective income distributions
conditional on values of GPA other than 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75. In addition, errors can be
introduced because it is necessary to compute distributions of final GPA from data. In
this appendix, we show that taking into account these errors would lead to a smaller
value of var(ςi ), implying a larger estimate of our measure of true heterogeneity.
     We start by describing how we incorporate both types of errors into our analysis. With
respect to the potential error introduced during the computation of the distribution of
final GPA, we denote FGit (git ) and FeGit (git ) as the true CDF and the computed CDF of
Git , respectively. We allow the CDFs to potentially differ from each other and denote
the difference as FG∆it (git ) = FeGit (git ) − FGit (git ).
     For ease of notation, we denote a vector that includes (E(Wit |Git = 2.00), E(Wit |Git =
3.00), E(Wit |Git = 3.75)) as EW   Git , and a vector that includes (E(Wit |Git = 2.00), E(Wit |Git =
                                                                     e                   e

                                                   38
3.00), E(W e it |Git = 3.75)) as E       e W . The interpolation approach that we use to compute
                                           Git
the mean of subjective income distributions conditional on values of GPA other than 2.00,
3.00, or 3.75 is essentially a mapping from E             e W to E(W e it |Git = git ), git 6= 2.00, 3.00, 3.75.
                                                            Git
We denote this mapping as E              e W (git ; E
                                                    e W ). Note that the difference between the com-
                                                      Git
puted value of the conditional mean, E                e W (git ; E
                                                                 e W ), and the true value of conditional
                                                                   Git
mean, E(Wit |Git = git ), is a result of both the measurement error, E                        e W − EW =
                                                                                                Git      Git
(ςi2.00 , ςi3.00 , ςi3.75 ), and the interpolation error, E    e W (git ; EW ) − E(Wit |Git = git ).
                                                                           Git
     The mean of subjective income distribution computed using Approach 2, E                        f2 (Wit ), is
then given by,

                   Z    4                                          Z    4
f2 (Wit ) =
E                           e it |Git = git )dFeG (git ) =
                            E(W                                             e W (git ; E
                                                                            E          e W )dFeG (git )
                                                                                         Git
                                                 it                                             it

                   Z2 4                                            Z 24
               =            E(Wit |Git = git )dFeGit (git ) +              e W (git ; E
                                                                          (E          e W ) − E(Wit |Git = git ))dFeG (git )
                                                                                        Git                          it

                   Z2 4                                            Z2 4
               =            E(Wit |Git = git )dFGit (git ) +                E(Wit |Git = git )dFG∆it (git )
                    2                                               2
                       Z    4
                   +   e W (git ; E
                      (E          e W ) − E(Wit |Git = git ))dFeG (git )
                                    Git                             it
                   2
                           Z 4                                     Z 4
               = E(Wit ) +       E(Wit |Git = git )dFG∆it (git ) +      e W (git ; E
                                                                       (E          eW ) − E
                                                                                     Git
                                                                                          e W (git ; EW ))dFeG (git )
                                                                                                      Git     it
                            2                                       2
                  Z 4
                +      e W (git ; EW ) − E(Wit |Git = git ))dFeG (git )
                      (E                                                                               (26)
                                    Git                             it
                        2


Following steps similar to those in Section D, we can show that:
Z    4                                                                    X
          e W (git ; E
         (E          e W )− E
                            e W (git ; EW                                         egit ς git ,
                                        Git ))dFGit (git ) =                      λ                   git = 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75,
                       Git
                                               e
                                                                                    i i
 2                                                                          git
                                                                                                                                  (27)
                        R3                                         R3                                  R4          git −3
where λe2.00 =             (3 − git )dFGit (git ),
                                         e             e3.00
                                                       λ       =        (git − 2)dFeGit (git ) +            (1 −          )dFeGit (git )
         i               2                               i          2                                   3           0.75
      3.75
             R4          git −3 e
and λi = 3
    e
                          0.75
                               dFGit (git ).
                                 R4                                                      R4
     Denoting                            = git )dFG∆it (git ) +
                        ∆it ≡ 2 E(Wit |Git                                                 2
                                                                                                e W (git ; EW ) − E(Wit |Git =
                                                                                               (E           Git
git ))dFeGit (git ), equation (26) can be written as:

                                               X
                 f2 (Wit ) = E(Wit ) +
                 E                                     egit ς git + ∆it
                                                       λ                                 git = 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75.                (28)
                                                         i i
                                                git

Taking the difference between the mean computed using Approach 1 and the mean com-
puted using Approach 2, we obtain:


                                                X
           f1 (Wit ) − E
           E           f2 (Wit ) = ςi −                egit ς git − ∆it
                                                       λ                                  git = 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75.               (29)
                                                        i i
                                                 git




                                                                   39
Recall that ςi and ςigit , git = 2.00, 3.00 or 3.75, are, by assumption, independent of other
factors. Hence, they are independent of ∆it since none of them show up in the expression
of ∆it . Taking the variance of both sides of equation (29), we find:


                                                                   X
                    f1 (Wit ) − E
                var(E           f2 (Wit )) = var(ςi −                    egit ς git ) + var(∆it )
                                                                         λ i i
                                                                   git
                                                                         X
                                                = var(ςi )[1 +                        egit )2 )] + var(∆it )
                                                                                   E((λ i
                                                                         git
                                                                         X
                                                ≥ var(ςi )[1 +                        egit )2 )].
                                                                                   E((λ                         (30)
                                                                                        i
                                                                         git


Therefore,

                                                    f1 (Wit ) − E
                                                var(E           f2 (Wit ))
                                   var(ςi ) ≤                              .                                    (31)
                                                  1+
                                                      P
                                                            E((λegit )2 )
                                                             git               i

    Since both λegit in this section and λgit in Section 3.2.2 are computed using the same
                 i                        i
distribution of Git (we assume that there is no error in the distribution of Git in Section
3.2.2), they are numerically identical. Thus, the right side of equation (31) is numerically
identical to the right side of equation (13). As a result, equation (31) shows that our
estimates of var(ςi ) reported in Table 4 should be considered as upper bounds for the
true value of var(ςi ).


G       Joint Decomposition
In Section 4.1 and Section 4.2, we estimated the fraction of total initial uncertainty that is
explained by uncertainty about GPA and major, respectively. In this appendix we explain
how to examine how much of total initial income uncertainty is due to uncertainty about
both of the two factors combined.
    We start by decomposing total income uncertainty into the contribution of uncertainty
about both final GPA and major and the contribution of uncertainty about other factors,
following an equation similar to Equation (4) and Equation (15):


var(Wit ) = varGit ,Mit (E(Wit |Git , Mit )) + EGit ,Mit (var(Wit |Git , Mit ))
          = {varGit [EMit |Git (E(Wit |Git , Mit ))] + EGit [varMit |Git (E(Wit |Git , Mit ))]} + EGit ,Mit (var(Wit |Git , Mit ))
          = {varGit (E(Wit |Git )) + EGit [varMit |Git (E(Wit |Git , Mit ))]} + EGit [EMit |Git (var(Wit |Git , Mit ))].
                                                                                                               (32)


The sum of the two terms in the fancy bracket corresponds to the contribution of uncer-
tainty about both final GPA and major to total initial income uncertainty, while the last
term corresponds to the contribution of uncertainty about all other factors. Analogous

                                                        40
to Equation (14) and Equation (16), we define the contribution of final GPA and major
to total income uncertainty as follows:


 GM                           varGit (E(Wit |Git )) + EGit [varMit |Git (E(Wit |Git , Mit ))]
Rit =                                                                                                                .
         {varGit (E(Wit |Git )) + EGit [varMit |Git (E(Wit |Git , Mit ))]} + EGit [EMit |Git (var(Wit |Git , Mit ))]
                                                                                                       (33)




G.1      Estimation
We focus on the time of entrance (t = 0). In order to compute the joint contribution of
final GPA and major, we need to compute all three terms on the RHS of Equation (32).
The first term can be computed using exactly the same method as in Section 3.1.2. We
now explain how to estimate the second and third term on the RHS.
    Note that we can compute E(Wi0 |Gi0 ) and var(Wi0 |Gi0 ) for Gi0 = 2.00, 3.00, 3.75.
Hence, if we have data on the distribution of Mi0 |Gi0 , we can apply the method detailed
in Section 4.2 to estimate E(Wi0 |Gi0 , Mi0 ) and var(Wi0 |Gi0 , Mi0 ) for all Mi0 and Gi0 =
2.00, 3.00, 3.75 and compute varMi0 |Gi0 (E(Wi0 |Gi0 , Mi0 )) and EMi0 |Gi0 (var(Wi0 |Gi0 , Mi0 ))
for Gi0 = 2.00, 3.00, 3.75. Then, we can interpolate their values at other realizations of Gi0
(Gi0 6= 2.00, 3.00, 3.75) and compute EGi0 [varMi0 |Gi0 (E(Wi0 |Gi0 , Mi0 ))] and EGi0 [EMi0 |Gi0 (var(Wi0 |Gi0 , Mi0
using a simulation-based method.
    Unfortunately, the distribution of Mi0 |Gi0 is not directly available in the data. To
deal with this issue, we propose a method to estimate it using data on the unconditional
distribution of Mi0 , Pij0 , the distribution of Gi0 , FGi0 (gi0 ) and the expectation of Gi0 |Mi0 ,
E(Gi0 |Mi0 ).30
                                                                                           C
    Denote the conditional probability of major, Prob(Mi0 = j|Gi0 = gi0 ), as Pij0            (gi0 ).
                                     C
Furthermore, we assume that Pij0 (gi0 ) has the following form:

                          C
                                                              exp(ρ0ij0 + ρ1ij0 gi0 )
                        Pij0 (gi0 ; ρ0i10 , ρ1i10 , ...)   =P         0         1
                                                                                             ,          (34)
                                                             j 0 exp(ρij 0 0 + ρij 0 0 gi0 )

where ρ0i70 and ρ1i70 are normalized to 0. This leaves us 2 × (7 − 1) = 12 parameters to
estimate. Note that this specification actually corresponds to the case where final major
is determined by a multinomial logistic model with final GPA as the regressor.
                                                                               C
    We start by writing E(Gi0 |Mi0 ) as a function of Pij0 , FGi0 (gi0 ) and Pij0 (gi0 ).
  30
    More precisely, what we observe in the data (Question 5 in Appendix A) is the conditional expec-
tation of semester GPA, E(Gki0 |Mi0 ), instead of the conditional expectation of final GPA, E(Gi0 |Mi0 ).
The two would be identical if there does not exist a GPA minimum requirement for graduation. In
practice, because most students believe that receiving grades less than the minimum is highly unlikely
(and do not think they will drop out), in this section we simply approximate E(Gi0 |Mi0 ) by E(Gki0 |Mi0 ).




                                                             41
                                                         Z
                                 E(Gi0 |Mi0 ) =              gi0 dFGi0 |Mi0 (gi0 )
                                                               C
                                                             Pij0 (gi0 )
                                                         Z
                                                     =                   gi0 dFGi0 (gi0 ),                    (35)
                                                               Pij0

where the second line follows from the Bayes rule.
  We can rearrange the terms in Equation (35) to derive an expression for Pij0 :

                                        Z
                               1            C
                  Pij0   =                Pij0  (gi0 )gi0 dFGi0 (gi0 )
                           E(Gi0 |Mi0 )
                                             exp(ρ0ij0 + ρ1ij0 gi0 )
                                        Z
                               1
                         =                P             0        1
                                                                             gi0 dFGi0 (gi0 ).                (36)
                           E(Gi0 |Mi0 )      j 0 exp(ρij 0 0 + ρij 0 0 gi0 )


    Note that, by definition, Pij0 also satisfies the following equation:

                                           Z
                                                 C
                             Pij0 =            Pij0 (gi0 )dFGi0 (gi0 )
                                                 exp(ρ0ij0 + ρ1ij0 gi0 )
                                           Z
                                    =          P         0         1
                                                                                dFGi0 (gi0 ).                 (37)
                                                j 0 exp(ρij 0 0 + ρij 0 0 gi0 )


    Equation (36) and (37) allow us to express Pij0 as two different functions of (ρ0ij0 , ρ1ij0 ),
                                                1               2
j = 1, 2, 3, ..., 7. We label them as Peij0        (·) and Peij0  (·), respectively. We then define
                     0    1
the estimator of (ρij0 , ρij0 ), j = 1, 2, 3, ..., 7 to be the minimizer of the sum of squared
                                    1
differences between Pij0 and Peij0                                                   2
                                      (ρ0i10 , ρ1i10 , ...) and between Pij0 and Peij0 (ρ0i10 , ρ1i10 , ...).
Formally, we have:


                                                         2 X
                                                         X 7
                                                                       q
                   ρ0i10 , ρb1i10 , ...}
                  {b                       ≡ argmin                [Peij0 (ρ0i10 , ρ1i10 , ...) − Pij0 ]2 .   (38)
                                                         q=1 j=1


          ρ0i10 , ρb1i10 , ...} are estimated, we can use Equation (34) to compute the distribu-
    Once {b
tion of Mi0 |Gi0 for any realization of Gi0 and compute the three terms in Equation (32)
in the way described in the second paragraph of this subsection.




                                                              42
References
 [1] Daron Acemoglu and David Autor. Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for
     employment and earnings. In Handbook of labor economics, volume 4, pages 1043–
     1171. Elsevier, 2011.

 [2] Joseph G Altonji. The demand for and return to education when education outcomes
     are uncertain. Journal of Labor Economics, 11(1, Part 1):48–83, 1993.

 [3] Joseph G Altonji, Peter Arcidiacono, and Arnaud Maurel. The analysis of field
     choice in college and graduate school. Handbook of the Economics of Education,
     5:305–396, 2016.

 [4] Joseph G Altonji, Erica Blom, and Costas Meghir. Heterogeneity in human capital
     investments: High school curriculum, college major, and careers. Annu. Rev. Econ.,
     4(1):185–223, 2012.

 [5] Peter Arcidiacono. Ability sorting and the returns to college major. Journal of
     Econometrics, 121(1):343–375, 2004.

 [6] Orazio P Attanasio and Katja M Kaufmann. Education choices and returns to
     schooling: Mothers’ and youths’ subjective expectations and their role by gender.
     Journal of Development Economics, 109:203–216, 2014.

 [7] David H Autor and Michael J Handel. Putting tasks to the test: Human capital,
     job tasks, and wages. Journal of Labor Economics, 31(S1):S59–S96, 2013.

 [8] Julian R Betts. What do students know about wages? evidence from a survey of
     undergraduates. Journal of human resources, pages 27–56, 1996.

 [9] Richard Blundell and Ian Preston. Consumption inequality and income uncertainty.
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2):603–640, 1998.

[10] Martin Browning and Jesus Carro. Heterogeneity and microeconometrics modeling.
     Econometric Society Monograph, 43:47, 2007.

[11] Pedro Carneiro, Karsten T Hansen, and James J Heckman. 2001 lawrence r. klein
     lecture estimating distributions of treatment effects with an application to the re-
     turns to schooling and measurement of the effects of uncertainty on college choice.
     International Economic Review, 44(2):361–422, 2003.

[12] Flavio Cunha and James J Heckman. Identifying and estimating the distributions
     of ex post and ex ante returns to schooling. Labour Economics, 14(6):870–893, 2007.

[13] Flavio Cunha, James J Heckman, and Salvador Navarro. Separating heterogeneity
     from uncertainty an aiyagari-laitner economy. In Goldwater Conference on Labor
     Markets in Arizona, 2004.

                                           43
[14] Flavio Cunha, James J Heckman, and Salvador Navarro. Separating uncertainty
     from heterogeneity in life cycle earnings. Oxford Economic Papers, 57(2):191–261,
     2005.

[15] Jeff Dominitz and Charles F Manski. Perceptions of economic insecurity: Evidence
     from the survey of economic expectations. Public Opinion Quarterly, pages 261–287,
     1997a.

[16] Jeff Dominitz and Charles F Manski. Using expectations data to study subjective
     income expectations. Journal of the American statistical Association, 92(439):855–
     867, 1997b.

[17] Milton Friedman. Choice, chance, and the personal distribution of income. Journal
     of Political Economy, 61(4):277–290, 1953.

[18] Robert Gibbons and Lawrence Katz. Does unmeasured ability explain inter-industry
     wage differentials? The Review of Economic Studies, 59(3):515–535, 1992.

[19] James J Heckman and Guilherme Sedlacek. Heterogeneity, aggregation, and market
     wage functions: an empirical model of self-selection in the labor market. Journal of
     political Economy, 93(6):1077–1125, 1985.

[20] Charles F Manski. Adolescent econometricians: How do youth infer the returns
     to schooling? In Studies of supply and demand in higher education, pages 43–60.
     University of Chicago Press, 1993.

[21] Charles F Manski. Measuring expectations. Econometrica, 72(5):1329–1376, 2004.

[22] Costas Meghir and Luigi Pistaferri. Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity.
     Econometrica, 72(1):1–32, 2004.

[23] Salvador Navarro and Jin Zhou. Identifying agent’s information sets: An application
     to a lifecycle model of schooling, consumption and labor supply. Review of Economic
     Dynamics, 25:58–92, 2017.

[24] Ralph Stinebrickner and Todd Stinebrickner. The effect of credit constraints on the
     college drop-out decision: A direct approach using a new panel study. The American
     economic review, 98(5):2163–2184, 2008.

[25] Ralph Stinebrickner and Todd Stinebrickner. Learning about academic ability and
     the college dropout decision. Journal of Labor Economics, 30(4):707–748, 2012.

[26] Ralph Stinebrickner and Todd Stinebrickner. A major in science? initial beliefs
     and final outcomes for college major and dropout. Review of Economic Studies,
     81(1):426–472, 2014a.


                                           44
[27] Ralph Stinebrickner and Todd Stinebrickner. Academic performance and college
     dropout: Using longitudinal expectations data to estimate a learning model. Journal
     of Labor Economics, 32(3):601–644, 2014b.

[28] Ralph Stinebrickner, Todd Stinebrickner, and Paul Sullivan. Job tasks and the
     gender wage gap among college graduates. NBER Working Papers 24790, 2018.

[29] Basit Zafar. How do college students form expectations? Journal of Labor Eco-
     nomics, 29(2):301–348, 2011.




                                          45
