                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WARTIME HEALTH SHOCKS AND THE POSTWAR SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS
     AND MORTALITY OF UNION ARMY VETERANS AND THEIR CHILDREN

                                              Dora Costa
                                             Noelle Yetter
                                            Heather DeSomer

                                          Working Paper 25480
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w25480


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2019




We thank Matthew Kahn and participants at the NBER Cohort Studies program and the Trans Pacific
Labor Seminar. We gratefully acknowledge the support of NIH grant P01 AG10120 and the use of
facilities and resources at the California Center for Population Research, UCLA, which is supported
in part by NICDH grant P2C HD041022. Costa was responsible for the sample design, the analyses,
the interpretation, and the writing. Yetter and DeSomer were responsible for all data acquisition, collection,
cleaning, and coding. The paper was presented at the 2018 National Bureau of Economic Research
Cohort Studies Meeting Honoring Robert W. Fogel, which was funded by NIA R13 AG034758. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Dora Costa, Noelle Yetter, and Heather DeSomer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Wartime Health Shocks and the Postwar Socioeconomic Status and Mortality of Union Army
Veterans and their Children
Dora Costa, Noelle Yetter, and Heather DeSomer
NBER Working Paper No. 25480
January 2019, Revised December 2019
JEL No. I12,J24,N12

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate when and how health shocks reverberate across the life cycle and down to descendants
in a manual labor economy by examining the association of war wounds with the socioeconomic status
and older age mortality of US CivilWar (1861-5) veterans and of their adult children. Younger veterans
who had been severely wounded in the war left the farm sector, becoming laborers. Consistent with
human capital and job matching models, older severely wounded men were unlikely to switch sectors
and their wealth declined by 37-46%. War wounds were correlated with children’s socioeconomic
and mortality outcomes in ways dependent on sex and paternal age group.


Dora Costa                                        Heather DeSomer
Bunche Hall 9272                                  NBER
Department of Economics                           2565 Chain Bridge Rd
UCLA                                              Vienna, VA 22181
Box 951477                                        hdesomer@nber.org
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
costa@econ.ucla.edu

Noelle Yetter
NBER
2565 Chain Bridge Rd
Vienna, VA 22181
Noelle.Yetter@verizon.net
   Is health just a consumer durable which provides well-being as argued by Arrow et al.

(2014) or is it also an important input into productivity? Researchers and policymakers

have pointed to health as spurring economic growth, both in the past and today (e.g. Fo-

gel 1994; Gallup and Sachs 2001; WHO 2001; Bloom et al. 2004), and a large body of

literature has emphasized the impact of health shocks in utero and in childhood on later

socioeconomic status and health (e.g. Almond 2006; Scholte et al. 2015; Bleakley 2007,

2010; Case et al. 2002; Currie and Hyson 1999), of health shocks at older ages on hours

worked and labor force participation (e.g., Smith 2005; McClellan 1998) and thus wealth,

and of disability on earnings (e.g., Bartel and Taubman 1979; Charles 2003; Mok et al.

2008; Halla and Zweimüller 2013) and a smaller literature has examined the impact of

health shocks at young adult ages on wealth accumulation (Lee 2005). However, esti-

mated wealth returns to early childhood health as measured by height in the past are low

(Bleakley et al. 2014), suggesting a relatively small role for health as a driver of economic

growth in the past (cf. Fogel 1994 and Lee 2005).

   This paper examines how the destruction of health capital at prime adult ages affected

socioeconomic status, wealth, and older age health in the past when much of the labor

force was in manual labor. Specifically, we investigate the impact of war wounds on the

postwar socioeconomic status and older age mortality of US Civil War (1861-65) veterans

and we examine how paternal war wounds affected the socioeconomic status and mortal-

ity of veterans’ daughters and sons using a new intergenerational database that covers the

complete lifespans of two generations. Our findings have implications not just for under-

standing the relationship between health and economic growth in the long-run but also for

understanding this relationship in developing countries where longitudinal and intergen-

                                             1
erational data often are sparse. Our findings also will help us understand the impact of

health on socieconomic status, a relationship which can be hard to disentangle from the

impact of socioecconomic status on health (Smith 2005).

       The US Civil War provides a unique opportunity to examine the long-run and intergen-

erational impact of disability. War wounds are an arguably exogenous health shock which

can lead to immediate and permanent disability. The percentage of men with non-mortal

wounds was more than twice as large as in many previous wars. 1 War injuries also are more

analagous to accident related injuries, a danger in manual labor economies both today and

in the past.2 In addition, because the US Civil War drew combatants from a broad age dis-

tribution, we can investigate how age at the end of the war influenced adjustments to health

shocks. If human capital is occupation or industry specific (Manovskii and Kambournov

2009; Neal 1995; Parent 2000), standard human capital and occupational matching mod-

els predict that the opportunity cost of switching occupations or industries rises with age.

While there is evidence that earnings and labor force participation depend on the age when

an individual becomes disabled in advanced economies (Charles 2003; Mok et al. 2008;

Halla and Zweimüller 2013), few individuals in advanced economies become disabled at

young ages and the impact of disability on their earnings and labor force participation also

depends on the work disencentives inherent in disability programs. We can estimate the

effects of disability on occupational change in the absence of work disincentives.
   1
      The percentage of US Army recruits with non-mortal battlefield wounds was 2% during the
Vietnam War, 5% during World War II, and 13% during the Civil War.                            Estimated from
https://dcas.dmdc.osd.mil/dcas/pages/report principal wars.xhtml Accessed on November 11, 2018.
    2
      In the first decade of the twentieth century, the age adjusted death rate from accidents peaked at 122.3
per 100,000 whereas in the first decade of the twenty-first century the peak age adjusted death rate from ac-
cidents was 40.4 per 100,000. See https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data-visualization/mortality-trends/. Accessed
on January 7, 2019.


                                                      2
    Our findings can also help us understand the intergenerational transmission of health

shocks. Both biological and socioeconomic channels have been implicated. There is evi-

dence from intergenerational and multigenerational data consistent with epigenetic trans-

mission of health in cases of extreme maternal, paternal, and grandparental over- and

under-feeding (e.g. Kaati et al. 2007; Heijmans et al. 2008; Vågerö et al. 2018; Costa et

al. 2018). Economic theory points to a role for the transmission of parental health through

socioeconomic channels. Less healthy parents have fewer resources to invest in their chil-

dren’s health, education, and financial assets. Children’s health at older ages then could

arise directly from their health at younger ages or from their own socioeconomic status.

Evidence showing that parental socioeconomic status affects child health and that child

health affects child future educational and labor market outcomes has been pointed to as

suggestive of the role that health could play in the intergenerational transmission of eco-

nomic status (Currie 2009; Johnson and Schoeni 2011). However, empirical research has

been stymied by the absence of data with at least two full generations and a health shock

to the first generation.



1 Data

1.1 Dataset

Our primary sample consists of 6,228 Union Army veterans who were not ex-POWs, who

survived to 1900, who had children and who were drawn from a sample of 39,341 men

in 330 randomly drawn Union Army volunteer infantry companies. The sample of 39,341



                                            3
men consists primarily of volunteers (95%), as did the Union Army, and is representative

of the Northern-born and pre-war immigrant male population of military age (see the Data

Appendix for details). We linked veterans, their children, and children’s mothers to death

records and all available manuscript census schedules to obtain occupational, residential,

and family information under the program project Early Indicators, Intergenerational Pro-

cesses, and Aging (NIA P01 AG10120, PI: Costa). Although our linkage of veterans’

children oversamples children of ex-POWs, we restrict ourselves in this analysis to non-

ex-POWs to focus on the impact of wounds alone. Our empirical analyses of veterans

use men linked to the 1870 and the 1880 censuses, yielding samples of 5,076 and 5,731

veterans, respectively.

   Linkage rates in our original records to both on-line death records and to manuscript

census schedules are high both for veterans and children. Children’s linkage rates to the

census are highest for 1880 (93%), when most of them were in their fathers’ households

(mean year of birth is 1878), and fall as they start to establish their independent households.

Wound status does not predict whether a veteran could be found in a census; the main

predictor of linkage to an early census for a veteran was whether he enlisted in one of the

large cities. Seventy-four percent of children were linked to death records. In the veterans’

children sample, sons are slightly over-represented with 1.09 sons for every daughter. (See

the Data Appendix for additional details.) Children’s and veterans’ characteristics explain

very little of the variation in the availability of children’s death records and their causes

of death (available for 40% of children with death records). Decisions by individual states

to make their records freely available on-line, including which information to release,

determines whether we can link to death records and cause of death (see the Supporting

                                              4
Information to Costa et al. 2018).

       The veterans and their wives in the sample are representative, in terms of cohort mor-

tality, to a random sample of the population drawn from genealogies, but are higher than

those from period life tables of the population which are for disproportionately urban pop-

ulations. The children’s mortality data are best suited to examining mortality at older ages;

a comparison of cohort life expectancies with those from a genealogical database suggests

that among veterans’ children deaths prior to age 40 or 50 are understated, particularly for

women (see the Supporting Information to Costa et al. 2018).

       Our analyses of veterans’ children use 9,811 children who were born after the war and

who were in the 1910 census, married, and either with own occupational information if a

son or husband’s occupational information if a daughter. We impose the last restrictions to

examine occupational status for both daughters and sons. We impose the first restriction

because children born after the war constitute the bulk of our sample. 3 In our original data,

88% of children were linked to the 1910 census (see the Data Appendix). The children

who were married and in the 1910 census were more likely to be the children of native-

born fathers. When we examine mortality we examine survivorship after age 45 because,

as previously noted, our sample is best suited to examining mortality at older ages. This

yields a sample of 9,130 children. Although our primary analyses of mortality focus on

those married and in the 1910 census, our investigations of mortality revealed similar

patterns regardless of sample restrictions.
   3
       Age at first marriage for white men circa 1860 was a bit over age 25 (Fitch and Ruggles 2000).




                                                       5
1.2 Variables

Our primary variable of interest is whether a veteran had been wounded in the war. We

classify wounds into two types: 1) a severe wound, that is, a wound which led to a dis-

charge for disability from the army, amputation, or blindness (all blindness was in one eye

only in our sample) and 2) all other types of wounds. A severe wound is more likely to

lead to a permanent disability.

   Our dependent variables of interest for our analyses of veterans are veterans’ occupa-

tional class in 1880 (classified as farmer, professional or proprietor, artisan, and laborer),

veteran’s total wealth in 1870 (the last census year this information was asked), and years

lived after 1900. Our control variables for veterans are birth year (or age at the end of the

war), occupational class at enlistment (farmer, professional or proprietor, artisan, and la-

borer), dummies for enlistment year, a dummy equal to one if the veteran enlisted in a city

of population size 50,000 or more (and thus one of the 16 largest US cities), and father’s

real estate and personal property wealth. We also control for pension recipiency either in

1870 or in 1880.

   Our dependent variables of interest for our analyses of children’s outcomes are sons’

occupational class in 1910 (farmer, professional or proprietor, artisan, and laborer), the oc-

cupational class of daughters’ husbands in 1910, and years lived after age 45. The control

variables are birth year, veterans’ enlistment characteristics (occupational class, enlist-

ment year dummies, and the city size dummy, as for our analysis of veterans), veterans’

post-war socioeconomic status (total wealth in 1870 and occupational class in 1880), pop-

ulation density in childhood county, the number of siblings, and, in examining mortality,



                                              6
socioeconomic status in 1910.

   In the full Union Army sample of 39,341 soldiers, 21% of men suffered a non-mortal

wound during wartime, 5% died from war injuries or wounds, and 25% of men who sur-

vived the war had been wounded (see Table 1). (Wartime mortality rates were 14%, largely

from disease.) Non-mortal wounds may have removed men from the field, thus lowering

their risk of death. Nineteen percent of men were discharged for disability, but the cause

is often unknown (9% of all men were discharged for disability without any given rea-

son). Only 3% of all men were known to have been discharged because of war wounds.

Thirty-one percent of veterans who survived to 1900 and whose date is death is known

were wounded during the war. Amputees were a relatively small proportion of the popula-

tion (less than 3% among survivors to 1900). In the sample we use for our analyses, 35%

of veterans were wounded, 23% had been discharged for disability, and 12% had a severe

wound (see Table 2).

   The wounded were more likely to have enlisted earlier, to have enlisted in a large city,

and to be laborers rather than farmers at enlistment (see Table 2). Early enlistees were

at greater risk of a wound because of their longer wartime service. The young and the

less skilled were at greater risk of a wound because they were less likely to have become

corporals or sergeants immediately after enlistment. The same patterns persist for children

of wounded veterans (see Table 3). Although the fathers of wounded men had less real

estate wealth, we did not find a statistically significant correlation between wounds and

paternal real estate wealth once we controlled for occupational class at enlistment. There

were no differences by paternal wounds in birth year or number of siblings for veterans’

children.

                                            7
1.3 Wounds and Sample Selection

There are two potential sample selection concerns. One concern is wartime selection,

particularly by age. If older wounded soldiers were more likely to die in the war than

their younger wounded counterparts then older war survivors may have suffered from less

serious wounds than their younger counterparts. The second concern is that the sample is

restricted to children and their veteran fathers thus raising the issue whether those most

severely wounded were the least likely to be in the sample.

   We found no evidence that the war led to selection in the severity of wounds by age.

There was no difference between the wounded and the non-wounded in the relationship

between the probability of dying during the war and age, suggesting that there was no dif-

ference in unobserved severity of wounds by age group (details are in the Data Appendix).

   Men who had been wounded in the war and who were not married prior to the war were

slightly less likely to have any children and thus to be in the sample and also had fewer

children, potentially leading to underestimates of the impact of war wounds on veteran and

child outcomes; but, as shown in the Data Appendix, the magnitude of the association was

small. Veterans’ probability of having a child was 0.88 and being wounded decreased this

probability by 0.02, a 2% decline. Almost all of those without children were unmarried.

Conditional on having children, men who were wounded had one quarter fewer children

when the average number was 5, an 8% decline. Pension recipiency increased the proba-

bility of having any children by 0.03 but did not have a statistically significant impact on

the number of children, conditional on having children.




                                             8
2 Empirical Strategy

2.1 Health Shocks and Later Socioeconomic Outcomes

A health shock can lead to mismatch, particularly for individuals in physically demanding

sectors such as agriculture. While switching industries or jobs can lead to a better match,

investments in new skills may be required. The older the individual experiencing the health

shock, the less likely he is to switch because the opportunity cost of switching rises with

tenure and because the pay-off period from investing in new skills or learning about the

match quality is shorter.

   An individual who changes occupation may pick a low-skill job if the health shock

increases the financial or time cost of investment in a new skill. Because poorer individuals

require less compensation to take an unpleasant or less prestigious job, then, provided that

income effects dominate, as shown by Weiss (1976), an individual whose earnings capacity

has declined uniformly in all jobs is more likely to pick an unpleasant or less prestigious

work activity, such as being a laborer. He also is more likely to choose an occupation with

risky monetary returns.

   The age at which an individual experiences a health shock affects earnings and thus

wealth. Because it is costlier for an older individual to switch occupations, he will pay a

relatively greater earnings penalty than his counterpart who experiences the same health

shock at a younger age. However, because older individuals will have had more time

to acquire skills and wealth prior to a health shock than younger individuals, they could

experience lower earnings and wealth declines.

   We are agnostic about the exact age range in which men who experience a health shock

                                             9
are likely to switch occupations or to experience a decline in wealth. When we examined

2 year age groups, we found that wound status had no statistically significant effect on

the probability of being a farmer or a laborer among men who were age 29 and age 26,

respectively, after the end of the war. We also found that wealth declined after age 30

among men who had been wounded in the war. We therefore divide the veteran sample

into those less than age 30 and those age 30 or older at the end of the war.

       Our data also permit us to examine the correlation between wealth effects and oc-

cupational choice by examining both the impact of pension recipiency and of paternal

wealth on occupational outcomes. (We focus on pension recipiency rather than pension

amount because relatively few men were on the pension rolls in 1870 or 1880.) Wealth ef-

fects would lead men to choose pleasant or prestigious low-paying work activities (Weiss

1976). Pensions and paternal wealth thus would push men to be farmers or small pro-

prietors. However, as shown in Weiss (1976), pensions and paternal wealth would push

men toward monetarily higher risk occupations, which in this time period would be that of

laborers.4

       We examine the relationship between wounds, age and four occupational outcomes

(farmer, professional or proprietor, artisan, or laborer) by, within each age-selected sub-

sample, estimating multinomial logit models where the probability that the response is
   4
    Risk was estimated as the occupational class specific standard deviation of the residuals from a regres-
sion of the logarithm of personal property wealth or total wealth on dummies for state of birth, age, and
occupational group. The sample we used was the 1870 IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2018) restricted to white men
age 25-59 who were born in a Union State or its territories. Professionals and proprietors had the highest
mean personal property and total wealth followed by farmers whereas laborers had the lowest.




                                                    10
equal to the ith outcome is


                                    exp(γi SW + δi OW + βi X)
              Pr(y = i) =          4                                                  (1)
                              1+    m=2 exp(exp(γm W + δm D + βm X)



if i > 1 and the base outcome is 1 and where SW is a dummy indicator if the veteran had

been severely wounded, OW is dummy indicator if he had another wound, and X is a set of

control variables which includes dummy variables for his occupational class at enlistment,

a dummy variable indicating whether he enlisted in a city of 50,000 or more, his age at

the end of the war, the logarithm of his father’s real estate wealth, the logarithm of his

father’s personal property wealth, and a dummy indicator for whether he was receiving a

pension in 1880. (We cannot interact age group dummies with wound dummies because

of computational issues.) We cluster standard errors at the company level. We present

marginal estimates.

   We examine the impact of wounds on 1870 wealth holdings, w, by estimating quantile

regressions within our two age-selected subsamples,


                              log(w) = γSW + δOW + βX                                  (2)


where SW is a dummy variable indicating if the veteran was wounded, OW is a dummy

variable indicating if the veteran had another wound, and the control variables are age at

the end of the war, occupational class at enlistment and enlistment year, a dummy variable

indicating if enlistment was in a city of 50,000 or more, the logarithms of paternal real

estate and of father’s personal property wealth. We also run regressions where we control



                                           11
for post-war variables: pension recipiency in 1870, farm occupation in 1870, and the com-

pany death rate from injuries. We control for these variables to avoid underestimating the

impact of wounds (in the case of pension recipiency), to understand mechanisms behind

wealth declines (in the case of farm occupations), and to avoid confounding the effects

of being wounded with general stress. We also investigate the impact of severe and all

wounds on median wealth.



2.2 Paternal Health Shocks and Child Outcomes

We investigate how the interaction between paternal wounds and age affected children’s

socioeconomic status and mortality. If a wound reduces earnings capacity, particularly at

older ages, wounded fathers would have fewer resources to invest in their children. Chil-

dren might receive less schooling, fewer health investments, and lower financial transfers

as adults. Sons might receive less occupational training. Daughters’ circumstances might

be more proscribed and their marriage market limited to men within the same occupational

class or social circle as their fathers.

    Our analysis of children’s socioeconomic and mortality outcomes subdivides the sam-

ple four ways: by sex and by our two paternal age groups (less than age 30 and age 30 or

older at the end of the war). When we examine mortality we look at children who survived

to age 45 to ensure sample representativeness.

    We examine the four occupational classes (farmer, professional/proprietor, artisan, la-

borer) of veterans’ sons and sons-in-law using a multinomial logit where the probability




                                            12
that the response is equal to the ith outcome is


                                   exp(γi SW + ωi OW + βi X)
            Pr(y = i) =        4                                                         (3)
                          1+     m=2 exp(exp(γm SW + ωm OW + βm X)



if i > 1 and the base outcome is 1 and where SW indicates a paternal severe wound, OW

indicates a paternal “other” wound, and X includes birth year, paternal enlistment char-

acteristics (occupational class, enlistment year, and city size), and, in one of the specifi-

cations, paternal post-war characteristics (1880 occupational class and 1870 total wealth).

Standard errors are clustered at the family level.

    We estimate the association between paternal wound type and children’s mortality by

running Cox proportional hazard regression models of years lived after age 45,


                      h(t) = h0 (t) exp(β1 SW + β2 OW + β3 X)                             (4)


where h(t) is the hazard, SW is a dummy variable equal to one if the veteran had been

severely wounded, OW is a dummy indicator if the veteran suffered a non-severe wound,

and X is a set of control variables. The specifications include as control variables birth

year, paternal enlistment characteristics, and paternal post-war characteristics from the

1880 census. The standard errors are clustered at the family level. We also present speci-

fications in which we control for sons’ or daughters’ husbands’ occupational class in 1910

by stratifying on these occupations to ensure that the proportionality assumption is satis-

fied.




                                             13
2.3 Interpreting the Results

A causal interpretation of our regression results would require wounds to be exogenous,

conditional on observable characteristics. While such an assumption is plausible (although

we lack an instrumental variable to test), we acknowledge that the wounded may have had

different unobservable characteristics, including love of risk or conscientiousness, than

the non-wounded. If the wounded were higher risk takers we may overestimate the impact

of war wounds on occupational change. If the wounded were more conscientious, we

may overestimate the impact of wounds on wealth. In addition, a causal interpretation

of our results also requires us to assume that those wounded at older ages do not differ

on unobservable characteristics from those wounded at younger ages. We can overcome

some of these challenges by comparing veterans with a severe wound to those with a non-

severe wound under the assumption that, conditional on being wounded, the severity of

the wound was exogenous.

   Either a causal or correlational interpretation of our findings on wounds as a proxy

for disability in the labor force needs to account for confounding factors. Wounds may

proxy for combat stress: the wounded would also have been more likely to have seen

their comrades killed. We found, consistent with Costa and Kahn (2010), that veterans

from companies with above median combat fatalities were shorter-lived than men from

other types of companies. We therefore add a control for above median company combat

fatalities to our regressions. Another possible confounding factor is pension recipiency

and we investigate both the inclusion and exclusion of pension recipiency in our analyses.

Men who received pensions were in worse health and, because the criterion until 1890



                                           14
was a war-related disability, the wounded were the ones most likely to be on the pension

rolls. The correlation between pensions and health may lead to an underestimate of the

negative impact of wounds on outcomes. We therefore show results for controls with

pension recipiency and without when pension inclusion affects the results. 5

       Wounds may proxy not just for disability but also for the availability of family re-

sources. The wounded who married after the war married women whose fathers had 17 to

22% less personal property wealth than their non-wounded counterparts (details are in the

Data Appendix). Because we do not have the sample size to control for maternal grandfa-

ther’s wealth in our specifications, we may overestimate a pure disability effect of wounds

on occupational change or wealth among younger men.



3 Results: Veterans’ Socioeconomic Outcomes

Men wounded in the war were less likely both to remain and to become farmers by 1880

than the non-wounded (see the transition matrices between enlistment and 1880 occupa-

tion in Table 4). Fifty-eight percent of wounded farmers remained farmers compared to

62% of non-wounded farmers. Farmers who switched occupational class were dispropor-

tionately professionals, proprietors or laborers in 1880 if wounded. Wounded profession-
   5
     We do not have a good instrumental variable for pension recipiency in the 1870s and 1880s: political
variables such as closeness of elections were too weak. In 1900, when law changes provided exogenous
variation, there was no evidence of selection in who received a pension (Costa 1995). The only statistically
significant predictors of receiving a pension between 1870 and 1880, conditional on not having one in
1870, were having been wounded and having been discharged for disability. (The impact of a having been
wounded was twice as large as having been discharged for disability.) Observable characteristics such as
1870 property wealth did not affect recipiency, suggesting no selection on observable characteristics. Our
results are from a probit regression where the dependent variables was receiving a pension on or before 1880
conditional on not having one in 1870.



                                                    15
als and proprietors were more likely to remain in their occupational class if wounded (53%

if wounded vs 44% if not), Very few men had no occupation at all, consistent with the ab-

sence of work disincentives in pensions. 6 For younger men occupations may have been

aspirational rather than actual and thus the costs of switching might be lower; however,

there should be no differences in aspirational versus actual occupations by wound status.

    A severe wound received when young was associated with a decrease of 0.09 in a vet-

eran’s probability of being a farmer and an increase of 0.03 in his probability of being

a professional or proprietor. Although a severe wound was associated with a decreased

probability of 0.04 in being a laborer, the effect was statistically significant only at the

10% level (see Table 5). Other wounds received when young were associated with an

increased probability of 0.03 of a veteran being a laborer but were not associated with a

decreased probability of being in another occupational class. There was not a statistically

significant difference in the association of severe and other wounds on the probability

of being a laborer whereas there was a difference in the probability of being a farmer

(χ2 (1) = 9.61, p = 0.002) or a professional or proprietor (χ2 (1) = 10.14, p = 0.002).

In contrast, among veterans who were age 30 or older at the end of the war, there was no

statistically significant association of wounds with 1880 occupational class and no statis-

tically significant difference in the probability of being in an occupational class by type of

wound severity.

    Table 5 also suggests that farming was a desirable occupation. Pension recipiency

was positively and statistically significantly associated with being a farmer in 1880 among
    6
      We find that neither wounds or pension recipiency were either statistically significant or, in terms of
estimated magnitudes, economically meaningful predictors of having no occupation in 1880.



                                                     16
younger men, the group switching occupational categories. There was no statistically

significant assocation among older men. The positive association for younger veterans

between the veteran’s father wealth and the veteran’s probability of being a farmer, pro-

fessional or proprietor also suggests that farming was a desirable occupation. A standard

deviation increase in the logarithm of paternal personal property wealth was associated

with an increased probability of 0.04 that a veteran was a farmer and a decreased prob-

ability of 0.04 that he was a laborer. For older veterans the logarithm of father’s real

estate wealth was statistically significantly associated with a change in an occupational

class (an increase in the probability of being a professional or proprietor) but there were

no associations for younger veterans. However, the magnitude of some of our estimated

correlations of paternal wealth and veterans’ occupational probabilities suggests that we

may be underpowered to find statistical significance.

   Older veterans had less wealth in 1870 if they had been wounded (see Table 6). A

severe wound was associated with 37% less wealth at the median among older veterans

and with 46% less wealth when we added controls for pension recipiency in 1870 and farm

occupation in 1870 and thus account for much of the working capital of farmers being tied

up in their wealth. Less severe wounds were not statistically, significantly associated with

wealth among older men but the estimated association was up to -28% and the coefficients

on severe and other wounds were not statistically significantly different from each other.

For younger veterans other wounds were statistically significantly inversely associated

with wealth when we controlled for pre-war characteristics and pension recipiency. The

estimated effect was halved and became statistically insignificant once we controlled for

farm occupation in 1870, suggesting that moves out of the farm sector explained much

                                            17
of the impact of wounds on total wealth holdings for younger men. Adding a control for

the company wartime death rate from injuries did not change the results, suggesting that

wounds are proxying for physical disability rather than combat trauma.

   Younger men maintained their wealth despite their wounds, perhaps because of their

occupational transitions. Older men were more likely to see wealth losses if they had

been wounded, perhaps because occupational changes had low future pay-offs. For older

men the impact of wounds was greater than that of a 1% increase in paternal personal

property wealth, which increased an older veteran’s wealth holdings by 32.5% (σ̂ =0.130,

P > |z| = 0.012) when we did not control for farm occupation in 1870 and by 27.1%

(σ̂ =0.086, P > |z| = 0.002) when we controlled for farm occupation in 1870.

   Our estimated wealth effects are broadly consistent with the 37% decline in wealth

because of war wounds found by Lee (2005) using a small and different sample of Union

Army veterans. Lee’s (2005) sample did not allow him to examine how the age at which

the health shock was received affected later wealth and occupational status.

   We could not find a correlation of wounds, regardless of severity and of inclusion or

exclusion of post-war controls, on veterans’ mortality (results not shown). While severe

wounds may have been disabling and affected productivity (at least immediately after the

war), they may not have affected mortality.




                                              18
4 Results: Children’s Socioeconomic and Mortality Out-

       comes

We found that among the children of veterans less than age 30 at the end of the war, the

daughters of severely wounded fathers were less likely to be married to farmers and more

likely to be married to laborers in 1910. The probability that a daughter would be married

to a farmer was 0.084 lower if her father was severely wounded (Table 7). Her probability

of being married to a laborer was 0.072 higher if her father was severely wounded. There

was no statistically significant association between a non-severe wound and husband’s oc-

cupational class. The increase in the probabilities of being married to a farmer or a laborer

associated with a severe and a non-severe wound were statistically significantly different

(χ2 (1) = 5.13, p = 0.024 and χ2 (1) = 7.89, p = 0.005, respectively). When we con-

trolled for paternal wealth in 1870 and paternal occupational class in 1880, our estimated

association between a severe paternal wound and the probability that a daughter would

be married to farmer declined by 8%. Our findings suggest that marriages of daughters

to farmers may have been limited by occupation-specific family and neighborhood social

circles. The association between paternal wound and the probability of being married to

a laborer remained unchanged. In contrast, we found no association between sons’ occu-

pational class and paternal wounds received by veterans less than age 30 at the end of the

war.

   The occupational class of sons was statistically, significantly asssociated with paternal

war wounds if the veteran was age 30 or older at the end of the war (see Table 8) and the

association was related to the decline in paternal wealth for the wounded among older,

                                             19
wounded veterans. The sons of fathers with severe and other wounds had probabilities of

being farmers that were 0.127 and 0.049 lower, respectively, than those of sons of non-

wounded fathers. The probability that the son of a severely wounded man would be a

laborer was 0.118 higher than that of a non-wounded man. Our estimates of the increase

in probabilities of a son being a farmer or laborer if the father had a severe or other wound

were not statistically distinguishable (χ 2 (1) = 1.31, p = 0.253 and χ2 (1) = 0.81, p =

0.367 for the change in the probability of being a farmer and a laborer, respectively). When

we controlled for paternal wealth in 1870 and paternal occupation in 1880, the increase

in the probability of being a farmer for those with a severe wound fell by 26% and the

association was statistically significant only at the 10% level, suggesting that paternal

wealth assisted sons in becoming farmers. Paternal wealth does not appear to have helped

daughters marry farmers.

   We also investigated the relationship between paternal wounds and children’s educa-

tional outcomes. We did not find a statistically significant association between paternal

war wounds and a child being in the 1880 census and with educational levels reported in

1940.

   A severe paternal wound at older ages was associated with mortality above age 45 for

daughters but not for sons (see Table 9). A daughter was 1.311 times more likely to die at

any age above 45 if her father had been severely wounded in the war and was older than age

30 at the end of war, controlling for paternal wealth in 1870 and for paternal occupational

class in 1880. Additionally controlling for the occupational class of the daugher’s husband

increased the hazard rate to 1.322. Adding additional controls for population density in the

1880 county of residence and for paternal farm occupation in 1870 increased the hazard

                                             20
ratio to 1.340 (σ̂ =0.152, P > |z| = 0.010). The hazard ratio was 1.290 (σ̂ =0.142, P

> |z| = 0.021) when we controlled only for pre-enlistment paternal characteristics. Our

sample size is large enough such we are unlikely to be detecting a spurious statistical result;

to find a hazard ratio of 1.32 for a binary variable at the 1% level of significance we need

a sample of 607, assuming power of 0.8 and an unrealistically high correlation with the

other variables of 0.5.7 We also did not find that older fathers’ daughters who were born

prior to paternal enlistment faced a statistically significant mortality risk if their fathers

were wounded; however, a caveat is that our sample contains only 508 such daughters. 8

    We suspect older fathers faced productivity declines within occupations which our

wealth measure, taken 5 years after the end of the war, does not capture. We found statis-

tically significant associations of severe wounds with mortality for the daughters of older

veterans who were farmers at enlistment but not for the daughters of non-farmers. For

the daughters of farmers, the hazard ratio on a severe wound was 1.449 (σ̂ =0.227, P

> |z| = 0.021) whereas it was only 1.084 (σ̂ =0.158, P > |z| = 0.579) for the daughters

of non-farmers.

    Severe paternal war wounds were associated with excess deaths from cardiovascular

disease for daughters of fathers age 30 or older at the end of the war, consistent with

the association of cardiovascular disease with early life conditions (e.g., Barker and Mar-

tyn 1992). A daughter whose father had been severely wounded in the war was 2.383

(σ̂ =0.892, P > |z| = 0.020) times as likely to die at any age after age 45 from a cardio-
    7
      The highest correlation was with the father’s enlistment year dummies and it was only -0.06 for those
enlisting in 1864.
    8
      The hazard ratios on severe and other wounds were 1.090 (σ̂ =0.168, P > |z| = 0.574) and 1.033
(σ̂ =0.120, P > |z| = 0.781), respectively.



                                                    21
vascular disease compared to a daughter whose father had not been wounded. However,

the hazard ratio on a severe wound was not statistically significantly different from the

hazard ratio of 1.380 (σ̂ =0.572, P > |z| = 0.438) on a non-severe wound.

   Why did paternal severe wounds received at older ages reduce daughters’ but not sons’

lifespans, if the mechanism is early life conditions? Girls may be more sensitive to early

in-utero nutritional shocks as seen in findings from the the Dutch Hunger Winter (Stein

et al. 2007, Lumey et al. 2009, Tobi et al. 2009). Nutritional shocks may have been more

severe among farm households who were growing food both for their own consumption

and for sale. Alternatively, because exposure to infectious disease may have been greater

in households of lower socioeconomic status, girls may have been differentially exposed

because they were not working outdoors or they may be more susceptible to infectious

disease between age 5 and 25 (Goldin and Lleras-Muney 2019). The burden of adult

caregiving does not appear to play a role: we found no evidence that adult daughters were

more likely to live with a father if he had been wounded in the war (results not shown).



5 Comparing Paternal Shocks

Paternal experiences can be transmitted to children either through biological or socioeco-

nomic channels. In previous work (Costa et al. 2018), we found that paternal ex-POW

hardship was transmitted to sons only and argued that the transmission was most consis-

tent with an epigenetic mechanism. We compare our findings for paternal wounds with

those for paternal ex-POW trauma by sex and by different paternal end of war age groups.

We re-run our Cox proportional hazard models hazard models for the paternal end of war


                                            22
age groups less than age 22, ages 22-29, and greater than or equal to age 30, stratifying

on own or spouse’s occupation in 1910. We use the data in Costa et al. (2018) to re-run

our 1910 occupation stratified results for these age groups. All of our regressions examine

mortality after age 45 and are for those married and in the 1910 census.

   We found that paternal wounds and POW trauma led to very different tranmission pat-

terns by paternal age at the time of the shock, not just to different sex-specific transmission.

Ex-POW trauma was transmitted to the sons of fathers who were young at the time of the

shock (see Table 10 which examines survival after age 45 by different paternal age groups

for children stratifying on either own or husband’s occupational class). The sons of veter-

ans who suffered severe POW camp hardship were 1.45 times as likely to die at any age

after age 45 compared to the sons of non-POWs, provided the veteran was less than age 22

at the end of the war. The sons of ex-POWs during times of milder POW camp hardship

were 1.20 times as likely to die compared to the sons of non-POWs. The hazard ratios on

severe and milder hardship were statistically, significantly different from each other at the

5% level (χ2 (1) =4.06, P > χ2 (1) =0.044). For sons of fathers who were between age

22-29 at the end of the war the association between severe paternal POW camp hardship

and sons’ mortality was statistically significant only at the 10% level and the hazard ra-

tio was 1.13, statistically indistinguishable from that for less severe POW camp hardship.

There were no statistically significant associations among sons of fathers who were age

30 or older at the time of the war, but statistical power is potentially an issue. In contrast,

paternal wounds were associated only with the mortality of daughters of fathers who were

older at the end of the war.

   We previously hypothesized that the correlation between POW camp hardship and

                                              23
sons’ mortality was caused by starvation which induced an epigenetic effect. The relation-

ship between paternal POW camp hardship and older age mortality among sons of fathers

who were less than age 22 at the end of the war is consistent with the positive correlation

between paternal grandfather’s food supply in his late teens and grandsons’ mortality in

the classic studies of Överkalix in northern Sweden (Bygren 2013). In contrast to our prior

results, we suspect that the correlation between severe wounds and daughter’s mortality

among fathers who were age 30 or older at the end of the war was related to productivity

declines among farmers which diffentially affected girls.



6 Conclusion

The twentieth century witnessed a radical transformation in the types of goods and services

produced and in the processes used to produce them. Concurrent with these changes, pro-

fessional, managerial, clerical, sales, and service workers grew from one-quarter to three

quarters of total employment between 1910 and 2000 (Wyatt and Hecker 2006). This shift

has been implicated as a cause in the long-run decline in musculoskeletal disabilities at

older ages (Costa 2000). Another outcome of this shift, and of jobs becoming less danger-

ous in the two decades after World War II, is the decline in permanent disability from on

the job accidents (Costa and Kahn 2004).9 We found that men could partially adapt to in-

juries received when they were young (though at the cost of lower socioeconomic status),

but could not adapt when they received injuries after age 30, consistent with human capital
   9
     Additional evidence on the extent of accident risk in the past comes from an examination of World War I
draftees age 18-30 which revealed that 21 out of 1000 men suffered from injuries due to accidents, including
losses of extremities, with higher rates in the Southern states (Love and Davenport 1920, pp. 126-8, 143).



                                                    24
and job matching models. The cost of an injury for an older man was a 36-46% decline

in wealth 5 years after the end of the war, implying a sizable impact of health shocks at

prime adult ages on productivity. The magnitude of our effect is larger than the 10-15%

wealth decline experienced today by older Americans who have had a severe health shock,

as might be expected in comparing the wealth outcomes of health shocks in brawn versus

brain based economies.10 While health shocks today affect the wealth of older Americans

through changes in their labor force participation, in our sample virtually all men were

in the labor force suggesting that in the past health shocks affected wealth either through

productivity or the amount of time worked. Regardless of the exact pathway, our findings

provide strong evidence of the importance of health on economic outcomes as argued by

Smith (2005). Our finding that a health shock could affect productivity in an age-specific

way but not own mortality also suggests that the literature on health and economic growth

needs to distinguish between types of health shocks and their timing (see Bleakley 2010

for a discussion).

    We found that there were intergenerational associations of paternal health shocks with

child socioeconomic and mortality outcomes. We argued that the decline in paternal

wealth affected the ability of sons to become farmers, probably because they had less

access to working capital. We argued that shifts out of the farm sector among younger

veterans reduced their daughters’ probabilities of marrying farmers, perhaps because they

were less likely to meet farmers. Our mortality findings raise several issues for further

research. We found that the daughters of fathers who were older when they were wounded
   10
      Smith (2005) estimates that a major health shock leads to a cumulative wealth decline of $52,000 over
8 years. This represents a 10-15% wealth decline.



                                                    25
faced a greater mortality risk at all ages after age 45 than the daughters of men who were

not wounded, an association which persisted when we cntrolled for paternal wealth 5 years

after the end of the war and which was concentrated among the daughters of farmers. We

found no effects of wounds on the adult socioeconomic status of daughters of older veter-

ans, suggesting that research should focus on the direct health effects of intergenerational

shocks. Our observed outcomes by sex and by the timing of the original shock are in con-

trast to our results for the intergenerational transmission of ex-POW trauma (Costa et al.

2018) and suggest that more research is needed on the intergenerational transmission of

paternal shocks by sex and by the timing of the original shock.



Data Appendix

6.1 Original Union Army Sample

Veterans are drawn from a sample of 39,341 men in 330 randomly drawn Union Army

volunteer infantry companies, collected by the program project, Early Indicators of Later

Work Levels, Disease, and Death (NIA P01 AG10120, PI: Fogel). The sample was con-

structed from hand written military service and pension records (including detailed exam-

ining surgeons’ exams), preserved in the National Archives, and from selected manuscript

census schedules. The sample is representative of the Northern population of military age

in 1860 in terms of socioeconomic status (Fogel 1993).

   The military service and the pension records contain enlistment information, including

occupation and place of enlistment, and also wartime experiences such as illnesses and



                                            26
wounds. The Union Army pension records exist because in 1862 Congress established

a program to provide pensions for soldiers who had incurred permanent bodily injury or

disability while in the service and for the dependents of soldiers who had died from causes

that could be traced directly to injuries received or diseases contracted while in Union

Army service. The pension program effectively became a universal disability and old age

pension program in 1890 and the number of veterans on the rolls doubled.



6.2 Veterans’ Children Sample

We are collecting the records of the children of 8,500 white non-POWs who survived to

1900 and of 1,999 white ex-POWs who survived to 1900. Only the children of veterans

who survived until 1900 were traced because information in the pension records is needed

to link children to death records and manuscript census records, but only in 1900 was

pension coverage close to universal. However, the biases introduced by not examining

veterans who survived the war but died before 1900 appear to be minimal because our

inability to find them in the 1870 and 1880 censuses suggests that most excess deaths

from wartime causes were before 1870. At the time of analysis not all children’s records

had been cleaned and coded so we focus on a subset of the data in our analyses.

   Information on veterans’ children was obtained from veterans’ manuscript census sched-

ules which list all members of the household and from family circulars which were part

of the veteran’s pension file (and would have been completed by all of the veterans in

the sample). The family circulars contain children’s names, birth and death dates and of-

ten daughters’ married names. All of the veterans’ children were linked to on-line death



                                            27
records and to all of the manuscript census schedules from 1850 to 1940, with the excep-

tion of 1890, using familysearch.org, ancestry.com, Find A Grave, and deathindexes.com,

with each record often leading to another record. Records that were found may include

(not necessarily in order) death records (often with parents’ names, exact birth dates, exact

death dates and other family member names), birth records (with exact birth dates and

parents names), marriage records (with spouses’ names and often with parents’ names),

WWI draft registration cards (with exact birth dates and next of kin, often a parent or a

spouse), and Social Security claim or death index (with exact birth dates and frequently

with parents’ names).

   Linkage rates are given in Table 11. The availability of on-line death records is the

primary determinant of linkage to death records. Although death sources are available

in some form on-line for all 50 states, each state varies in the types of death information

and dates available. Census linkage rates in the current children’s sample are high for the

following reasons: the pension records often provide names of the veterans’ spouses and

children (including daughters’ married names), various addresses for the veteran, date of

birth and birthplaces for the veterans and their children, birth date and marriage date and

place for the veterans’ spouses, and, at times, death dates for the veterans’ children; 2) the

sample is a Northern sample (the North had better records), and the children are all native-

born; 3) when daughters’ married names are unavailable in the pension records, these

names can be found in on-line marriage records using their parents’ names and places

of residences. All linkages were done by staff with extensive training in genealogical

research, and all links undergo an extensive series of cross-checks.

   Linkage methods are designed to reduce the rate of false positives. By using Ances-

                                             28
try trees, inputters follow the hints provided, attach relevant documents, and see multiple

match points from a variety of sources that corroborate new information when it is found.

Inputters determine on a case by case basis which information is the strongest to use in

their search parameters, then examine the actual record image and determine the strength

of the match by reviewing all the available information. Inputters can also recognize in-

dexing errors, decipher poor handwriting, sort through mistakes on the record and make

informed decisions.

   We have investigated the use of mechanized algorithms for finding birth, death, and

census records, but these yielded too many false positives relative to our manual searches

because, unlike humans, extant matching algorithms do not recognize matching points

from a variety of records nor connect the dots to follow the clues when one record leads

to the next. Mechanized methods are limited to digitized records and cannot open the

document to examine the image in order to recognize errors in indexing and recording;

they cannot alter the search sequence nor change the importance of search fields on a case

by case basis, and are unable to eliminate results that make no sense. Common linkage

methods such as those examined in Bailey et al. (2017) and those used on Family Search

yield numerous false positives. The advantage having human inputters use extensive in-

formation to find individuals is that it avoids probabilistic matches, such as those used by

the Census Bureau in their linkage projects, which permit only coarse inference when the

number of entities relative to the number of records is small (Johndrow et al. 2018).




                                            29
6.3 Sample Selection

We investigate entry into the sample by using a probit model in which the dependent

variable is a dummy equal to one if a veteran who was not married before the war had

a child using a probit equation. Conditional on having children, we examine the impact

of wounds on number of children using a poisson model. Marginals for both the probit

and poisson model are in Table 12. We found some evidence of differential effects of

being wounded by broad age group. When we examined veterans who were older than

age 25 at the end of the war and unmarried we found that the impact of being wounded

on having any children was -0.036 (σ̂ =0.015,P > |z| =0.016), a 4% decline compared

to the 2% decline among all age groups. Conditional on having children, we found no

differential age effects of being wounded on the number of children (results not shown).

Our results suggest that the older veterans who were in our sample of men with children

were the relatively healthy because those who were unhealthy dropped out. We thus may

underestimate the impact of wounds on veteran and child socioeconomic and mortality

outcomes.



6.4 Father-In-Law’s Wealth

We run quantile regressions where the dependent variables is the logarithm of father-in-

law’s personal property wealth in 1860 (see Table 13). The impact was statistically sig-

nificant at the 1% level at the 50th and 75th quantiles, but not at the 25th. Controlling

for wounds, a discharge for disability was not statistically significantly correlated with

father-in-law’s wealth.


                                           30
   Figure 1 in the Appendix compares the probability of a wartime death for the wounded

and the non-wounded by two year age group (measured at war’s end) as estimated from

a probit regression with controls for enlistment year dummies, enlistment occupational

class, and a dummy for city size.




                                          31
References
 [1] Almond, Douglas. 2006. Is the 1918 influenza pandemic over? Long-term effects
     of in utero influenza exposure in the post-1940 US population. Journal of Political
     Economy 114(4): 672-712.

 [2] Bailey, Martha, Connor Cole, Morgan Henderson, Catherine Massey. 2017. How
     well do automated methods perform in historical samples? Evidence from new
     ground truth data. NBER Working Paper No. 24019.

 [3] Barker, DJP and CN Martyn. 1992. The maternal and fetal origins of cardiovascular
     disease. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. 46(1): 8-11.

 [4] Bartel, Ann and Paul Taubman. 1979. Health and Labor Market Success: The Role
     of Various Diseases. The Review of Economics and Statistics. 61(1): 1-8.

 [5] Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradi-
     cation in the American South. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 122(1): 73-117.

 [6] Bleakley, Hoyt. 2010. Health, Human Capital, and Development. Annual Review of
     Economics. 2: 283-310.

 [7] Bleakley, Hoyt, Dora L. Costa, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2014. Health, Educa-
     tion and Income in the United States, 1820-2000. In L. Boustan, C. Frydman and
     R, Margo (Eds.), Human Capital in History: The American Record. University of
     Chicago Press for NBER:

 [8] Bloom, David E., David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla. 2004. The Effect of Health
     on Economic Growth: A Production Function Approach. World Development. 32(1):
     1-13

 [9] Bygren, Olav. 2013. Intergenerational Health Responses to Adverse and Enriched
     Environments. Annual Review of Public Health. 34: 49-60.

[10] Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. 2002. Economic Status and
     Health in Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient. American Economic Review.
     92(5): 1308-34.

[11] Charles, Kerwin Kofi. 2003. The Longitudinal Structure of Earnings Losses among
     Work-Limited Disabled Workers. Journal of Human Resources. 38(3): 618-46.



                                          32
[12] Costa, Dora L. 1995. Pensions and Retirement: Evidence from Union Army Veter-
     ans. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 110(2): 297-320.
[13] Costa, Dora L. 2000. Understanding the Twentieth Century Decline in Chronic Con-
     ditions Among Older Men. Demography. 37(1): 53-72.
[14] Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. Changes in the Value of Life, 1940-1980.
     Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. 29(2): 159-80.
[15] Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E Kahn. 2010. Health, Wartime Stress, and Unit Cohe-
     sion: Evidence from Union Army Veterans. Demography. 47(1); 45-66.
[16] Costa, Dora L., Noelle Yetter, and Heather DeSomer. 2018. Intergenerational Trans-
     mission of Paternal Trauma Among US Civil War Ex-POWs. Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences, USA. 115(44): 11215-11220.
[17] Currie, Janet. 2009. Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health
     in Childhood, and Human Capital Development. Journal of Economic Literature.
     47(1): 87-122.
[18] Currie, Janet and Rosemary Hyson. 1999. Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned
     by Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Low Birthweight. American Economic Re-
     view. 89(2): 245-50.
[19] Fitch, Catherine A. and Steven Ruggles. Historical Trends in Marriage Formation:
     The United States 1850-1990. In Linda J. Waite and Christine Bachrach (Eds), The
     Ties That Bind: Perspectives on Marriage and Cohabitation. New York: Aldine de
     Gruyter, pp. 59-90.
[20] Fogel, Robert W. 1993. New Sources and New Techniques for the Study of Secular
     Trends in Nutritional Status, Health, Mortality, and the Process of Aging. Historical
     Methods. 26(1): 5-43.
[21] Fogel, Robert W. 1994. Economic growth, population theory, and physiology: The
     bearing of long-term processes on the making of economic policy. American Eco-
     nomic Review. 84(3): 369-395.
[22] Gallup, John Luke, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. 2001. The Economic Burden of Malaria.
     American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 64, suppl. 1 (January): 85-96.
[23] Goldin, Claudia and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2019. XX > XY?: The Changing Fe-
     male Advantage in Life Expectancy. Journal of Health Economics. 67 (September),
     102224.

                                           33
[24] Halla, Martin and Martina Zweimüller. 2013. The Effect of Health on Earnings:
     Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Commuting Accidents. Journal of Labour Eco-
     nomics. 24: 23-38.

[25] Heijmans BT, EW Tobi, AD Stein, H Putter, GJ Blauw, ES Susser, PE Slagboom, LH
     Lumey. 2008. Persistent epigenetic differences associated with prenatal exposure to
     famine in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA. 104(44):
     17046-9.
[26] Johndrow J.E., K. Lum, D.B. Dunson. 2018. Theoretical limits of record linkage and
     microclustering. Biometrika. 105(2): 431-446.

[27] Johnson, Rucker C. and Robert F. Schoeni. 2011. The Influence of Early-Life Events
     on Human Capital, Health Status, and Labor Market Outcomes Over the Life Course.
     The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy. 11(3), ISSN (Online) 1935-1682,
     DOI: https://doi.org/10.2202/1935-1682.2521.
[28] Gunnar Kaati, Lars Olov Bygren, Marcus Pembrey, and Michael Sjöström. 2007.
     Transgenerational Response to Nutrition, Early Life Circumstances and Longevity.
     European Journal of Human Genetics. 15: 784-790.
[29] Lakdawalla, Darius and Tomas Philipson. 2009. The Growth of Obesity and Techno-
     logical Change. Economics & Human Biology. 7(3): 283-293.

[30] Lee, Chulhee. 2005. Wealth Accumulation and the Health of Union Army Veterans,
     1860-1870. Journal of Economic History. 65(2): 352-85.
[31] Love, Albert G. and Charles B. Davenport. 1920. Defects Found in Drafted Men.
     Washington: Govt. print. off.
[32] Lumey, L.H., Aryeh D. Stein, Henry S. Kahn, and JA Romijn. 2009. Lipid profiles
     in middle-aged men and women after famine exposure during gestation; the Dutch
     Hunger Winter Families Study. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 89(6): 1737-
     43.
[33] Manovskii, Gueorgui and Iourii Kambournov. 2009. Occupational Specificity of Hu-
     man Capital. International Economic Review. 50(1): 63-115.
[34] McClellan, Mark. 1998. Health Events, Health Insurance and Labor Supply: Ev-
     idence from the Health and Retirement Survey.” In Frontiers in the Economics of
     Aging, Edited by David A. Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER:
     301-46.

                                          34
[35] Mok, Wallace K.C., Bruce D. Meyer, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Alexandra C. Achen.
     2008. A Note on “The Longitudinal Structure of Earnings Losses among Work-
     Limited Disabled Workers.” Journal of Human Resources. 43(3): 721-8.

[36] Neal, Derek. 1995. Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced
     Workers. Journal of Labor Economics. 13(4):

[37] Parent, Daniel. 2000. Industry-Specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from
     the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.
     Journal of Labor Economics. 18(2):

[38] Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose
     Pacas, and Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 8.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN:
     IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V8.0

[39] Scholte, Robert S., Gerard J. van den Berg, and Maarten Lindeboom. 2015. Long-run
     Effects of Gestation during the Dutch Hunger Winter Famine on Labor Market and
     Hospitalization Outcomes. Journal of Health Economics. 39(1): 17-30.

[40] Smith, James P. 2005. Consequences and Predictors of New Health Events. In Anal-
     yses in the Economics of Aging, Edited by David A. Wise. Chicago, Universithy of
     Chicago Press for NBER: 213-240.

[41] Stein, Aryeh D, Henry S Kahn, Andrew Rundle, Patricia A Zybert, Karin van der
     Pal-de Bruin, and LH Lumey. 2007. Anthropometric measures in middle age after
     exposure to famine during gestation: evidence from the Dutch famine. American
     Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 85: 869-76.

[42] Tobi, Elmar W., LH Lumey, Rudolf P. Talens, Dennis Kremer, Hein Putter, Aryeh
     D. Stein, P. Eline Slagboom, and Bastiaan T. Heijmans. 2009. DNA methylation dif-
     ferences after exposure to prenatal famine are common and timing- and sex-specific.
     Human Molecular Genetics. 18(21): 4046-4053.

[43] Vågerö, Denny. Pia R. Pringer, Vanda Aronsson. and Gerard J. van den Berg. 2018.
     Paternal Grandfather’s Access to Food Predicts All-Cause and Cancer Mortality in
     Grandsons. Nature Communications. 9, Article Number 5124. Published on-line Dec
     11, 2018.

[44] Weiss, Yoram. 1976. The Wealth Effect in Occupational Choice. Economic Review.
     17(2): 292-307.



                                          35
[45] WHO (World Health Organization). 2001. Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in
     Health for Economic Development. Report of the Commission on Macroeconomics
     and Health. WHO Press.

[46] Wyatt, Ian D. and Daniel E. Hecker. 2006. Occupational Changes During the 20th
     Century. Monthly Labor Review. March: 35-57.




                                        36
                     Table 1: Percentage Disabled, Injured, or Wounded


                                                        During    Survived to
                                                         War     1866    1900
                    Wounded or Injured                   26.27   25.15 30.95
                      Non-mortal wound or injury         21.41
                      Non-mortal battlefield wound       13.64
                    Discharged disability (any cause)            18.77   18.99
                    Discharged for
                      Wounds or Injuries                          3.00    3.42
                      Vague reason (e.g., disability)             0.76    0.71
                      Other reason (e.g., disease)                7.49    7.77
                      No reason given                             8.58    8.21
                    Amputation                                    2.07    2.60
                    Observations                        39,341 33,485 15,133

Estimated from the full Union Army sample.




                                             37
                 Table 2: Mean Characteristics of Veterans by Wound Status


                                                                          Not          Severe        Other
                                                              All       Wounded        Wound         Wound
  Veterans
  Dummy=1 if
    Severe wound                                              0.124
    Any wound                                                 0.346
    Discharged disability                                     0.233         0.196         0.855             0
    On pension rolls in 1870                                  0.108         0.039        0.0425         0.134
    Enlisted in city with population of 50,000+               0.032         0.025         0.048         0.043
    Enlistment Occupation
      Farmer                                                 0.621         0.640    0.572    0.591
      Professional/Proprietor                                0.040         0.044    0.040    0.032
      Artisan                                                0.160         0.155    0.178    0.163
      Laborer                                                0.167         0.148    0.201    0.202
      Unknown                                                0.012         0.013    0.009    0.012
  Enlistment Year                                         1862.261      1862.411 1861.911 1862.022
  Age at end war                                            26.162        26.272   26.822   25.482
  Father’s real estate wealth ($)                          946.693       982.956 939.271 847.127
  Father’s personal property wealth ($)                    763.472       765.120 875.498 763.472
  Fraction of company died of wartime injuries               0.052         0.046    0.067    0.059
  Total wealth in 1870 ($)                                1263.632      1312.758 1324.426 1086.325
  Dummy=1 if farmer in 1870                                  0.430         0.447    0.407    0.391
  Dummy=1 if Occupation in 1880
    Farmer                                                    0.472         0.492         0.399         0.454
    Professional/Proprietor                                   0.107         0.106         0.137         0.093
    Artisan                                                   0.141         0.138         0.155         0.143
    Laborer                                                   0.260         0.244         0.282         0.293
    No occupation                                             0.020         0.020         0.026         0.017

Means are for the sample of 6,228 Union Army veterans. Means for 1870 and 1880 characteristics are for men linked
to those censuses (5,076 and 5,726 respectively). Means for the veteran’s father wealth are for 4,139 fathers.




                                                  38
     Table 3: Mean Characteristics of Veterans’ Children by Paternal Wound Status


                                                                      Not         Severe       Other
                                                          All       Wounded       Wound        Wound
  Dummy=1 if veteran
    Severe wound                                           0.108
    Any wound                                              0.234
    On pension rolls in 1880                               0.190        0.122        0.397        0.285
    Enlisted in city with population of 50,000+            0.020        0.019        0.025        0.023
  Veteran’s enlistment Occupation
      Farmer                                              0.681        0.698    0.623    0.659
      Professional/Proprietor                             0.021        0.031    0.045    0.027
      Artisan                                             0.128        0.129    0.137    0.122
      Laborer                                             0.146        0.127    0.181    0.182
      Unknown                                             0.014        0.015    0.014    0.010
  Veteran’s enlistment year                            1862.268     1862.429 1861.878 1861.995
  Veteran’s total wealth in 1870 ($)                   1103.348     1147.779 1126.072 965.911
  Veteran’s occupation in 1880
    Farmer                                                0.563        0.581    0.505    0.540
    Professional/Proprietor                               0.080        0.078    0.116    0.066
    Artisan                                               0.120        0.115    0.127    0.133
    Laborer                                               0.221        0.210    0.232    0.247
    No occupation                                         0.016        0.016    0.020    0.014
  Dummy=1 if female                                       0.451        0.452    0.452    0.454
  Birth year                                           1874.580     1874.616 1874.505 1874.512
  Number of siblings                                      5.843        5.885    5.886    5.702
  Own or spouse’s occupation in 1910
    Farmer                                                 0.334        0.342        0.287        0.331
    Professional/Proprietor                                0.227        0.230        0.227        0.217
    Artisan                                                0.174        0.169        0.176        0.187
    Laborer                                                0.265        0.258        0.310        0.265

The means are for all children who were married in the 1910 census and who had own or spouses’ occupational
information.




                                               39
    Table 4: Occupational Transitions between Enlistment and 1880 by Wound Status


         Enlistment                                     1880 Occupation
        Occupation              F           PP            A         L             None         Total
       Not wounded
       Farmer (F)              1,531     196     186     482      44                            2,439
                             62.77%   8.04%   7.63% 19.76%    1.80%                          100.00%
                             83.75% 51.44% 36.54% 52.79% 57.79%                               65.79%
       Professional/              38      69      17      26       7                              157
       Proprietor (PP)       24.20% 43.95% 10.83% 16.56%      4.46%                          100.00%
                              2.08% 18.11%    3.34%   2.85%   9.21%                            4.24%
       Artisan (A)               116      67     250     128       9                              570
                             20.35% 11.75% 43.86% 22.46%      1.58%                          100.00%
                              6.35% 17.59% 49.12% 14.02% 11.84%                               15.38%
       Laborer (L)               143      49      56     277      16                              541
                             26.43%   9.06% 10.35% 51.20%     2.96%                          100.00%
                              7.82% 12.86% 11.00% 30.34% 21.05%                               14.59%
       Total                   1,828     381     509     913      76                            3,707
                             49.31% 10.28% 13.73% 24.63%      2.05%                          100.00%
                            100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%                          100.00%
       Wounded
       Farmer (F)                682     103      93     265      25                            1,168
                             58.39%   8.82%   7.96% 22.69%    2.14%                          100.00%
                             79.86% 50.49% 31.96% 47.24% 65.79%                               59.96%
       Professional/              12      35       4      14       1                               66
       Proprietor (PP)       18.18% 53.03%    6.06% 21.21%    1.52%                          100.00%
                              1.41% 17.16%    1.37%   2.50%   2.63%                            3.39%
       Artisan                    60      35     139      86       3                              323
                             18.58% 10.84% 43.03% 26.63%      0.92%                          100.00%
                              7.03% 17.16% 47.77% 15.33%      7.89%                           16.58%
       Laborer                   100      31      55     196       9                              391
                             25.58%   7.93% 14.07% 50.13%     2.30%                          100.00%
                             11.71% 15.20% 18.90% 34.94% 23.68%                                20.07$
       Total                     854     204     291     561      38                            1,948
                             43.84% 10.47% 14.94% 28.80%      1.95%                          100.00%
                            100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%                          100.00%

The means are for all men who were linked to the 1880 census and who had known occupations at enlistment and in
1880 (i.e., not illegible or unclassifiable).     40
 Table 5: Wounds and Change in Occupational Class Probabilities in 1880 (Marginals)


                                                   < 30 yrs at end war            ≥ 30 yrs at end war
                                                   ∂Y                             ∂Y
                                                   ∂x
                                                            σ̂    p               ∂x
                                                                                           σ̂      p
           Variable: Severe Wound
              Farmer                              -0.089    0.023     0.000 -0.008 0.037             0.830
              Professional/proprietor              0.034    0.015     0.024 0.003 0.018              0.856
              Artisan                              0.021    0.015     0.178 -0.001 0.024             0.963
              Laborer                              0.035    0.021     0.104 0.006 0.033              0.861
           Variable: Other Wound
              Farmer                             -0.014     0.017     0.432 0.005          0.033     0.891
              Professional/proprietor            -0.019     0.013     0.138 -0.012         0.021     0.585
              Artisan                            -0.000     0.013     0.988 -0.009         0.022     0.674
              Laborer                             0.033     0.016     0.036 0.016          0.032     0.606
           Variable: On pension in 1880
              Farmer                               0.040    0.020     0.045 0.016          0.029     0.570
              Professional/proprietor              0.004    0.011     0.744 0.004          0.015     0.770
              Artisan                             -0.021    0.014     0.144 -0.046         0.025     0.071
              Laborer                             -0.022    0.017     0.182 0.024          0.028     0.368
           Variable: Logarithm father’s
           real estate wealth
              Farmer                               0.006    0.002     0.001 0.002          0.005     0.667
              Professional/proprietor              0.002    0.001     0.200 0.007          0.004     0.040
              Artisan                              0.000    0.001     0.788 -0.002         0.004     0.479
              Laborer                             -0.008    0.002     0.000 -0.007         0.004     0.126
           Variable: Logarithm father’s
           personal property wealth
              Farmer                               0.036    0.011     0.001 0.021          0.045     0.646
              Professional/proprietor              0.022    0.006     0.001 -0.027         0.015     0.084
              Artisan                             -0.021    0.008     0.005 0.040          0.024     0.091
              Laborer                             -0.037    0.010     0.000 -0.034         0.046     0.457

Marginals estimated from the multinomial logit model in Equation 1. The sample consists of 4,213 veterans less than
age 30 at the end of the war and 1,398 veterans age 30 or older at the end of the war. Standard errors are clustered
on the company. Additional control variables include the veteran’s age at the end of the war, his occupational class at
enlistment, enlistment year dummies, a dummy indicator for a city of 50,000 or more, and dummies indicating that
wealth information is unknown. Standard errors are clustered at the company level.



                                                     41
Table 6: Wounds and Change in Total Median 1870 Wealth Holdings (Quantile Regres-
sions)


                                                             < 30 yrs at end war           ≥ 30 yrs at end war
                                                              β       σ̂    p               β       σ̂      p
     Dependent variable: log(total wealth)
     With pre-war controls only
     Dummy=1 if
       severe wound                                        -0.203 0.183 0.268 -0.368 0.178 0.039
       other wound                                         -0.278 0.135 0.040 -0.222 0.166 0.183
     Plus control for pension in 1870
     Dummy=1 if
       severe wound                                        -0.190 0.181 0.292 -0.409 0.171 0.017
       other wound                                         -0.256 0.111 0.021 -0.278 0.165 0.092
     Plus control for farmer in 1870
     Dummy=1 if
       severe wound                                        -0.091 0.131 0.490 -0.462 0.129 0.000
       other wound                                         -0.121 0.125 0.334 -0.252 0.163 0.122
     Plus control for company injury death rate
     Dummy=1 if
       severe wound                                         0.029 0.199 0.885 -0.439 0.147 0.003
       other wound                                         -0.127 0.133 0.339 -0.193 0.159 0.226

Estimated from the median quantile regressions in Equation 2. The additional independent variables are age at the end of
the war, occupational class at enlistment, dummy variables for enlistment year, a dummy variable indicating if enlistment
was in a city of 50,000 or more, the logarithm of paternal real estate wealth, the logarithm of paternal personal property
wealth, and dummy indicators if paternal wealth information was missing. The sample consists of 3,731 veterans less than
age 30 at the end of the war and 1,345 veterans age 30 or older at the end of the war.




                                                    42
Table 7: Paternal Wounds and Change in Occupational Class Probability of Daughters’
Husbands and of Sons (Marginals), Father Less than Age 30 at the End of the War


                                                             Daughters’ Husbands                       Sons
                                                              ∂Y                               ∂Y
                                                              ∂x
                                                                      σ̂    p                  ∂x
                                                                                                         σ̂         p
      No Paternal Post-War SES Controls
      Severe wound
        Farmer                                              -0.084      0.032     0.008 -0.002 0.026 0.934
        Professional/Proprietor                              0.019      0.025     0.459 -0.015 0.023 0.533
        Artisan                                             -0.006      0.023     0.791 -0.008 0.022 0.719
        Laborer                                              0.072      0.024     0.003 0.025 0.025 0.327
      Other wound on
        Farmer                                              -0.007      0.022     0.751 0.010 0.019              0.614
        Professional/Proprietor                             -0.012      0.018     0.522 -0.014 0.018             0.432
        Artisan                                              0.021      0.015     0.173 0.010 0.015              0.501
        Laborer                                             -0.002      0.019     0.906 -0.006 0.018             0.750
      With Paternal Post-War SES Controls
      Severe wound
        Farmer                                              -0.077      0.030     0.009 0.010 0.024              0.697
        Professional/Proprietor                              0.012      0.025     0.628 -0.023 0.023             0.308
        Artisan                                             -0.007      0.023     0.758 -0.010 0.021             0.654
        Laborer                                              0.072      0.024     0.002 0.023 0.024              0.329
      Other wound
        Farmer                                              -0.004      0.021     0.832 0.014 0.018              0.435
        Professional/Proprietor                             -0.006      0.017     0.722 -0.009 0.017             0.612
        Artisan                                              0.016      0.015     0.278 0.007 0.014              0.638
        Laborer                                             -0.005      0.019     0.772 -0.012 0.018             0.486

Marginals are estimated from the multinomial logit model in Equation 3. The dependent variable is either the occupational
class of the daughters’ husbands or the sons. The samples consists of the 3,665 daughters who were married in the 1910
census and whose husbands had an occupation and 4,366 sons who were married in the 1910 census and had an occupation.
The standard errors are clustered on the family. The regressions control for birth year and paternal enlistment characteristics
(occupational class, enlistment year dummies, and a dummy if the city population size was 50,000 or more). The paternal
post-war ses controls consist of the logarithm of total paternal wealth in 1870, paternal occupational class in 1880, and the
number of siblings.




                                                      43
Table 8: Paternal Wounds and Change in Occupational Class Probabilities of Daughters’
Husbands and of Sons (Marginals), Father Greater than Age 30 at the End of the War


                                                             Daughters’ Husbands                       Sons
                                                              ∂Y                               ∂Y
                                                              ∂x
                                                                      σ̂    p                  ∂x
                                                                                                         σ̂         p
      No Paternal Post-War SES Controls
      Severe wound
        Farmer                                               0.014      0.059     0.817 -0.127 0.058 0.028
        Professional/Proprietor                             -0.032      0.052     0.535 -0.046 0.044 0.301
        Artisan                                              0.030      0.042     0.479 0.055 0.039 0.155
        Laborer                                             -0.011      0.049     0.816 0.118 0.048 0.015
      Other wound
        Farmer                                              -0.027      0.050     0.586 -0.049 0.044 0.269
        Professional/Proprietor                             -0.012      0.042     0.782 -0.040 0.033 0.226
        Artisan                                              0.010      0.038     0.791 0.021 0.033 0.514
        Laborer                                              0.029      0.044     0.510 0.068 0.038 0.075
      With Paternal Post-War SES Controls
      Severe wound
        Farmer                                               0.039      0.061     0.527 -0.094 0.053 0.074
        Professional/Proprietor                             -0.052      0.052     0.317 -0.047 0.043 0.277
        Artisan                                              0.032      0.041     0.447 0.034 0.036 0.344
        Laborer                                             -0.018      0.048     0.702 0.108 0.045 0.016
      Other wound
        Farmer                                              -0.008      0.049     0.873 0.036 0.043              0.406
        Professional/Proprietor                             -0.027      0.041     0.510 -0.031 0.040             0.430
        Artisan                                              0.012      0.039     0.749 0.019 0.034              0.582
        Laborer                                              0.022      0.044     0.611 -0.023 0.043             0.591

Marginals are estimated from the multinomial logit model in Equation 3. The dependent variable is either the occupational
class of the daughters’ husbands or the sons. The samples consists of the 761 daughters who were married in the 1910
census and whose husbands had an occupation and 1,019 sons who were married in the 1910 census and had an occupation.
The standard errors are clustered on the family. The regressions control for birth year and paternal enlistment characteristics
(occupational class, enlistment year dummies, and a dummy if the city population size was 50,000 or more). The paternal
post-war ses controls consist of the logarithm of total paternal wealth in 1870, paternal occupational class in 1880, and the
number of siblings.




                                                      44
                                     Table 9: Hazard Ratios of Mortality by Paternal Wound Status


                                                                        Daughters                                                Sons
                                                       eβ        σ̂     p > |z|   χ2         Pr >   χ2     eβ        σ̂     p > |z|        χ2         Pr > χ2
      Father < 30Y at end war
      No controls for 1910 occupation
        Severe wound                                  1.053    0.060      0.361                          1.095     0.062      0.112
        Other wound                                   0.942    0.040      0.157                          1.002     0.042      0.971
      Test of equality severe and other wound                                        3.32       0.069                                   2.07 0.150
      Test of proportional hazards assumption                                       15.70       0.868                                        31.98        0.101
      Stratifying on 1910 occupation
        Severe wound                                  1.048    0.059      0.400                          1.085     0.063      0.159
        Other wound                                   0.939    0.040      0.136                          1.004     0.042      0.925
      Test of equality severe and other wound                                        3.30       0.069                                         1.54        0.215




45
      Test of proportional hazards assumption                                       15.61       0.871                                        29.12        0.176
      Father ≥ 30Y at end war
      No controls for 1910 occupation
        Severe wound                                  1.311    0.144      0.014                          1.137     0.117      0.214
        Other wound                                   0.870    0.087      0.162                          1.044     0.085      0.598
      Test of equality severe and other wound                                        9.33       0.002                                         0.53        0.467
      Test of proportional hazards assumption                                       26.72       0.268                                        18.85        0.710
      Stratifying on 1910 occupation
        Severe wound                                  1.322    0.147      0.012                          1.130     0.116      0.234
        Other wound                                   0.873    0.085      0.164                          1.043     0.085      0.609
      Test of equality severe and other wound                                       10.56       0.001                                         0.48        0.491
      Test of proportional hazards assumption                                       26.09       0.297                                        16.68        0.825

     Estimated from the Cox proportional hazard model in Equation 4. The dependent variables is the number of years lived after age 45. Standard
     errors are clustered on the family. All specifications control for birth year, paternal enlistment characteristics (occupational class, enlistment
     year dummies, a dummmy indicator if city population was 50,000 or more), paternal post-war characteristics (occupational class in 1880, the
     logarithm of total wealth in 1870), the number of siblings, and husband’s occupational class in 1910. The samples consists of 3,665 daughters
     and 3,809 sons of fathers who were less than age 30 at the end of the war and 761 daughters and 895 sons of fathers who were age 30 or older at
     the end of the war. The proportional hazards assumption is tested on the basis of the Schoenfeld residual using a χ 2 (23) test.
Table 10: Hazard Ratios of Mortality by Paternal Wound and ex-POW Status and by Age
at End of War


                                                       Daughters                      Sons
           Wounds
           Father < 22 at end war
             Severe wound                       1.003 0.111 0.980 1.036 0.123 0.766
             Other wound                        1.034 0.088 0.694 1.084 0.077 0.256
           Father age 22-29 at end war
             Severe wound                       1.062 0.070 0.363 1.081 0.072 0.381
             Other wound                        0.905 0.045 0.045 0.966 0.050 0.511
           Father ≥ 30 at end war
             Other wound                        1.322 0.147 0.012 1.130 0.116 0.234
             Severe wound                       0.873 0.085 0.164 1.043 0.085 0.609
           Ex-POW Status
           Father < 22 at end war
             Severe POW hardship                1.057 0.107 0.584 1.454 0.142 0.000
             Less severe POW hardship           0.956 0.092 0.641 1.199 0.098 0.026
           Father age 22-29 at end war
             Severe POW hardship                1.057 0.107 0.584 0.130 0.074 0.062
             Less severe POW hardship           0.956 0.092 0.641 1.025 0.065 0.696
           Father ≥ 30 at end war
             Severe POW hardship                1.016 0.171 0.926 1.107 0.173 0.515
             Less severe POW hardship           1.114 0.193 0.535 1.176 0.129 0.141

The regressions for wounds are estimated using the Cox proportional hazards model in Equation 4. The regressions
for POW hardship are estimated using a Cox proportional hazards model and the data in Costa et al. (2018). Both
regressions examine mortality after age 45. The samples are all children who were married in the 1910 census, for
whom we have own or spouse’s occupation, and who survived to age 45.




                                                  46
                        Figure 1: Impact of Wounds on Probability of Wartime Death by Age
                 .25
       Pr(Died in the War)
         .15     .1     .2




                             18   20   22   24   26   28 30 32 34         36     38     40           44
                                                      Age Group in 1865

                                                  Not wounded             Wounded



Confidence intervals indicated by the vertical lines. Estimated from the Union Army sample of 39,341 men
using a probit regression in which the dependent variables is a dummy equal to 1 if the soldier died in the war
and the independent variables are dummy variable indicating if the soldier was wounded, dummy variables
for 2 year age groups (except for the first and last age groups), the interaction between the wounded dummy
and the age dummies, and controls for enlistment characteristics (occupational class and city size).




                                                          47
Table 11: Linkage Rates to Census and Death Information for Veterans (Survived to 1900)
and their Children Born After 1866


                                                 Veterans             Children
                                                 Living in  Not Known      Alive, Year
                                                Census Year to be Dead of Death Known
            Death records                              99.9        73.7            100.0
            Census (born before census)
            1850                                         75.0
            1860                                         78.2
            1870                                         83.6            78.0                   79.7
            1880                                         95.2            88.9                   93.0
            1900                                         95.6            78.8                   89.4
            1910                                         96.0            73.4                   88.0
            1920                                         92.4            70.9                   88.0
            1930                                         94.5            68.6                   88.3
            1940                                         62.5            60.3                   83.2

Both children known to be alive and children with missing death dates are included in ”Not Known to be Dead.”
Children ”Not Known to be Dead” were searched for in all censuses. The higher linkage rates for those known to be
alive suggest that many children with missing death dates were probably dead.




                                                  48
Table 12: Impact of Wounds on Probability of Having Any Children and on Number of
Children, Marginal Effects, Not Married Before the War


                                                    Any Children           Number of Children
                                               ∂y                           ∂y
                                               ∂x
                                                         σ̂      p          ∂x
                                                                                   σ̂      p
              Dummy=1 if
                wounded               -0.019 0.010 0.066 -0.251 0.101 0.012
                discharged disability -0.001 0.011 0.944 -0.214 0.111 0.054
                on the pension rolls   0.025 0.011 0.020 0.048 0.115 0.678

Marriages known to have occurred during or prior to the war are excluded, yielding 6,172 observations for everyone
and 5,138 observatons where veterans had children. The probability of having a child was 0.883. Those with children
had a mean number of 5 children. Additional control variables were age at the end of the war, indicator variables
for father’s US birth and Irish birth, occupational class at enlistment, enlistment year dummies, and a dummy for
enlistment in a city of over 50,000. Standard errors are clustered at the company level.




                                                     49
                             Table 13: Wounds and Father-In-Law’s Wealth, Post-War First Marriages


                     Dependent Variable:         Father-In-Law’s Personal Property Wealth in 1860
                                                     25th Quantile            50th Quantile                    75th Quantile
                                                   β        σ̂     p        β       σ̂       p             β         σ̂      p
                     Specification 1
                     Dummy=1 if
                       wounded                   -0.173    0.108    0.109    -0.223   0.075    0.003    -0.194     0.072   0.007
                       discharged disability      0.009    0.126    0.942     0.000   0.089    1.000     0.061     0.084   0.471




50
                     Specification 3
                     Dummy=1 if
                       wounded                   -0.118    0.105    0.261    -0.140   0.081    0.084    -0.186     0.078   0.018
                       discharged disability      0.053    0.121    0.664     0.068   0.094    0.471     0.046     0.091   0.617
                       on pension in 1870        -0.288    0.166    0.084    -0.243   0.128    0.058    -0.175     0.125   0.162

     Marriages known to have occurred during or prior to the war are excluded. The sample is restricted to those with information on father-in-
     law’s wealth yielding 1,130 observations. Additional control variables in all three specifications were enlistment year dummies, dummies for
     occupational class at enlistment, age at the end of the war, and a dummy for enlistment in a city of 50,000 or more.
