                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                              IQ, EXPECTATIONS, AND CHOICE

                                       Francesco D’Acunto
                                          Daniel Hoang
                                         Maritta Paloviita
                                         Michael Weber

                                       Working Paper 25496
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25496


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2019


This research was conducted with restricted access to data from the Finnish Defence Forces and
Statistics Finland. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Bank of Finland, Finnish Defence Forces, or Statistics Finland. We thank
the project coordinator at Statistics Finland, Valtteri Valkonen, for his help with the data and very
insightful comments. We also thank Rudi Bachmann, Richard Blundell, Markus Brunnermeier,
Doug Diamond, Andreas Fuster, Mark Gertler, Simon Gilchrist, Erik Hurst, Yueran Ma, Ricardo
Perez-Truglia, Monika Piazzesi, Raghu Rajan, Chris Roth, Kathrin Schlafmann, Andrei Shleifer,
Giorgio Topa, Gianluca Violante, Amir Yaron, Basit Zafar, and seminar participants at Aalto
University, the Bank of Finland, CES-ifo Summer Institute: Expectation Formation, CES-ifo
Workshop on Subjective Expectations and Probabilities in Economics, CEBRA Annual Meeting,
CEPR Household Finance Conference, Symposium on Economics and Institutions, the European
Central Bank, the EFA, the EABCN Asset Pricing and Macro Conference, European Midwest
Micro/Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Board, the ifo Institute, and the University of Chicago
for valuable comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Weber also gratefully acknowledges financial support from the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business, the Fama Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business, and the Fama-Miller Center.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Francesco D’Acunto, Daniel Hoang, Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
IQ, Expectations, and Choice
Francesco D’Acunto, Daniel Hoang, Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 25496
January 2019
JEL No. D12,D84,D91,E21,E31,E52,E65,E7

                                          ABSTRACT

Forecast errors for inflation decline monotonically with both verbal and quantitative IQ in a large
and representative male population. Within individuals, inflation expectations and perceptions are
autocorrelated only for men above the median by IQ (high-IQ men). High-IQ men's forecast
revisions are consistent with the diagnostic-expectations framework, whereas anything goes for
low-IQ men. Education levels, income, socioeconomic status, or financial constraints do not
explain these results. Using ad-hoc tasks in a controlled environment, we investigate the channels
behind these results. Low-IQ individuals' knowledge of the concept of inflation is low; they
associate inflation with concrete goods and services instead of abstract economic concepts, and
are less capable of forecasting mean-reverting processes. Differences in expectations formation
by IQ feed into choice—only high-IQ men plan to spend more when expecting higher inflation as
the consumer Euler equation prescribes. Our results have implications for heterogeneous-beliefs
models of consumption, saving, and investment.

Francesco D’Acunto                               Maritta Paloviita
Boston College                                   Bank of Finland
Carroll School of Management                     PO Box 160
dacuntof@bc.edu                                  00101 Helsinki
                                                 Finland
Daniel Hoang                                     maritta.paloviita@bof.fi
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Kaiserstr. 12                                    Michael Weber
76128 Karlsruhe                                  Booth School of Business
Germany                                          University of Chicago
daniel.hoang@kit.edu                             5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                 Chicago, IL 60637
                                                 and NBER
                                                 michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
      Theoretically, deviations from the paradigm of rational choice have a long history
in economics (Simon (1955)). Empirically, subjective expectations display large cross-
sectional variation and deviate from the rational benchmark (Manski (2004); Coibion
et al. (2018)). And, yet, after the rational-expectations revolution, most macroeconomists
lost interest in understanding how individuals form expectations under the conviction
that the standard model implies the expectations of the representative agent directly.
But because subjective expectations are the ultimate drivers of individual saving and
consumption choices at the micro level, and hence of aggregate outcomes (Gennaioli and
Shleifer (2018)), macroeconomists have recently moved to understand how agents form,
update, and act upon their own subjective economic expectations.1
      Forming expectations and making economic decisions require the use of cognitive
resources—cognition might affect individuals’ ability to gather information about
economic variables, the ability to solve resource-allocation problems over time, and the
ability to grasp basic economic reasoning and intuition. Cognitive abilities are therefore
a natural candidate to help explain subjective economic expectations and choice (Falk,
Becker, Dohmen, Enke, Huffman, and Sunde (2018)).
      Assessing how cognitive abilities shape consumers’ economic expectations and choices
faces a major empirical challenge. The econometrician needs to jointly measure the
cognitive abilities, macroeconomic and individual subjective expectations, and the
economic choices of a representative population.              Most existing data sources that
include proxies for cognitive abilities, such as the Health and Retirement Study (HRS)
that produced important microeconomic research on the beliefs and decision-making of
the elderly (e.g., see Manski (2018)), are not viable in this case. They only survey
elderly populations, they are run every two years, which makes studying the process
of updating expectations over time difficult, and they only include questions about
individual expectations such as retirement age and longevity. Observing macroeconomic
expectations is crucial to understanding whether any effects of limited cognition might
  1
    See also Landier, Ma, and Thesmar (2018), Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2018), Gennaioli, Ma,
and Shleifer (2018), Armantier, Bruine de Bruin, Topa, Klaauw, and Zafar (2015), Crump, Eusepi,
Tambalotti, and Topa (2018), Bachmann, Berg, and Sims (2015), Glaeser and Nathanson (2017), Fuster,
Perez-Truglia, Wiederholt, and Zafar (2018), Malmendier and Nagel (2016), Roth and Wohlfart (2018),
D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2019), Das, Kuhnen, and Nagel (2017), D’Acunto, Malmendier, Ospina,
and Weber (2019), D’Acunto, Malmendier, and Weber (2019), Fuster, Kaplan, and Zafar (2018), Andre,
Pizzinelli, Roth, and Wohlfart (2019), Vellekoop and Wiederholt (2017), and Ben-David, Fermand,
Kuhnen, and Li (2018).



                                                 1
matter for aggregate outcomes and for the effectiveness of policies that operate through
managing such expectations.       Moreover, because the realizations of macroeconomic
variables are observable and common to all consumers, they allow for studying the
accuracy of expectations by comparing forecasts with subsequent realizations.
    To overcome this empirical hurdle, we match—for the first time, to the best of our
knowledge—individual-level administrative data on cognitive-ability tests administered
to the quasi-universe of Finnish men, with survey-based information on macroeconomic
forecasts, as well as on the consumption, saving, and borrowing plans of a representative
sample of this population.
    We use these unique data to first assess the extent to which cognitive abilities
help explain the cross-sectional variation in subjective macroeconomic expectations.
Because our data include a full-panel component that elicits numerical expectations
every six months, we also assess how cognitive abilities relate to the process of updating
macroeconomic expectations within individuals.          Moreover, we study how agents’
economic and financial plans react to their expectations based on cognitive abilities. To
understand the possible channels that might explain the differences in expectations and
choice by cognitive abilities, we recruited a large US population and elicit their cognitive
abilities and have them perform a set of tasks in a controlled environment, as we discuss
in detail below.
    The majority of our analysis focuses on inflation expectations, because in most
macroeconomic models, inflation expectations drive the consumption, saving, and
borrowing decisions of individuals, workers’ wage bargaining with firms, and managers’
price-setting decisions.   Ultimately, inflation expectations determine the effectiveness
of fiscal and monetary policy (Bernanke (2007)).         Inflation is also one of the few
macroeconomic variables consumers recognize as important and relevant to their daily-life
decision-making (Di Tella, MacCulloch, and Oswald (2001)).
    Figure 1 plots the average absolute forecast error for inflation across bins by IQ-test
scores. Forecast error is the difference between an individual’s numerical forecast of
12-month-ahead inflation and actual inflation measured after 12 months. The average
absolute forecast error for individuals with the lowest cognitive abilities (normalized score
of 1) is 4.3 percentage points. The absolute forecast errors decrease monotonically with
IQ. The difference in absolute forecast errors between men with median cognitive abilities
and men with the highest cognitive abilities is 0.6 percentage points, which is 30% of the

                                             2
       Figure 1: Mean Absolute Forecast Error for 12-Month-Ahead Inflation by IQ




                                    5
                       Mean Absolute Forecast Error
                            3       2      4




                                                      1   2   3   4        5        6   7   8    9
                                                                      Normalized IQ


 This figure plots the average absolute forecast error for inflation (in percentage points) across IQ levels. Forecast error
 is the difference between the numerical forecast for 12-month-ahead inflation and ex-post realized inflation. Vertical
 lines represent 95% confidence intervals around the estimated mean for each bin. We use the confidential micro data
 underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to measure inflation expectations. Statistics
 Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the
 Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. The sample period is from January 2001 to March
 2015.



forecast error of the highest-IQ individuals. Comparing 95% confidence intervals across
IQ levels, we can statistically and economically reject the null hypothesis of identical
forecast error across most adjacent IQ levels. Interestingly, the average absolute forecast
errors are large across the whole IQ distribution relative to the average realized inflation
rate of 1.66% during our sample period and the official inflation target of the European
Central Bank (ECB) of close to, but below, 2%. Even consumers with the highest levels
of IQ form inaccurate expectations about macroeconomic variables, on average.
     The monotonic pattern by IQ is similar when we consider proxies for the uncertainty
of respondents’ inflation expectations, such as their tendency to report round numbers
or implausible values (see, e.g., Manski and Molinari (2010); De Bruin et al. (2011);
and Binder (2017)). The raw-data results do not change if we absorb time-varying
economy-wide shocks at the monthly level, as well as a rich set of demographics that
include age, income, education levels, socio-economic status, marital status, employment
status, number of children, and rural versus urban residence.                                   These demographics
represent dimensions that earlier research has related to macroeconomic expectations,



                                                                        3
as well as potential determinants of households’ consumption baskets that shape the
inflation expectations of Americans (D’Acunto, Malmendier, Ospina, and Weber (2019)).
Consistent with earlier research, we find these observables are important determinants of
expectations and choice, but they barely help explain the relationship between IQ and
expectations.
       The field data are not comprehensive enough to delve into the channels that might
explain these cross-sectional differences in inflation expectations by IQ. We thus fielded
a survey instrument on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) to administer ad-hoc tests
for a set of non-mutually-exclusive potential channels.2 This controlled environment is
also important because it allows us to recruit both men and women from a different
population than Finns, which helps assess whether the facts we document are likely to
generalize across genders and across space.
       Several differences emerge in the ways in which individuals approach the problem of
forming inflation expectations based on their cognitive abilities. First, we find that low-IQ
individuals have lower knowledge of the concept of inflation, based on their answers
to questions about the implications of inflation. Moreover, low-IQ individuals think
about inflation differently than others—they think about the prices of concrete goods
and services they experience in their daily lives, such as gas or purchases on Amazon.
By contrast, high-IQ individuals are more likely to associate inflation with abstract and
general economic concepts such as the overall price level, wages, and savings.
       Beyond these differences in the knowledge and conceptualization of inflation, we find
low-IQ individuals make larger errors when forecasting generic mean-reverting processes,
especially for processes that have lower volatility and hence are easier to forecast (Landier
et al. (2018)). This result likely reflects a lower ability to think in probabilistic terms by
low-IQ individuals (McDowell and Jacobs (2017)), irrespective of their knowledge and
understanding of economic concepts.
       The last channel we consider is respondents’ ability to map news about inflation
into optimal economic decisions in scenario analyses. We find that low-IQ individuals
have a lower ability to propose meaningful choices in these scenarios, whereas high-IQ
individuals are more likely to choose the options that would arise in a standard dynamic
  2
      We thank Andrei Shleifer for inspiring this analysis.




                                                      4
macro models, such as those the consumer Euler equation prescribes.3
       After having assessed how and why cognitive abilities might help explain the
cross-sectional differences in consumers’ inflation expectations, we move on to study the
formation and updating of inflation expectations within individuals by exploiting the panel
component of our Finnish field data. Because realized inflation is highly persistent, under
rational expectations, we would expect a positive correlation between a consumer’s recent
inflation forecast and her current inflation forecast, on average (Landier et al. (2018)).
Whereas we do detect such positive correlation for high-IQ men, we fail to detect any
correlation for low-IQ men. Moreover, past expectations of future inflation should be
correlated with current perceptions of realized inflation if no major news about inflation
occurred between the two interview periods. We find an economically and statistically
significant association between past expectations and current perceptions of inflation for
high-IQ men that is five times larger than the association for low-IQ men. The association
for high-IQ men is higher across interview periods with stable inflation, whereas it drops
across periods of volatile inflation, during which news about inflation intervened across
subsequent interviews. Similar to the other tests, we do not detect any variation in the
(low) consistency of inflation expectations for low-IQ men.
       Despite the economic and statistical significance of the correlations for high-IQ men,
the size of the estimated coefficients is significantly lower than 1, even at times of stable
inflation, which suggests the rational-expectations framework does not accurately describe
the expectations of high-IQ men either. Motivated by this observation, we test whether
individuals’ tendency to overreact or underreact to macroeconomic news might help
describe the expectations-formation process of high-IQ men. To do so, we estimate the
relationship between forecast errors and forecast revisions within individuals (see Coibion
and Gorodnichenko (2012), Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), Bordalo, Gennaioli, Ma,
and Shleifer (2018)). Consistent with the diagnostic-expectations framework (Bordalo,
Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2018)), we do find evidence that high-IQ men overreact
to macroeconomic news when forming inflation forecasts. The evidence for low-IQ men
is mixed—they overreact to a lesser extent than high-IQ men, and over-reaction is not
statistically significant within individuals.
   3
    Scenario analyses are important because they completely rule out the possibility that MTurk
respondents could find answers online during the limited time they had available for the survey. Although
implausible given the response time, we cannot completely rule out this possibility for questions about
the knowledge of the concept of inflation.


                                                   5
       Overall, we interpret our evidence as suggesting that high-IQ men overreact to
news when forming macroeconomic expectations but update their forecasts in the
correct direction. For low-IQ men, instead, we do not find unambiguous evidence in
support of any existing framework of expectations-formation. Low-IQ men’s expectations
are not adaptive, they are not rational, and they are barely consistent with the
diagnostic-expectations framework. With low-IQ men—who in our sample represent
50% of the representative population we study—anything goes in terms of expectations
formation and updating over time.
       In the last part of the paper, we test whether the heterogeneity of individual
expectations by cognitive abilities matters for economic decision-making. As a first step,
we assess whether IQ levels relate to Finns’ understanding of intertemporal substitution.
Specifically, we test whether individuals adjust their durable consumption plans to their
inflation expectations, as the consumer Euler equation prescribes, after keeping constant
income expectations and other macroeconomic expectations (Bachmann, Berg, and Sims
(2015)). The consumer Euler equation is at the core of all dynamic macro models. Several
central banks relied on intertemporal substitution when implementing policies to raise
inflation expectations during the Great Recession in the hope of stimulating consumption.4
       Because the numerical inflation expectations of low-IQ men are inaccurate and such
individuals might be aware of their inability to forecast inflation precisely, in principle,
they might actively decide not to employ their numerical inflation expectations when
forming spending plans. We thus follow D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2019) and create
a qualitative measure of inflation expectations—a dummy variable that equals 1 when
a household expects inflation to increase over the following 12 months relative to the
previous 12 months. D’Acunto et al. (2019) show that this qualitative measure tracks
closely ex-post inflation rates even for individuals with low levels of sophistication. If
low-IQ individuals were aware of their biases and understood intertemporal substitution,
we would expect that at least their accurate qualitative inflation expectations would be
associated with their purchasing plans.
       Within high-IQ men, respondents who think inflation will increase going forward are
   4
     Yellen (2016) is a good example: “With nominal short-term interest rates at or close to their effective
lower bound in many countries, the broader question of how expectations are formed has taken on
heightened importance. Under such circumstances, many central banks have sought additional ways to
stimulate their economies, including adopting policies that are directly aimed at influencing expectations
of future interest rates and inflation.”



                                                     6
about 4% more likely to state it is a good time to purchase large-ticket items relative
to other high-IQ men. Instead, when we consider the subsample of low-IQ men, we
detect a small, negative, and statistically insignificant association between qualitative
inflation expectations and willingness to spend. These results hold conditional on the
rich set of demographics we discussed above and suggest that even if low-IQ men held
plausible inflation expectations—for instance, because policymakers successfully anchored
expectations or provided information about professional forecasts—low-IQ men might still
not behave in line with the predictions of standard macroeconomic models.
    We also consider respondents’ saving and borrowing motives, even if we can only
observe these dimensions for a restricted portion of our sample. We find high-IQ and
low-IQ men do not differ based on their propensity to save part of their monthly income—if
anything, high-IQ men are less likely to save in general. High-IQ men, though, are more
likely to save for retirement relative to saving for current purposes. High-IQ men might
thus understand the trade-off between current consumption and future consumption better
than low-IQ men (Falk et al. (2018)). Moreover, high-IQ men are as likely as low-IQ men
to borrow to finance current consumption, but high-IQ men are more likely to borrow to
finance current or future education-related costs. Overall, we interpret these results as
consistent with high-IQ men being more forward-looking than low-IQ men.
    When assessing the channels that might explain the differences in mapping inflation
expectations to economic choice, one might think low-IQ men are more likely to be
financially constrained than high-IQ men, which would explain the insensitivity of their
consumption plans to changes in real interest rates (see Zeldes (1989)). Note that income
and IQ have a correlation of 0.15 only in our sample, and conditioning on income does
not affect any of our results. We find that even low-IQ individuals in the top quarter
of the population by income are insensitive to their inflation expectations when forming
spending plans, which casts doubt on the ability of this channel to explain our results.
    Another possibility is that expecting higher economic growth and hence higher
household income might deliver a spurious positive relationship between the propensity
to spend and inflation expectations.      Because we can observe respondents’ income
expectations elicited at the same time as their inflation expectations, we can test for
this channel directly in the data and we rule it out.
    Demographic-based channels do not seem able to explain our results in full. We
thus move on to propose field-data proxies for the non-mutually exclusive channels in the

                                            7
formation and updating of expectations we tested on MTurk. First, low-IQ men might be
less informed about economic fundamentals like inflation than high-IQ men. The cognitive
costs of gathering information about macroeconomic variables might be high for low-IQ
men, who might thus behave rationally by deciding to not gather such information. We
find that even the subset of low-IQ men whose perceptions about recent inflation rates is
correct do not adjust their spending plans in response to their inflation expectations.
      Because low-IQ men have more difficulty thinking in probabilistic terms and fore-
casting in general, even well-informed low-IQ men might have miscalibrated expectations
about macroeconomic variables, which might in turn explain their non-reaction to inflation
expectations when forming spending plans. In the data, however, we find that even low-IQ
men who have accurate inflation expectations do not react to such expectations when
forming consumption plans.
      Finally, we consider consumers’ inability to map future states of the world into
optimal economic choice due to limited cognition, which Ilut and Valchev (2017) study
theoretically. Under this framework, even low-IQ agents who have the right information
about current inflation and are able to forecast future states of the world accurately might
not understand basic economic concepts such as intertemporal substitution and hence not
act accordingly.5
      Although we do not have conclusive evidence in favor of this channel, we find the
differences between high-IQ and low-IQ men drop substantially and almost disappear
within the subsample of respondents who have an economics or business degree. In this
subsample, the correlation between IQ and forecast errors almost disappears. Moreover, in
this subsample even low-IQ individuals who expect higher inflation increase their readiness
to spend as predicted by the consumer Euler equation.
      We would like to stress the potential relevance of this channel analysis for
policymaking.       Because information about inflation has little effect in reducing the
differences in economic plans and choice across individuals by cognitive ability, policies
relying on managing households’ expectations directly through communicating inflation
targets might be less effective than predicted by the models policy institutions use.
Even providing information about experts’ forecasts of future macroeconomic variables
might be ineffective in influencing low-IQ men’s economic choices, because low-IQ men
  5
    Note this channel could also explain the excess sensitivity of consumption to predictable income
changes (see, e.g., Parker et al. (2013)).


                                                 8
who forecast accurately are still unable to map this information into optimal economic
behavior. Ultimately, these policies based on communicating inflation targets might even
increase wealth inequality through a redistribution from low-IQ individuals, who barely
react and hence do not take advantage of the monetary incentives the policies create, to
high-IQ individuals (D’Acunto et al. (2018)). Thus, providing information about future
macroeconomic variables to manage consumers’ expectations might not be enough to
change consumers’ economic plans. Instead, explaining why such information matters
for choice and how consumers should change their consumption, saving, or investment
decisions.
       Related Literature. Our findings stress the importance of cognitive abilities in
shaping individual economic decision-making. Papers that document the role of IQ in
financial decision-making are Grinblatt, Keloharju, and Linnainmaa (2011), who study the
effect on stock market participation, Grinblatt, Keloharju, and Linnainmaa (2012), who
study the effect on trading behavior, and Grinblatt, Ikäheimo, Keloharju, and Knüpfer
(2016), who study mutual fund choice. Agarwal and Mazumder (2013) relate cognitive
abilities to suboptimal use of credit cards and home-equity loan applications. Aghion,
Akcigit, Hyytinen, and Toivanen (2017) use micro-level data on visuospatial IQ to study
the effects of cognitive abilities, education, and parental income on inventiveness. Dal Bo,
Finan, Folke, Persson, and Rickne (2017) relate IQ to the likelihood individuals enter
political careers in Sweden. In a broad, comprehensive, and representative study of global
preferences, Falk et al. (2018) document the relationship between survey respondents’
self-reported cognitive abilities and their economic preferences. More broadly, a large
literature has studied the role of cognition as well as the deterioration of cognitive
abilities with aging on a several features of economic preferences and beliefs about personal
outcomes.6 Our paper contributes to this strand of literature by linking cognitive abilities
to macroeconomic expectations and subsequent choices, which allows the measurement of
forecast errors based on objective and common realization to all consumers. Moreover, we
investigate how cognitive abilities relate to consumers’ view of the economy and the ways
in which they conceptualize economic concepts. The large variation by cognitive abilities
   6
    For instance, see Frederick (2005); Heckman et al. (2006); Chabris et al. (2008); Hanushek and
Woessmann (2008); Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix, and Laibson (2009); Oechssler et al. (2009); Borghans
et al. (2009); Burks et al. (2009); Banks et al. (2010); Dohmen et al. (2010); McArdle et al. (2011);
Benjamin et al. (2012); Benjamin et al. (2013); Agarwal and Mazumder (2013); Choi et al. (2014); Kautz
et al. (2014); Gerardi et al. (2013).



                                                  9
we uncover speaks to the relevance of considering subjective models of the macroeconomy
both under the research and policy perspectives (Andre et al. (2019)).
      In our paper, we use a test-based measure of cognitive abilities because such a measure
is available for a large population of men in a developed country through administrative
sources. We do not claim that the measure we use is the best possible measure of cognitive
abilities, or that producing one single measure of cognitive abilities is the best way to assess
individuals’ intelligence and other potentially related traits.7 In the ideal test, we would
have produced a set of measures for several traits related to intelligence and cognition
by contacting directly the population of interest and using elicitation methods aligned
with the most recent state of the art in this area. Unfortunately, producing these types
of measures might be feasible for a limited population under study but not for a large,
representative population, whose analysis is the main contribution of our paper.
      We focus our study on how individuals form inflation expectations and whether they
adjust their consumption, savings, and borrowing plans to their inflation expectations.
Other recent contributions studying the formation and updating of expectations and
the relationship with economic behavior are Zafar (2011), who studies the formation
of expectations by college students, Malmendier and Nagel (2016) and Kuchler and
Zafar (2018), who study the effect of personal experiences on expectations about
aggregate outcomes, Fuster, Perez-Truglia, Wiederholt, and Zafar (2018), who study how
agents acquire and process information for national home price expectations, Coibion,
Gorodnichenko, and Kumar (2018), who study how firms form inflation expectations,
Bachmann et al. (2015), who are the first to study the consumer Euler equation at the
micro level, Crump et al. (2018), who study the consumer Euler equation using the
microdata from the novel Survey of Consumer Expectations from the New York Fed,
D’Acunto et al. (2019) and D’Acunto et al. (2018), who use preannounced consumption
tax changes to causally relate inflation expectations to consumption plans, D’Acunto et al.
(2019) and Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia (2017), who show individuals extrapolate
from the realized inflation experienced in their shopping bundle to overall inflation
expectations, Rozsypal and Schlafmann (2017), who document an overpersistence bias
in income expectations and study how it relates to consumption plans, and Coibion et al.
(2019), who study how different forms of monetary-policy communications causally change
  7
    For detailed summaries and for the evolution of this long-standing debate over time, see Weinberg
(1989) and Stanovich (2009), among others.


                                                 10
individuals’ inflation expectations. These papers do not focus on the heterogeneity in how
agents form expectations by cognitive abilities.



I         Data
Our analysis uses three micro datasets that include individual-level information on
macroeconomic expectations, consumption and borrowing plans, and cognitive abilities,
as well as administrative information on household-level income.


A.         Data on Cognitive Abilities
Finland has general conscription for men, which means all Finnish men between the ages
of 18 and 60 are liable for military or non-military service. The share of men who do
non-military service is only about 3% of all men who start military service.8 Within the
first weeks of the mandatory military service, Finnish men typically around the age of
19-20 have to participate in a series of tests. The Finnish Defence Forces (FDF) administer
these tests and use the results to select candidates for possible officer training. Because
ranking well in the IQ test provides a set of advantages in terms of quality of training
and access to elite social networks, men have an incentive to perform as well as possible
on the test (Grinblatt et al. (2011)).
         The cognitive-ability test consists of 120 questions that focus on three areas –
visuospatial, mathematical, and verbal. The FDF aggregates those scores into a composite
measure of cognitive abilities, which we label collectively as IQ. The FDF standardizes
IQ to follow a stanine distribution. Stanine (STAndard NINE) is a method of scaling
test scores on a 9-point standard scale with a mean of 5 and a standard deviation of 2,
approximating a normal distribution. The respondents with the lowest 4% of test scores
are at least 1.75 standard deviations from the mean and are assigned a standardized IQ
score of 1, and the 4% with the highest test scores are assigned a standardized IQ score
of 9. Hence, most of the mass of our observations is around the median bin, whereas the
extreme bins account for only a small part of the sample. We have test results for all
participants from 1982 until 2001.
         Finland is a homogeneous country in terms of cultural background and opportunities.
    8
        Please see https://puolustusvoimat.fi/en/conscription for these and additional details.



                                                      11
Access to education, including college education, is virtually for free. The country is also
racially homogeneous (Grinblatt et al. (2011)). These features make the Finnish setting
a desirable laboratory because our measures of IQ are unlikely to proxy for differences
in cultural or environmental factors, which individuals could manipulate, but are more
likely to reflect differences in innate abilities across individuals.


B.      Data on Expectations, Spending, and Borrowing Plans
Our main source of information on individual-level macroeconomic expectations and
consumption and borrowing propensities are the confidential micro data underlying the
Consumer Survey of Statistics Finland. Statistics Finland conducts the survey on behalf of
the Directorate General for Economic and Financial Affairs of the European Commission
as part of the European Commission’s harmonized consumer survey program.9 Every
month, it asks a representative repeated cross section of approximately 1,500 Finns
questions about general and personal economic conditions, inflation expectations, and
willingness to spend on consumption goods. Statistics Finland also collects additional
information through supplementary questions on plans to save and borrow.
       We obtained access to the micro data underlying the survey for the period starting in
March 1995 and ending in March 2015. Until December 1999, Statistics Finland ran the
survey using rotating panels. In the rotating panels, the same person within a household
answered the survey three times at six-month intervals, and each month one-third of
the sample was replaced. Since January 2001, the survey has employed random samples
that change completely from month to month.10 The samples are drawn from the total
population of 4.4 million individuals and 2.6 million households residing in Finland. The
survey is run through phone interviews. In advance of the phone interview, Statistics
Finland notifies all target individuals with a letter that contains information about the
contents and logistics of the survey. Our analysis employs the purely cross-sectional data
starting in 2001, with the exception of section IV, in which we exploit the panel dimension
to study variation in expectations within individual over time.
       We use the answers to the following two questions in the survey to construct the
variables capturing spending plans and inflation expectations in our baseline analysis:
   9
     D’Acunto et al. (2019) use the micro data for several European countries and discuss in detail the
survey design and data properties.
  10
     The data for 2000 are missing, unfortunately.


                                                  12
Question 10 In view of the general economic situation in Finland, do you think that
                now it is the right moment for people to buy durable goods such as
                furniture, home appliances, cars, etc.?


Respondents can answer, “It’s neither a good nor a bad time,” “No, it’s a bad time,” or
“Yes, it’s a good time.”



Question 7 By what percentage do you think consumer prices will change over the
               next 12 months?


Respondents can answer numbers between -100 and 100 with one decimal point.
     In addition, we use qualitative questions regarding expectations about general
macroeconomic variables, personal income and unemployment, and a rich set of
socio-demographics from Statistics Finland, which include gender, age, marital status,
household size, and education levels.


C.     Data on Income from Tax Returns
We also have access to administrative income and debt data for all Finnish full-time
residents at the end of each calendar year through Statistics Finland.           The data
contain information on individuals’ labor and business incomes, received and paid income
transfers, as well as overall household taxable assets and liabilities. The information is
collected from underlying sources across various agencies (Tax Administration, National
Institute for Health and Welfare, Statistics Finland, Kela), administrative registers, and
statistical repositories.


D.     Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 contains the descriptive statistics for the main variables in our analysis. Mean
inflation expectations during our cross-sectional sample are 2.5% with large cross-sectional
dispersion of 3.76%. Mean household income is EUR 22,500 and the average age is 30.7
years. 5.8% are unemployed in our sample, 60% are single, and 77.6% have children. In


                                            13
our running sample, 35.6% of men live in urban areas, with 27.8% living in Helsinki, and
34% have a college degree.
       On average, 51% of respondents say it is a good time to buy durables, 20% say it
is a bad time, and the others are indifferent. On average, 72% of men save in general
and 29.5% save for retirement. Fifteen percent of Finns borrow money for education and
31.3% borrow for consumption.
       Table 2 reports average inflation expectations and standard deviations within each
stanine of the distribution by IQ. Both the mean and the cross-sectional dispersion in
inflation expectations are higher for low-IQ men than for high-IQ men and decrease
monotonically in IQ. Note the number of observations is not symmetric around bin 5,
but we observe systematically lower mass in the left tail of the distribution than in the
right tail. In some of our analyses, we split our sample between groups 1 to 5 (low-IQ
mean) and groups 6-9 (high-IQ men) to obtain subsamples of similar size.
       The asymmetry of the distribution of the survey responses by IQ might raise
concerns about sample selection,11 because the underlying distribution of IQ we obtain
from the FDF is symmetric around 5.               Only after merging the IQ data with the
consumer-expectations survey do we observe the asymmetry. Conversations with survey
experts at Statistics Finland suggest a nonnegligible fraction of Finns who are contacted
to complete the survey decline to do so. Low-IQ men might be more likely to decline
to participate in the survey relative to high-IQ men. If the low-IQ men who decline are
those who have severe cognitive problems or know they have a limited knowledge of their
surroundings, we would expect these men would perform even worse, on average, than
the surveyed low-IQ men in forecasting inflation and making economic choices. In this
case, the empirical effects we estimate in this paper might be a lower bound of the actual
effects we would expect if everybody in the population provided expectations and plans.



II       IQ and Expectations across Individuals
The first part of our analysis tests whether any systematic heterogeneity exists in the
precision and consistency with which economic agents form their inflation expectations
based on cognitive abilities. We also assess the potential heterogeneity in the relationship
between expectations and IQ by demographic splits.
 11
      We thank Kathrin Schlafmann for emphasizing this point.


                                                  14
A.      Forecast Errors
We start by analyzing the association between IQ levels and the precision and accuracy of
inflation expectations in the raw data. First, we compute the forecast error for inflation at
the individual level as the difference between the numerical forecasts for 12-month-ahead
inflation and ex-post realized inflation.
       In Figure 1 in the Introduction, we compute the average of the absolute values of
the individual forecast errors within each stanine of normalized IQ scores. The graph
documents a monotonic negative association between forecast errors for inflation and
cognitive abilities. Men in the lowest IQ stanine have an average absolute forecast error
of about 4.4%, whereas men in the highest stanine have an absolute forecast error of
about 2%, which is more than 50% smaller. Two patterns are worth noticing. First,
the monotonic relationship between absolute forecast errors and cognitive abilities is
non-linear, and cognitive abilities display a decreasing marginal improvement on forecast
errors. Second, respondents with the lowest cognitive abilities are not the only drivers of
the patterns in the data. In fact, Figure 1 shows that individuals just below the median
stanine (4) display forecast errors that are more than 40% larger than individuals in the
top stanine.
       We repeat the analysis for the bias in forecasts—the mean forecast error.                      In
this alternative definition, we allow for positive and negative deviations of inflation
expectations from ex-post realized inflation to wash away. Figure 2 reports the results,
and replicates all the patterns in Figure 1, although the association is slightly flatter for
levels of IQ above the median.


A.1      Forecast Errors by Income and Education

The univariate association between IQ bins and forecast errors might proxy for other
individual-level characteristics, and especially for income or education levels. In fact,
IQ bins and taxable income might be positively associated, but we find the correlation
between IQ and income levels, despite being positive, is quite low (0.15).12
       To assess the extent to which this interpretation might be relevant in our setting,
we first repeat the univariate analysis of Figure 2, plotting average forecast errors across
  12
    D’Acunto et al. (2018) show average income by IQ stanine is monotonically increasing similar to the
pattern in Grinblatt et al. (2011). Large idiosyncratic variation in income at the individual level seems
to result in the low correlation at the individual level.


                                                   15
categories of income and education level. In Panel A of Figure 3, we split our sample
into nine bins of income and report the average forecast errors for individuals in each bin.
Notably, we fail to detect any monotonic association between the average forecast error
and income levels. If anything, average errors are higher for the income levels above the
median—with the notable exception of the top bin—than for the income levels below the
median.13 These results underscore the desirability of the Finnish setting, which allows
us to disentangle meaningfully the variation in cognitive abilities from the variation in
labor income to explain the cross section of expectations.
       Panel B of Figure 3 reports a similar analysis for splitting the sample into six
groups based on education levels. We follow the International Standard Classification
of Education to construct the six groups.14 We fail to detect a negative association as
stark as the one by the IQ bins between education levels and average forecast errors,
although the association is slightly negative. These results suggest variation in IQ levels
exist among individuals that obtain the same formal degree. Note the overall amount of
learning of individuals holding the same degree might differ across IQ levels,15 but at least
in terms of observable levels of education, we do not detect differences in forecast errors
as large as the differences across the IQ distribution. In our multivariate analysis below,
we will partial out education-level fixed effects to only exploit variation in forecast errors
not explained by different education levels.
       Our analysis of the raw data suggests the potential of observed characteristics to
explain the association between forecast errors and IQ is low. For a direct test, we perform
a multivariate analysis in which we regress individual-level forecast errors on a dummy
variable that equals 1 if the individual belongs to the top four stanines of the normalized
IQ distribution (6 to 9), and 0 otherwise, year-month fixed effects, and a rich set of
demographics. Demographics include age, age2 , a dummy that equals 1 if the respondent
is single, and 0 otherwise, log of income, a dummy that equals 1 if the respondent has
a college degree, and 0 otherwise, an unemployment dummy, a dummy that equals 1 if
  13
     This result does not imply that labor income and IQ are not correlated, because correlation is not
transitive. Indeed, we detect a positive correlation between IQ and labor income, although the correlation
coefficient is not high (0.15). If we average income across IQ bin, we detect a monotonic association
between these two variables.
  14
     The classification includes eight categories, with the first two categories not present in our sample.
The categories are: primary education (1), lower secondary education (2), upper secondary education
(3), post-secondary non-tertiary education (4), short-cycle tertiary education (5), bachelor (6), master
(7), and doctoral (8).
  15
     We thank Basit Zafar for stressing this point.


                                                    16
the respondent has at least one child, and 0 otherwise, a dummy that equals 1 if the
respondent lives in a urban area, and 0 otherwise, and a dummy that equals 1 if the
respondent lives in Helsinki, and 0 otherwise. On average, the mean absolute forecast
error is 0.24 percentage-points lower for high-IQ men than for low-IQ men (see column
(1) of Table 3).


A.2     Forecast Errors by IQ: Demographic Splits

To further investigate the role of observables in shaping the relationship between IQ and
expectations, we perform a multivariate analysis across a set of sample splits in Table
3. We first aim to capture the potential differences in households’ consumption baskets
related to observables. Household consumption baskets, and especially the price changes
households observe for the goods they typically purchase, are important determinants of
expectations about general inflation (D’Acunto et al. (2019)). We compare the size of
the association between IQ and absolute forecast errors for inflation separately for single
and married respondents (column (2)), respondents below and above age 35 (column (3)),
urban and rural respondents (column (4)), and respondents earning more than the median
labor income in the sample (column (5)).
      Across the board, we find IQ is economically and statistically negatively associated
with absolute forecast errors for inflation within each sample split.         In terms of
heterogeneity across groups, some differences in the association between IQ and forecast
errors are noteworthy, even though we typically fail to reject the null hypothesis that
the point estimates across splits are equal. High IQ is associated with a larger reduction
in forecast errors within young respondents than within old respondents. Even though
our paper is agnostic about the driving force behind the result, one potential explanation
could be that cognitive abilities deteriorate with age. We observe IQ around age 20 for
all respondents, and we might expect that within our sample, some men that were in the
top part of the IQ distribution when they took the test have lower cognitive abilities at
the time of the survey. We also observe a stronger effect of IQ on forecast errors within
high-income men and men living in rural areas.
      The second set of splits we consider refer to proxies for the extent to which
households might easily obtain information about inflation and the extent to which
households understand basic economic concepts. We estimate the baseline specification for


                                            17
respondents with or without a college degree (column (6)), and respondents with a degree
in the areas of economics, business, law, or information, and other respondents (column
(7)). We find the association between IQ and absolute forecast error for inflation is about
half the size for college-educated respondents and respondents with economic-related
degrees than for others. This result suggests the ability to process information or the
grasping of basic economic concepts might be a substitute for cognitive abilities when
forming expectations about inflation. At the same time, IQ is still economically and
statistically significantly negatively associated with absolute forecast errors for inflation
even for respondents who are more educated or have economics-related degrees.
      A concern with our analysis so far is that cognitive abilities and macroeconomic
expectations were elicited at different points in time for the men in our sample. IQ
is measured for all men at the beginning of the military service—around age 19.
Expectations, instead, are elicited at different ages for different men. One might worry
that IQ measured at age 19 is not a good proxy for cognitive abilities at different points
in one’s life cycle, and especially might be a bad proxy for men who appear in our survey
at elderly ages. To address this issue, we split our sample into three groups based on
the time between the date the IQ test was taken and the date at which the individual
participated in the expectations survey, and test if our results differ across these three
groups. Table A.1 in the online appendix shows the baseline association between IQ and
forecast errors does not change across groups. Moreover, the results are not different
if we interact the dummy for an IQ bin above 6 with respondents’ age, which suggests
that potential deterioration of cognitive abilities over time does not interfere with the
explanatory power of our proxy for IQ for forecast errors.
      Overall, the association between IQ and forecast errors for inflation is a stable feature
of the data. Some heterogeneity exists by demographic splits, which is why the subsequent
analysis partials out these variables to ensure they do not drive any results.


A.3     Forecast Errors by IQ: Types of Cognitive Abilities

Our data do not only include a composite score for the cognitive abilities of men based on
their overall test performance, but also separate measures of performance across three
types of cognitive abilities, that is, visuospatial, verbal, and arithmetic abilities. In
principle, each of these types of cognitive abilities might help explain the cross-sectional


                                              18
variation in forecast errors we detect in the data. Indeed, forecasting requires that agents
have an understanding of the relationship between quantitative variables, that they read
and understand information about macroeconomic variables, and that they understand
the causal relationships across events in space and in time. The extent to which each of
these features is more or less relevant to explain forecast errors in the cross section is an
empirical question.
     D’Acunto, Hoang, Paloviita, and Weber (2019) show that, unconditionally, all
three types of cognitive abilities predict systematic differences in forecast errors across
individuals. We first verify that the unconditional results in D’Acunto et al. (2019) survive
once we absorb individual demographic characteristics as well as year-month fixed effects.
Columns (1)-(3) of Table 4 confirm all three types of cognitive abilities are negatively
associated with forecast errors. Scoring above 5 in visuospatial IQ is associated with
a 0.15-percentage-point-lower forecast error, whereas scoring 6 or higher in verbal and
arithmetic IQ is related to a 0.22 and 0.25-percentage-point-lower forecast error.
     D’Acunto et al. (2019) also detect a large positive correlation among the scores in
different categories of IQ. In this paper, we therefore also ask whether any of the three
categories are more or less relevant to explain forecast errors, by performing a horse race
among them. Column (4) of Table 4 reports this result. Once all three scores enter
the same specification, verbal and arithmetic IQ retain an autonomous association with
forecast errors. By contrast, the association between the visuospatial IQ score and forecast
errors drops in magnitude by almost 75% and loses statistical significance.
     Overall, we conclude empirically verbal and arithmetic cognitive abilities seem to be
equally important in explaining the cross section of forecast errors in our representative
male population.


B.    Rounding, Uncertainty, and Implausible Values
We move on to study two proxies for the quality of individuals’ forecasts that earlier
research proposes. The first is rounding—individuals’ tendency to report values that are
multiples of 5 when asked to provide numerical forecasts. Reporting round numbers
conveys uncertainty about future inflation (e.g., see Binder (2017) and Manski and
Molinari (2010)). We also consider respondents’ tendency to provide implausible forecasts
for inflation. Implausible forecasts are values that would be very unlikely to materialize


                                             19
over a period of 12 months based on historical inflation rates and the fact the ECB has
an inflation target of close to but below 2% in the medium run.
       Similar to the baseline association between forecast errors for inflation and IQ, Figure
4 documents that the fraction of rounders as well as the fraction of respondents reporting
implausible values both decline monotonically by IQ bins. The fraction of rounders ranges
from 65% in the lowest IQ bin to 35% in the highest IQ bin. The fraction of those reporting
implausible forecasts ranges from 20% in the lowest IQ bin to 7% in the highest bin when
we consider the 5% threshold for implausible values. For the 5% threshold, we categorize
an inflation forecast above 5% or below -5% as implausible. In Figure A.1 in the Online
Appendix, we confirm this monotonic negative association for several other thresholds for
implausible forecasts.
       Note we can reject the null hypothesis that the fractions of rounders and those
reporting implausible values are the same across almost all adjacent IQ bins, which
suggests respondents in the lowest or highest IQ bins are not the outliers driving the
negative associations. In untabulated results, we also confirm the analysis after excluding
all inflation forecasts that equal zero.16
       In Table 5, we run this analysis in a multivariate setting. We regress a dummy
variable that equals 1 if the respondent forecast a round number (columns (1)-(2)) or if
he forecasts an implausible value (columns (3)-(4)), and 0 otherwise. Columns (1) and
(3) report the raw correlations, whereas columns (2) and (4) control for demographics
and year-month fixed effects. The main covariate of interest is the dummy variable that
equals 1 if the respondent obtained an IQ score of 6 or above.
       Respondents with an IQ score of 6 or above are 7.4 percentage points less likely
to report round numbers.           Because we control for income and college education,
socioeconomic status does not explain the association between IQ and rounding
(Ben-David, Fermand, Kuhnen, and Li (2018)), which is a proxy for inflation uncertainty.
High-IQ men are also about 2 percentage points less likely to report implausible values for
inflation forecasts when we condition on observables and time-varying economic shocks.
       Rounding to salient thresholds might reflect objective uncertainty, for example, due
to high fluctuations in realized inflation, or subjective uncertainty about future states of
the world and macroeconomic conditions. We thus assess how the relationship between
  16
    Although a value of zero is rounded and not implausible, one might argue that other considerations
lead respondents to provide this number. No patterns change when we exclude all zeros from the analysis.


                                                  20
IQ and rounding varies across periods when inflation rates fluctuate or not. In Figure
5, we report the yearly standard deviation of monthly inflation rates in the form of gray
bars, and measure it on the left y-axis. The black line plots, for each year, the difference
in the average fraction of rounders between low-IQ men and high-IQ men. This difference
is higher in years in which inflation rates do not vary much—for example, 2001, 2003, and
2009—whereas it is lower in years in which inflation rates vary substantially—for example,
2006, 2007, and 2009. Overall, Figure 5 is consistent with the possibility that high-IQ
men are more likely to round at times of high objective inflation uncertainty relative to
low-IQ men.


C.    Forecast Dispersion
All the results we have discussed so far refer to the first moment of the distribution
of inflation expectations across IQ levels. Research in economics and finance suggests
dispersion in forecasts might proxy for differences in opinions across forecasters (Roth
and Wohlfart (2018) and Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002)). Hence, one might ask
whether the second moment of inflation expectations also varies across levels of IQ, that
is, whether the standard deviation of the reported inflation forecasts is systematically
higher within low-IQ bins than within high-IQ bins. Higher dispersion of expectations for
low-IQ respondents would be consistent with low-IQ respondents being less certain, more
confused, more disagreeable, or less capable of providing precise estimates than high-IQ
respondents.
     In Figure 6, we report the average standard deviation of the forecast errors for
inflation across IQ bins. Indeed, we detect a negative monotonic relationship between the
dispersion in forecast errors and IQ levels that mimics the pattern for the first moment
of the distribution. As expected, the pattern we detect for the cross-sectional dispersion
in forecast errors by IQ is similar to the pattern in the standard deviation of forecasts
by IQ (Table 2), because the time-series variation in realized inflation is smaller than the
variation in expectations across men.




                                            21
III       Channels Explaining Heterogeneity in Expecta-
          tions by IQ
Several non-mutually exclusive channels might help explain the systematic differences in
high- and low-IQ men’s abilities to forecast inflation. Disentangling these channels using
our field data would be difficult given the expectations survey was not designed to this
aim.


A.       Survey to Disentangle Potential Channels
To assess the potential scope of alternative channels to explain our results so far, we
designed an ad-hoc survey instrument, in which we elicit proxies for respondents’ cognitive
abilities and dig deeper into the extent to which respondents understand the concept of
inflation, how they differ in their forecast ability, and possible differences in economic
reasoning. We fielded two sessions of this survey on MTurk in August 2019. The survey
contained 69 questions, including questions about demographics, and the average response
time in the first session was 28 minutes and 39 seconds, and 28 minutes and 21 seconds
in the second session. To avoid any systematic bias in the recruited online sample based
on the time or day of the week, we fielded the first session during a weekend afternoon in
the US East Coast and the second session during a weekday evening. In each session, we
recruited 500 respondents, for a total of 1,000 respondents.17
       Despite the advantage of the survey design in allowing us to disentangle the scope for
alternative potential channels driving our baseline results, the main drawback is that the
population on which we can run the survey (US respondents of both sexes on MTurk) is
not the same population for which we observe the administrative data for our results so
far (Finnish men contacted by Statistics Finland). We show the MTurk survey responses
uncover similar patterns as the ones we document in Finland, which if anything speaks
to the external validity of those results even to settings outside Finland.
       In terms of the incentivization scheme, we offered participants a base payment of
$1.50 as well as the possibility to earn a bonus of up to $5.65. The maximal payment
respondents could earn was thus $7.15, and the average payment was $3.41.
  17
    Below, we discuss the filtering process of certain responses that, based on our questions, we could
identify as bots or as individuals who could not speak any English, and hence could not meaningfully
respond to the survey questions.


                                                  22
    The survey started with five questions about respondents’ preferences and beliefs,
which we designed based on Falk et al. (2018).            First, we elicited respondents’
risk tolerance, generalized trust, self-reported mathematical abilities, reciprocity, and
willingness to take revenge against peers. In all cases, respondents would use sliders to
scale the extent to which statements about these characteristics described them accurately
on a scale between 0 and 10.
    Second, we elicited a set of features related to cognitive abilities using the three
cognitive-reflection test questions in Frederick (2005).       We slightly modified these
questions by changing the context as well as the correct answers to ensure respondents,
who could access the internet, would not be able to obtain the correct answers from any
sources. We also added four questions about logical associations and numerical patterns.
We presented these questions with the label of “brain teasers” to respondents. To make
the answering to the questions about cognitive abilities incentive-compatible, respondents
earned a bonus payment of $0.05 for each correct answer. Following our analysis of the
administrative data discussed above, we construct our baseline proxy for cognitive abilities
as a dummy variable, High IQ, which equals 1 if the respondent provided at least five
correct answers to the seven questions about cognition, and 0 otherwise. The results are
virtually identical if we define this variable adding or subtracting one correct answer.
    Third, we asked respondents to assess whether a set of six statements about inflation
we obtained from the survey in Leiser and Drori (2005) were true or false. These questions
aimed at determining respondents’ knowledge and understanding of the concept of
inflation and its implications. Out of six questions, four referred to theoretical statements
about inflation, whereas two presented respondents with hypothetical scenarios based on
their concrete choices in daily life. Respondents earned a bonus payment of $0.05 for each
correct answer
    Fourth, we asked respondents to play an “association game” based on Leiser and
Drori (2005). In this association game, respondents had to choose three words out of
a list of seven words they thought were most related to the term “Inflation,” and for
each word, they had to explain briefly in their own words why the association had come
to their mind. Three of the words were abstract concepts (prices, wages, and savings),
three were concrete concepts (gas, Amazon, and stocks), and one was not as directly
related to inflation (elections). Asking for respondents’ motivations in their own words
was important not only to assess whether the associations were meaningful or not, but

                                             23
also to identify any potential bots as well as subjects who were not able to perform our
survey meaningfully, for instance, because their English language skills were subpar. To
evaluate the answers to these questions, an answer that is generally true received a score
of 1, an answer that could be true under certain conditions received a score of 0.5, and a
wrong answer received a score of 0. Two of the authors rated the answers independently,
and we used the average of the two ratings to create a final score at the respondent level.
     Fifth, respondents engaged in a forecasting task, which we designed following Landier,
Ma, and Thesmar (2018). We asked respondents to provide their best forecast for two
random processes in each of 15 periods after observing the first 40 realizations of the
processes. To incentivize this task, we followed Landier, Ma, and Thesmar (2018) and
computed a bonus as the maximum between $0 and the forecast error in the respondent
assessment, scaled by the standard deviation of each process. Importantly, the processes
to be forecasted were completely unrelated to any economic variables, and the instructions
clearly stated the processes were created at random for the purpose of the survey.
     The survey included other questions asking respondents to write in a few words their
understanding of the relationship between inflation and a set of other economic concepts,
whose design also followed Leiser and Drori (2005).
     Sixth and last, we concluded with a set of questions about demographic characteristics
including respondents’ age, gender, income bracket, education level, as well as whether the
respondent was the main financial decision-maker in his/her household (Dı̈¿ 12 Acunto et al.
(2019)) and whether he/she was the main grocery shopper for the household (D’Acunto
et al. (2019), D’Acunto et al. (2019)).


B.    Understanding the Concept of Inflation
High- and low-IQ men might understand the concept of inflation differently. For instance,
Leiser and Drori (2005) conducted detailed one-on-one surveys with a sample of Israelis
employed in different jobs (psychology students, high-school students, grocers, and school
teachers), and found these groups differed systematically in their knowledge about the
concept of inflation as well as the extent to which they thought inflation related to other
macroeconomic variables. In our application, low-IQ individuals might have a worse
understanding of the concept of inflation, and might therefore have a harder time providing
plausible forecasts for inflation.


                                            24
    To assess the relevance of this channel, we consider respondents’ answers to the six
true-false statements about inflation. The top panel of Figure 7 reports univariate results
for sample averages and 95% confidence intervals around the sample mean for the number
of correct answers across respondents with different levels of IQ. Consistent with the
conjecture that low-IQ respondents know the concept of inflation less, on average, they
answer 4.05 questions correctly, whereas high-IQ respondents provide on average 4.82
correct answers, and this difference is statistically significant.
    Low-IQ respondents might be worse at answering questions about inflation for two
reasons. On the one hand, they might lack a formal and theoretical understanding
of the concept of inflation and the relationship between inflation and other economic
variables. In this case, they would be worse at answering questions about inflation
similar to the common questions asked in surveys about consumer sentiment by
central banks and statistical offices around the world, which assume that respondents
understand the definition of inflation and the relationship between inflation and other
macroeconomic variables. On the other hand, low-IQ respondents might possess an
intuitive understanding of the concept of inflation, and even if they did not know the
formal definition of inflation, they might be able to grasp this concept in questions based
on concrete-scenario hypotheses that mimic daily situations.
    Panel B and Panel C of Figure 7 show low-IQ respondents are less likely than
high-IQ respondents to answer questions about inflation correctly irrespective of whether
the questions refer to the definition of inflation and its theoretical relationship with
other macroeconomic variables or whether considering daily-life scenarios about the
consequences and implications of inflation.
    Overall, we find low-IQ respondents have a worse understanding of the concept of
inflation relative to high-IQ men, both in terms of theoretical and practical understanding
of this concept. At the same time, we note that, despite the statistical significance of the
differences across IQ levels, the economic magnitude of these differences is not large. On
average, high-IQ men provide 0.77 more correct answers to seven questions in total.
    The fact that low-IQ men seem to be less correct about inflation, but not by
a substantial amount, suggests other channels might also be relevant to explain the
differences in inflation forecasts by cognitive abilities.




                                              25
C.      Ability to Forecast Mean-Reverting Processes
A second channel we consider is agents’ ability to think in probabilistic terms and hence
to produce plausible forecasts for the future values of a stochastic process, irrespective of
whether the process relates to an economic variable.
       In the Finnish data we use in our main analysis, we cannot disentangle this channel
from respondents’ knowledge about inflation. Indeed, providing plausible forecasts for
inflation requires not only the ability to think in probabilistic terms, but also the ability
to assess plausible potential values and potential probabilities attached with future states
of the world in the domain of inflation.
       To tackle this challenge, we analyze the forecasting task in our survey, which asks
individuals to forecast two alternative mean-reverting processes that do not relate to
inflation or other economic variables. The tasks builds on Landier et al. (2018).18 We
first explain to survey participants that they will be shown a random process that partially
relies on the last realization and partially on randomness. We show individuals the first
40 realizations of the process and then ask them to forecast the process for 15 periods.
After each forecast, individuals see the current realization before they make the next
forecast. The data-generating process follows a zero-mean AR(1) process with coefficient
0.9. Individuals have to forecast two processes with error-term standard deviations of 5
and 20.19 We randomize the order of the two processes individuals have to forecast, but
conditional on the process, each survey participant sees the same realizations.20
       The incentive payment is a decreasing function of the absolute forecast error (∆) and
the error-term volatility (σ):


                                    S = 100 × max(0, 1 − |∆|/σ).                                         (1)


We convert the overall score into dollar payments using a conversion factor of 600. Landier
et al. (2018) discuss that under the loss function in equation (1), a rational agent would
choose the rational-expectations forecast.
  18
     Note we do not aim to assess whether agents over-extrapolate from observed realization in our case,
which creates a difference between our test and the one in Landier et al. (2018).
  19
     The latter specification follows Landier et al. (2018) and the former is closer to the actual process of
inflation.
  20
     Because of this task, we ensured that the same respondent could not answer the survey more
than once. We double check the automatic MTurk worker ID check by searching for duplicates among
respondents’ IP addresses.


                                                     26
     We consider processes with different volatilities, because in the Finnish field results,
we find high-IQ men provide better forecasts for inflation especially in times of low
inflation volatility, relative to times of volatile inflation.
     Figure 8 reports the univariate results for comparing the average within-individual
mean forecast error (Panel A) and absolute forecast error (Panel B) across 15 rounds
for low-IQ and high-IQ respondents. Two patterns emerge, which are consistent with our
results in the field. First, for both the mean and the absolute forecast errors, high-IQ men
display lower forecast errors than low-IQ men in terms of both economic and statistical
significance. Second, the difference in average forecast errors is large when respondents
assess the more stable process, but this difference drops substantially when respondents
assess the more volatile process and especially for the absolute forecast errors.
     Several individual observable characteristics that correlate with cognitive abilities
might explain these patterns. For this reason, in Table A.2, we propose a multivariate
analysis in which we regress the within-individual average forecast errors on the High IQ
dummy as well as the set of individual preferences and beliefs we elicited and the individual
demographic characteristics. Both patterns we uncovered in Figure 8 are confirmed in
this multivariate setting.


D.     Mapping Knowledge about Inflation into Economic Choices
Ilut and Valchev (2017) discuss the third channel we consider. Intuitively, because of
different ways of thinking about the concept of inflation, high- and low-IQ individuals
might display a differential ability to forecast inflation and map news about inflation into
their optimal consumption and savings decisions. For instance, D’Acunto et al. (2019) find
many individuals think about the price changes of goods they purchase frequently in their
daily lives when forming expectations about aggregate inflation. Moreover, Leiser and
Drori (2005) show that, due to different features of inflation that are salient to individuals
employed in different industries, the understanding of the implications of inflation for other
macroeconomic variables varies systematically across individuals.
     To study this last channel, we first ask individuals to pick three words from a list
of seven words based on what they think is most related to the word “Inflation,” and to
explain in their own words the reasons they picked each word. This “association game” is
based on the questions in Leiser and Drori (2005). We picked the seven words in the list so


                                                27
that three of these words refer to abstract concepts in the form of macroeconomic variables
(prices, wages, and savings), and three words refer to concrete concepts respondents might
think of when asked to provide an inflation forecast (gas, Amazon, and stocks), and one
word has no direct association with inflation (elections). A priori, meaningful reasons to
relate each of these words with inflation are possible.
       Before moving on to considering the motivations respondents provided, we compare
the frequencies with which low-IQ and high-IQ respondents reported each of the six
words among the three words they associate more with inflation. Figure 9 reports these
frequencies for each word across the two groups defined above—concrete words (Panel A)
and abstract words (Panel B).
       The results in Figure 9 deliver two consistent patterns. On the one hand, low-IQ
individuals are more likely than high-IQ individuals to pick concrete concepts in the
association game, and this likelihood holds both economically and statistically for each of
the three concrete concepts. By contrast, high-IQ individuals are more likely than low-IQ
individuals to pick abstract concepts, a result that is also true both economically and
statistically for each of the three abstract concepts.
       We move on to consider whether individuals with high and low IQ levels provided
meaningful explanations for the words they associated with inflation, irrespective of
whether they picked concrete or abstract concepts.               Assessing whether statements
respondents provided are meaningful is subjective, and any method to evaluate these
statements has pros and cons. We decided to proceed as follows. Two of the authors of
the paper rated independently each of the short motivations respondents provided on a
three-value scale between 0 and 1.21 A value of 0 means the explanation is wrong; a value
of 0.5 means the explanation could have been correct had the respondent specified specific
conditions under which such an explanation would hold; and a value of 1 means that the
explanation is correct. Because of potential subjectivity in interpreting answers, as well
as in the interpretation of statements about economic variables non-expert respondents
make, which often do not use a precise terminology, we take the average of the two ratings,
which thus results in five potential outcomes in the analysis of this task—0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75,
and 1.
       The left plot of Panel A of Figure 10 reports the univariate results for comparing
  21
    We also have answers that are not meaningful sentences or words. We exclude these cases from the
analysis, which might refer to robots or individuals who cannot write in English.


                                                28
the average ratings across respondents with low and high IQ levels. High-IQ individuals
are, on average, statistically more likely than low-IQ individuals to report meaningful
explanations for the associations. As was the case for the questions about inflation,
though, the difference is not economically large, because the average rating equals 0.62
for low-IQ respondents and 0.74 for high-IQ respondents.
    The third way we propose to assess the ability of the mapping channel exploits three
specific questions among the incentivized questions about inflation, which relate directly
to the consequences of higher unexpected inflation for other macroeoconomic variables.
    The first question asks whether, after news of future higher inflation, a household
should save more. This question is inspired by the consumer Euler equation in a standard
New-Keynesian framework, based on which news of higher future inflation in times
of stable nominal interest rates should reduce perceived real rates and hence decrease
households’ propensity to save. The right plot of Panel A of Figure 10 shows high-IQ
respondents are less likely to state that households should save more when news about
higher future inflation intervenes, which is consistent with the consumer Euler equation.
An anecdotal assessment of the motivations respondents reported in the association game
suggests low-IQ respondents are more likely than high-IQ respondents to confound news
of future higher inflation with negative news about future economic growth and wage
levels, which might trigger a precautionary saving motive in this group of households.
    Two other questions we consider in Panel B of Figure 10 are whether inflation mainly
benefits savers, which should not be the case given savings are mainly in nominal values,
and whether a condition of persistent deflation is desirable for the economy. In both
cases, low-IQ respondents are more likely to provide an answer that differs from the most
plausible answer based on standard macroeconomic models.
    Considering all three questions, the answers of low-IQ survey participants seem
to portray an understanding of the consequences of inflation on other macroeconomic
variables that does not conform with standard macroeconomic models. Rather, low-IQ
individuals, on average, seem to think that periods of higher inflation (irrespective of the
level of inflation) are bad times, that they are times in which households should save,
and that, to the contrary, periods of sustained drops in prices and deflation are desirable.
This result casts doubt on the effectiveness of most fiscal- and monetary-policy measures,
which are in most cases justified in a representative-agent model of the economy that
seems far from the actual interpretation and understanding of the economy by a large

                                            29
fraction of households, which is consistent with findings in Andre, Pizzinelli, Roth, and
Wohlfart (2019).
       Ideally, we would want to assess whether the mapping channel has a separate role
in explaining low-IQ respondents’ consumption and savings plans relative to low-IQ
respondents being informed about inflation and being able to forecast inflation in a
meaningful way. We attempt to disentangle these three channels in Table A.3 in the Online
Appendix. In this table, we regress four dummies that equal 1 if the respondent has higher
knowledge of inflation or provided the wrong answer for each of the questions discussed
above, and 0 otherwise. Crucially, in this table, we restrict the sample to respondents
who provided plausible values for their perception of current inflation and expectations
about 12-month-ahead inflation, and hence respondents who are likely to be informed
about the prevailing level of inflation as well as about inflation forecasts, irrespective
of their IQ level.22 We see that even within this subsample, and after absorbing the
preferences, beliefs, and demographic characteristics we observe, high-IQ individuals are
still more likely to have more correction answers and are still less likely to provide the
wrong answers about inflation’s consequences on other macroeconomic variables relative
to low-IQ individuals.
       Taken together, the results in this section suggest low-IQ individuals are more likely
to associate inflation with the prices of specific goods, are worse in thinking in probabilistic
terms and making forecasts in general, but also that they are less able to map news about
inflation into the optimal consumption decisions relative to high-IQ survey participants,
consistent with the mechanism Ilut and Valchev (2017) propose theoretically.



IV        IQ and the Process of Expectations Formation
          within Individuals
Our results so far exploited cross-sectional variation in cognitive abilities and inflation
expectations for individuals we observe only once. Between 1995 and 1999, though,
Statistics Finland administered the survey with a panel component. In this section,
we use the panel component to study how past inflation expectations are associated with
  22
    Following Bachmann et al. (2019), we consider values of inflation perceptions and expectations
between 0 and 4 as plausible.



                                               30
current inflation expectations, how perceptions of the current inflation rate, which the EU
survey also elicits, relate to past inflation expectations within individuals, and we study
the association between forecast errors and forecast revisions to study whether individuals
over- or underreact to news.


A.       Are Current Expectations and Perceptions Consistent with
         Past Expectations?
In the standard model, agents have forward-looking expectations; that is, only news
relevant for future inflation should result in forecast revisions. Moreover, many central
banks aim to anchor inflation expectations. Hence, under rational expectations, we would
expect, on average, a positive correlation of inflation expectations within individuals over
short periods of time. Columns (1)-(2) of Table 6 investigate this auto-correlation of
inflation expectations for high-IQ and low-IQ men when we condition on demographics
and year-month fixed effects. An economically and statistically significant correlation of
23% exists for high-IQ men. This partial autocorrelation is statistically insignificant and
close to 0 (2.5%) for low-IQ men.
       Under rational expectations, we would also expect that past inflation expectations are
positively correlated with current perceptions of inflation unless major news or shocks to
inflation are realized between the times of the elicitation of expectations and perceptions.
       To assess whether the correlation between past expectations and current perceptions
varies across IQ levels, we regress current inflation perceptions on past inflation
expectations at the individual level. In columns (3)-(4) of Table 6, we detect a positive and
statistically significant association of 24% between current inflation perceptions and past
inflation expectations for high-IQ men. The association for low-IQ men is statistically
significant but an order of magnitude lower than the association for high-IQ men (5%).
       For both tests in Table 6, high-IQ men display statistically significant positive
associations, but the magnitude of these associations is not large, which might suggest
even high-IQ men form expectations in a way that departs from the standard rational
model.23
       Note, though, that under rational expectations, the correlation between current
  23
    Attenuation bias due to measurement error might help explain this low association in part. Note,
though, that expectations and perceptions were elicited consistently across survey waves, and the question
asks for a precise numerical value, which alleviates concerns about potential measurement error.


                                                   31
perceptions of inflation and past expectations should be lower in periods with shocks
to realized inflation.24 We thus split our sample into periods in which the difference
between the inflation rate at the time of the first and subsequent interview is in the top
third of the distribution, and all other periods. In columns (5)-(6) of Table 6, we repeat
the analysis only for periods of low changes in inflation between elicitations, whereas in
columns (7)-(8), we study periods with large changes in inflation.
       Comparing columns (5) and (7), we see that for high-IQ men, the positive association
between past inflation forecasts and current perceptions of inflation is higher in periods of
stable inflation relative to other periods, even though the association is nowhere close to
1 even in periods of stable inflation. Columns (6) and (8) show that no differences exist in
the economically small association for low-IQ men. If anything, the association appears
slightly larger during periods of changing inflation, which is barely consistent with the
standard rational model.


B.      Do Individuals Learn about the Relationship between
        Expectations and Perceptions over Time?
The results in Table 6 suggest the dynamics of expectations of high-IQ men are more
consistent with the rational benchmark than those of low-IQ men.                         High-IQ men,
however, seem to form expectations in a way that is not fully consistent with the rational
benchmark, because the size of the estimated coefficient is lower than 1.25
       Because perceptions and expectations are elicited three times for the same individual
in the panel component of our data, we can test whether individuals learn about the
relationship between inflation expectations over time and hence whether they get closer
to the rational benchmark as they make inflation forecasts over time.
       To this aim, in Table 7, we estimate the specifications of Table 6 separately for the
expectations and perceptions elicited between the first and second survey wave (columns
(1)-(2) and (5)-(6)) relative to the expectations and perceptions elicited across all three
waves (columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8)). If agents learnt over time, we would find the size
of the estimated coefficients are higher when we consider all waves combined relative to
  24
     We should not expect an attenuating effect of shocks to realized inflation on the autocorrelation of
inflation expectations to the extent that expectations are fully forward-looking and shocks to realized
inflation do not affect long-run inflation.
  25
     Under rational expectations, we would expect a coefficient of 1 to the extent that shocks to inflation
are not uni-directional over time and that the sample period is not too short.

                                                    32
only the correlation between the expectations and perceptions across wave 1 and wave 2.
     We fail to detect any substantial differences in the size or significance of the estimated
coefficients across groups of waves either for low-IQ or high-IQ respondents, which suggests
that agents barely learn over time when forming expectations across subsequent periods.


C.     Overreaction or Underreaction to News by Cognitive Abili-
       ties?
Motivated by the fact that not only low-IQ men, but also high-IQ men seem to not form
expectations in a way that is fully consistent with the rational benchmark, we move on
to assess whether other potential processes of expectations formation might be consistent
with our data.
     Mounting evidence suggests consumers, professional forecasters, and managers form
expectations that deviate from the rational benchmark because of underreaction or
overreaction to news. We build on the framework in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012)
and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), who propose a simple test for whether individuals
over- or underreact to news. Note the econometrician does not observe changes in agents’
information sets, but he can observe changes in forecasts, and hence whether agents react
to (unobservable) news they received across two forecast elicitations. We can thus regress
the forecast errors of agent i, the differences between the realized value of a variable, xt+1 ,
minus the forecast at time t, xi,t+1|t , on the forecast revision, F Ri,t,1 = xi,t+1|t − xi,t+1|t−1 :


                              xt+1 − xi,t+1|t = α + βF Ri,t,1 + εi,t .                           (2)


The full-information rational-expectations benchmark implies a coefficient estimate of 0
for β. A positive point estimate instead suggests the agent did not update the expectations
sufficiently to news. To see the intuition, imagine the agent revised upwards the forecast
for inflation. A positive coefficient implies the agent, on average, did not update the
expectations enough, because the ex-post realized value was above the predicted value.
Following a similar intuition, a negative point estimate for β instead implies the agent
overreacted to news; that is, he forecasted a value that was too high given the ex-post
realization.
     Bordalo, Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2018) test this framework on the individual


                                                 33
macroeconomic expectations underlying the Survey of Professional Forecasters and find
professional forecasters, on average, overreact to news for most macroecnomic time series,
which is in contrast to the results for consensus forecasts in Coibion and Gorodnichenko
(2015). They rationalize their findings in a model of diagnostic expectations along the
lines of Bordalo et al. (2016), Bordalo et al. (2018), and Bordalo et al. (2017).
       We follow Bordalo et al. (2018) and test for overreaction versus underreaction at the
individual level by pooling high- and low-IQ men separately:26

                                                            IQ
                                xt+1 − xi,t+1|t = αIQ + βF Ri,t,1 + εi,t .                                (3)


       Table 8 reports the results for estimating equation (3). In columns (1)-(2), we only
absorb year-month fixed effects, whereas columns (3)-(4) add demographic characteristics.
In columns (5)-(6), we restrict the variation within individuals and hence eliminate any
systematic time-invariant differences across individuals in the two groups by IQ levels.
Because of differences in prior beliefs or other reasons, some respondents might be
consistently overly optimistic or pessimistic, which would affect the estimate of β.
       Similar to Bordalo et al. (2018), the results with and without individual fixed effects
are quite similar for high-IQ men. The economically and statistically negative estimate
of β implies overreaction to news. If anything, the magnitude of the estimated coefficient
increases as we absorb systematic time-invariant differences across high-IQ men. Moving
on to low-IQ men, we also estimate a negative β across specifications, but the coefficient is
lower in economic magnitude than for high-IQ men, and becomes statistically insignificant
once we absorb time-invariant individual characteristics.
       Taken together, our results for the accuracy of expectations and the process of
expectations formation suggest high-IQ men overreact to news but make plausible inflation
forecasts. Low-IQ men instead do not seem to form expectations in a way that is in line
with the standard model or recent models of expectations formation.
  26
     Our tests differ slightly from Bordalo et al. (2018), because in our sample, individuals always forecast
12-month-ahead inflation instead of inflation for a fixed forecast period, such as the year 2020. Because
realized inflation is highly persistent and close to a random walk, we can still interpret the coefficients as
in Bordalo et al. (2018).




                                                     34
V     IQ and Choice
Do expectations of different quality transmit to individual choice, and especially
consumption and saving decisions? Most existing models studying fiscal and monetary
policy are based on a representative agent with rational expectations who reacts to
changing economic incentives. Based on these premises, the Euler equation predicts
a positive association between consumption expenditure and inflation expectations. In
the textbook New Keynesian model, monetary policy affects real quantities through the
dynamic IS equation, and hence, intertemporal substitution. In the last part of our
analysis, we aim to test whether low-IQ and high-IQ individuals differ in the extent
to which they update their consumption, saving, and borrowing plans to changing
inflation expectations. This analysis is important because households’ understanding
of intertemporal substitution and its implications for consumption plans is crucial for any
intertemporal-substitution-based channels to affect behavior.
    Different mechanisms exist through which expectations might transmit to choice
differently between high- and low-IQ men. One possibility is low-IQ individuals ultimately
make consumption and saving decisions as if they held accurate inflation expectations even
if they report expectations of lower quality once asked in a survey. Note the survey we use
asks households about changes in consumer prices. The fact that low-IQ individuals might
not know the term “inflation” thus cannot drive our results. Yet, everyone might hold
accurate and unbiased beliefs and make choices as representative-agent models prescribe,
but low-IQ men might be unable to express their beliefs in numerical terms. If this
conjecture were true, the inaccurate expectations of low-IQ individuals would not have
substantial implications for individual-level or aggregate outcomes.
    A second possibility is that low-IQ individuals understand the concept of intertem-
poral substitution, but they rely on their inaccurate expectations when making choices.
In this case, we would observe individuals’ decisions deviating from the choices of the
representative agent, but conditional on observing individual beliefs, one could predict
how the individual would allocate his resources between current consumption and future
consumption.
    Finally, low-IQ individuals might not only have inaccurate expectations, but also
might not know or understand the concept of intertemporal substitution.




                                            35
A.     IQ and Intertemporal Substitution
Low-IQ individuals provide numerical values for inflation expectations that are often
inaccurate, implausible, or rounded. This fact is consistent with the common concern
with survey-based numerical values of inflation expectations (e.g., see Binder (2017) and
D’Acunto et al. (2019)). If we correlated numerical values of inflation expectations with
choice, we would be unable to disentangle the case in which low-IQ individuals were
unable to articulate their expectations in numerical terms from the case in which they
were unable to understand intertemporal substitution, because in both cases, we would
observe that reported numerical inflation expectations do not relate to consumption plans.
     To address this concern, we follow D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2019) and
construct a measure of high inflation expectations based on survey respondents’ qualitative
expectations. The rationale is that, even if low-IQ households were not able to express
their numerical inflation expectations meaningfully, they should be able to report whether
they expect inflation to increase, stay the same, or decrease over the following 12 months.
If not, they would either not understand the concept of inflation or would hold incorrect
beliefs.
     This qualitative measure of inflation expectations is a dummy variable that equals 1
if the respondent answers in the European Commissions survey that he expects a higher
inflation rate in the following 12 months, compared to the prevailing inflation rate over the
past 12 months, and 0 otherwise. D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2019) show this measure
tracks closely ex-post realized inflation across several samples in different countries and
different time periods. A rationale for why this qualitative measure might track ex-post
realized inflation more closely than quantitative measures is that respondents might have
a clear idea for the directional changes in inflation they perceive and expect, but might
be uninformed about the level of inflation prevailing at the time they are interviewed,
consistent with evidence in Vellekoop and Wiederholt (2017).
     We follow the recent literature in macroeconomics using micro data and study the
association between the qualitative measure of inflation expectations and different choices
(Bachmann et al. (2015) and Crump, Eusepi, Tambalotti, and Topa (2018)). Our first
outcome variable of interest, households’ readiness to purchase durable goods, derives from
discrete, non-ordered choices in a survey. We therefore model the response probabilities
in a multinomial-logit setting. We assume the answer to the question on the readiness to


                                             36
spend is a random variable representing the underlying population.
    We estimate the model via maximum likelihood to obtain the vector of coefficients
and compute the marginal effects of changes in the covariates on the probability that
individuals choose any of three answers in the survey, and report them in the tables.
    In columns (1) and (2) of Table 9, we report the average marginal effects for whether
respondents think it is a good time to purchase durable goods on the dummy that equals
1 if the respondent thinks inflation will be higher in the following 12 months than it was
in the previous 12 months. We cluster standard errors at the quarter level to allow for
correlation of unknown form in the residuals across contiguous months. Both specifications
include the full set of demographic controls we observe, as well as controls for perceived
past inflation (Jonung (1981)). The results in column (1) refer to the full sample of
high-IQ men, and those in column (2) include the full sample of low-IQ men. In column
(1), high-IQ men who expect inflation to increase are, on average, 3.6% more likely to
answer it is a good time to buy durables than are high-IQ men who expect constant
or decreasing inflation. Instead, column (2) documents no economically or statistically
significant association between the inflation expectations and the readiness of low-IQ men
to purchase durable goods. If anything, the estimated coefficient is negative, although
small in size and not statistically distinguishable from zero.
    These baseline results are consistent with the possibility that low-IQ men do not
understand the concept of intertemporal substitution because they do not adjust their
consumption plans to their inflation expectations. Recall we use the dummy variable
for expected inflation from a qualitative question that measures the change in expected
inflation and tracks actual realized inflation well both for high-IQ and low-IQ men
(D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2019)). Hence, these results are barely consistent with the
idea of low-IQ men being sophisticated – knowing their quantitative inflation expectations
are inaccurate and deciding not to react to them when forming purchasing plans. If they
were sophisticated, they would follow their expected directional change in inflation and
adjust upward their consumption propensity when expecting higher inflation.
    In the rest of Table 9, we consider the sample splits we proposed in the analysis of
the association between IQ and expectations in Table 3 to assess whether similar patterns
arise for the case of purchasing plans. For each sample split reported at the top of the
columns, we report four marginal effects: for those high-IQ and low-IQ men who belong
to the reported category (Panel A) and for those who do not belong to the category (Panel

                                            37
B).
       We emphasize a set of patterns from these sample splits. First, for most of the splits
we consider, high-IQ men who expect higher inflation are systematically more likely to
respond it is a good time to purchase durable goods irrespective of whether they belong
to the demographic group of interest. Columns (3), (5), (7), (9), (11), and (13) show this
higher propensity is economically large irrespective of whether high-IQ men are single, live
in urban areas, are above the median of the distribution by income, have a college degree,
or have an economics or business degree. Note we fail to detect statistical significance
at conventional levels for the coefficients associated with high-IQ men above 35, high-IQ
men below the median of the income distribution, and high-IQ men with an economics
or business degree, but even in these cases, the point estimates are positive and large.
       Second, we fail to reject the null that the marginal effect equals 0 for low-IQ
respondents across most demographic splits, irrespective of the sample size, both
economically and statistically (see columns (4), (6), (8), (10), and (12)).
       Third, low-IQ men with an economics or business degree are the only group of low-IQ
men for whom we can detect an economically and statistically positive association between
expecting higher inflation and answering it is a good time to purchase durable goods, as
the consumer Euler equation implies (0.1109, see column (14), Panel A).27 This result
might suggest providing economics and business knowledge to low-IQ men might be a
relevant substitute for cognitive abilities in determining economic choice.


B.      IQ, Borrowing Motives, and Saving Motives
Next, we assess whether low-IQ men differ from high-IQ men even along other forward-
looking choices. To this aim, we exploit a limited set of questions in the survey regarding
households’ motives to save and borrow. These questions are conditional on saving and
borrowing, and hence, we observe smaller and varying sample sizes. The structure is such
that individuals are asked whether they plan to save (borrow), and if they respond yes,
various subquestions regarding the motives of saving (borrowing) follow.
       High-IQ men might understand the trade-off between present and future consumption
  27
     Note the coefficient is also positive and nonnegligible in size for low-IQ men with any college degree
(see column (12), Panel A), but we fail to reject the null that this coefficient is 0 statistically. Because
this group also includes economics and business college degrees, the association is unlikely to be positive
and large for low-IQ respondents with other types of college degrees.



                                                    38
better than low-IQ men or might be more patient (Falk et al. (2018)). In both cases, we
should observe high-IQ men saving more for retirement than low-IQ men.
    We first assess whether individuals differ – based on cognitive abilities – in their
propensity to save. Column (1) of Table 10 reports the marginal effect attached to the
high-IQ dummy when the outcome variable of a probit specification is a dummy that
equals 1 if the individual claims he saves at least part of his monthly labor income.
High-IQ individuals, if anything, are less likely to save than low-IQ men. This fact could
be consistent with a reduced precautionary savings motive for high-IQ men, among other
potential explanations.
    We then consider a second question that digs deeper into the saving motives and
asks respondents whether they save for retirement. In column (2), we report the marginal
effect on the high-IQ dummy for a similar specification as column (1), but in this case,
the outcome variable is a dummy that equals 1 if the respondent claims he saves for
retirement. The sign of the association flips, and the association with high IQ becomes
positive and statistically different from zero. Overall, then, the analysis of saving motives
suggests high-IQ men are, if anything, less likely to save in general, but they are more
likely to save for retirement than low-IQ men. We interpret this evidence as consistent
with the notion that high-IQ men are more forward-looking than low-IQ men.
    After having assessed whether any differences exist in the average association between
being in the top of the IQ distribution and saving for retirement, in Figure 11, we provide
evidence that the association between IQ bins and the fraction of households that declare
they save for retirement increases monotonically – it is lowest for the first IQ bin and
highest for the top IQ bins. Because the sample size is smaller than in our baseline
analysis, statistical significance is sparse and we cannot reject the null hypothesis that
fractions are the same across all adjacent bins.
    We move on to consider borrowing motives. In this analysis, we compare respondents’
likelihood of answering that they plan to borrow to finance current or future consumption
with the likelihood of answering that they plan to borrow to finance current or future
education-related expenses. Column (3) of Table 10 shows high-IQ men do not differ from
low-IQ men in their likelihood of borrowing to finance consumption, whereas we see in
column (4) high-IQ men are substantially more likely than low-IQ men to plan to borrow
to finance education-related costs. We interpret this evidence as also consistent with
high-IQ individuals being more forward-looking than low-IQ individuals, because they

                                             39
plan to borrow to finance a long-term investment in human capital. This interpretation
assumes formal education and IQ are at least in part substitutes.


C.     Which Channels Mediate the Differences in Choice by IQ?
After documenting that high-IQ men have lower forecast errors, update expectations in
a way that seem consistent with the diagnostic-expectations framework, and act on their
expectations in economic decisions in a way that is consistent with the Euler equation
logic, whereas low-IQ men do not, we investigate the channels that might mediate the
relationship between IQ, expectations, and choice in field data.
     Because the question we use to measure consumption propensities asks respondents if
they think it is a good time to purchase durable goods, one might wonder whether low-IQ
men display systematic characteristics that make their consumption plans insensitive to
inflation expectations. For instance, low-IQ men might be more financially constrained or
have negative income expectations relative to high-IQ men. At the same time, low-IQ men
might interpret the survey question as referring to their own purchasing decisions instead
of the decision of the average household in the economy. In our sample, income and IQ
have a correlation of 0.15 only, and D’Acunto et al. (2018) show financial constraints
and income expectations do not differ systematically across high- and low-IQ men, which
suggests a different economic outlook or financial situations are an unlikely explanation
for our results.
     We therefore move on to assess three channels based on the potential cognitive costs
of gathering information about economic variables, of forming expectations about future
states of the world, and of mapping expectations into economic decision-making in line
with the channels we studies in the controlled MTurk environment.
     First, low-IQ men might be less informed than high-IQ men about economic
fundamentals, including the current state, potentially because gathering information
about macroeconomic variables is more cognitively costly to them.           In this case,
low-IQ men would have miscalibrated perceptions about current inflation, resulting in
miscalibrated beliefs about future macroeconomic variables. As long as low-IQ men
understand their expectations are biased, they would not rely on them when forming
purchasing plans.
     To assess this channel directly, we focus on the subsamples of high-IQ men and low-IQ


                                            40
men with perception errors below the median and below the 25th percentile. These men
represent individuals who are likely to be informed about the prevailing inflation rate at
the time of the interview given their perception error is low, irrespective of whether their
IQ is high or low.
    A concern is that this split merely captures low-IQ men who provided values for the
inflation rate at random and ended up being close to the actual realization ex post. Panel
A of Figure A.2 in the online appendix suggests this concern is not material, because it
shows that even if low-IQ men, on average, have less accurate perceptions about inflation
than high-IQ men, still a large fraction of low-IQ men proposes values for inflation close
to the actual inflation rate at the time they were interviewed. If all low-IQ men were
merely providing values for inflation randomly, the distribution of perceived inflation in
Figure A.2 would be uniform instead of displaying a mode close to the actual inflation
rate.
    In Panel A of Table 11, we regress consumption propensities on inflation expectations
for men with low perception errors, across levels of IQ. In column (1), we find high-IQ
men within the group of men with low perception errors for contemporaneous inflation
display a large positive and significant association between their inflation expectations
and consumption propensities. The size of this association is higher than the size of
the baseline association we detected in Table 9. In column (2) of Table 11, the point
estimate is positive and economically non-negligible, but we fail to detect a significant
association between inflation expectations and consumption propensities for low-IQ men
with low perception errors for contemporaneous inflation. The results are similar if we
restrict the samples even more and only consider men whose perception error is below the
25th percentile (columns (3)-(4)). Even in this case, low-IQ men whose perceptions about
inflation are quite accurate do not display any significant positive association between
inflation expectations and consumption propensity.
    The fact that low-IQ men do not behave in line with the consumer Euler equation
even when they seem accurately informed about the prevailing inflation rate suggests that
informing consumers about the level of current inflation might not be sufficient to affect
the economic plans or choices of low-IQ men.
    The second channel we consider states that low-IQ men might be unable to think in
probabilistic terms and about future states of the world (McDowell and Jacobs (2017)).
This channel could explain the non-response in the Euler equations only if low-IQ men

                                            41
were sophisticated about their bias; that is, they knew that they should not rely on their
faulty expectations when making consumption and saving plans.
    To assess the relevance of this channel, we focus on the subsample of men with forecast
errors for 12-month-ahead inflation below the median and below the 25th percentile.
Similar to above, because the distribution of both low-IQ and high-IQ men has a mode
at plausible values for inflation forecasts and is not uniform (see Panel B of Figure A.2 in
the online appendix), the two subsamples are likely to include individuals who are able
to think probabilistically and to come up with plausible assessments of future states of
the world, irrespective of their IQ levels.
    Panel B of Table 11 reports the results for estimating the marginal effect of expecting
higher inflation on the propensity to consume across groups based on the size of their
forecast errors. High-IQ men increase their spending propensities when they expect
higher inflation and their inflation forecasts are accurate (columns (1) and (3)). Low-IQ
men, instead, are still unresponsive, both economically and statistically, even if their
expectations about future inflation are close to the ex-post realization.
    In terms of policy implication, these results could imply that purely providing the
broader population with plausible forecasts of future inflation might not be enough to
align their consumption and saving plans to what the consumer Euler equation predicts.
    A third channel we consider is that low-IQ men might not understand basic economic
concepts such as intertemporal substitution. This channel suggests that even if low-
IQ men were perfectly informed about current inflation and about plausible forecasts
of future inflation, still they would not be able to map this information into optimal
consumption and saving plans. Ilut and Valchev (2017) provide a theoretical foundation
for this channel, because they model agents with limited knowledge of the optimal action
even conditional on knowledge of the current and future economic state. This channel
would be consistent with all the evidence in the paper and could also rationalize other
puzzles in the literature, such as the excess sensitivity of consumption to predictable
income changes (see, e.g., Parker et al. (2013)).
    Although we cannot provide a direct test for this channel in our data, we propose
suggestive evidence by focusing on two subsamples. First, we consider only high-IQ men
and low-IQ men with a college degree in economics and business. Intuitively, both of these
two groups should understand intertemporal substitution and should know how inflation
expectations map into optimal action, because they should have been trained on these

                                              42
concepts extensively during their college studies. Columns (1)-(2) of Panel C of Table 11
estimate the marginal effect of expecting higher inflation on the propensity to spend on
durable goods for this subsample. We find that, indeed, within the group of men with
an economics or business degree, both high-IQ and low-IQ men increase their propensity
to consume when expecting higher inflation, which is consistent with the consumer Euler
equation.
       To further assess whether the split by economics/business degree is likely to capture
knowledge of basic economic concepts as opposed to the effects of a quantitative college
degree, in columns (3)-(4) of Panel C of Table 11, we consider the subsample of high-IQ
men and low-IQ men with a college degree in engineering. Men trained in engineering
obtained college education, irrespective of their IQ levels, and if anything were trained
more in quantitative skills than men who earned an economics or business degree. At
the same time, these men were not trained specifically in economic concepts such as
intertemporal substitution. We see that for this group, low-IQ men do not display a
positive association between expecting higher inflation and willingness to purchase durable
goods. If anything, the estimated coefficient is large and negative, although statistically
insignificant.28
       Overall, we interpret the results in Panel C of Table 11 as broadly consistent with
the possibility that low-IQ men do not understand basic economic concepts and hence
cannot map their macroeconomic expectations into optimal choice.



VI        Conclusion
We show that cognitive abilities play a central role in understanding forecast errors for
inflation both across and within individuals in a unique representative male sample that
uses administrative data on IQ. Cognitive abilities are also relevant to individuals’ plans
for current and future consumption, their understanding of intertemporal substitution,
and their forward-looking behavior.
       Exploiting variation within individual, we find that high-IQ men overreact to
macroeconomic news when forming inflation forecasts, but update their forecasts in
the right direction (Bordalo, Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2018)). For low-IQ men,
  28
     Note that for this group, high-IQ men display no association between inflation expectations and
willingness to consume, which emphasizes that education per se does not explain our results.


                                                43
instead, we fail to find unambiguous evidence in support of an existing framework of
expectations-formation. Low-IQ men’s expectations are not adaptive, are not rational,
and are barely consistent with the diagnostic-expectations framework. Overall, with
low-IQ men—who in our sample represent more than 50% of the representative population
we study—anything goes in terms of expectations formation and updating over time.
    We study a set of potential channels that might explain these results, and find that
low-IQ individuals have lower knowledge of the concept of inflation, are more likely to
think about concrete goods rather than prices in general, have a lower ability to forecast
generic random processes unrelated to economic variables, and have a harder time choosing
the optimal economic decision conditional on new information. We study these channels
in a controlled environment for a US population that includes both genders.
    Future research in economics, finance, and cognitive science should build on these
results to investigate in more detail the specific mechanisms that explain the role of
cognitive abilities in the formation of economic expectations. For instance, do cognitive
abilities matter for the gathering of information, the processing of information, and the
mapping of processed values into economic decisions? Or are they only driving choice
through a subset of these channels? Distinguishing between these mechanisms is crucial
not only to inform the development of new heterogeneous-agent models across fields of
economics, but also to inform policymakers on the policy actions that might or might not
help low-IQ individuals make optimal decisions based on the incentives policies create.
    The lack of forward-looking attitudes in low-cognitive-ability individuals might result
in a lower sensitivity of their choices to policy shocks that operate through forward-
looking savings, consumption, and borrowing decisions, and might help explain why some
policies are less effective than a representative-agent full-information model predicts, such
as forward guidance. Limited reaction to policy interventions by many households would
be detrimental for governments that aim to change aggregate consumption and saving
patterns throughout the business cycle (D’Acunto et al. (2018)). Future research could
thus investigate the extent to which cognitive abilities interact with the reaction to policy
interventions and quantify their effect on aggregate outcomes.




                                             44
References
Agarwal, S., J. C. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson (2009). The age of reason:
  Financial decisions over the life cycle and implications for regulation. Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity 2009 (2), 51–117.
Agarwal, S. and B. Mazumder (2013). Cognitive abilities and household financial decision
  making. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1), 193–207.
Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, A. Hyytinen, and O. Toivanen (2017). The social origins of
  inventors. NBER Working Paper 24110 .
Andre, P., C. Pizzinelli, C. Roth, and J. Wohlfart (2019). Subjective models of the
  macroeconomy: Evidence from experts and a representative sample. Unpublished
  Manuscript.
Armantier, O., W. Bruine de Bruin, G. Topa, W. Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2015). Inflation
  expectations and behavior: Do survey respondents act on their beliefs? International
  Economic Review 56 (2), 505–536.
Bachmann, R., T. O. Berg, and E. Sims (2015). Inflation expectations and readiness to
  spend: Cross-sectional evidence. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (1),
  1–35.
Bachmann, R., B. Born, E. Sims, and M. Weber (2019). Are households neo-fisherian?
  Unpublished Manuscript.
Banks, J., C. o’Dea, and Z. Oldfield (2010). Cognitive function, numeracy and retirement
  saving trajectories. The Economic Journal 120 (548), F381–F410.
Ben-David, I., E. Fermand, C. Kuhnen, and G. Li (2018). Expectations uncertainty and
  household financial choices. Working Paper .
Benjamin, D. J., S. A. Brown, and J. M. Shapiro (2013). Who is “behavioral”?
  cognitive ability and anomalous preferences. Journal of the European Economic
  Association 11 (6), 1231–1255.
Benjamin, D. J., D. Cesarini, M. J. Van Der Loos, C. T. Dawes, P. D. Koellinger, P. K.
  Magnusson, C. F. Chabris, D. Conley, D. Laibson, M. Johannesson, et al. (2012). The
  genetic architecture of economic and political preferences. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences 109 (21), 8026–8031.
Bernanke, B. S. (2007). Inflation expectations and inflation forecasting. Speech 306,
  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
Binder, C. (2017). Measuring uncertainty based on rounding: New method and an
  application to inflation expectations. Journal of Monetary Economics 90, 1–12.
Bordalo, P., K. Coffman, N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2016). Stereotypes. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131 (4), 1753–1794.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, Y. Ma, and A. Shleifer (2018). Over-reaction in macroeconomic
  expectations. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, R. L. Porta, and A. Shleifer (2017). Diagnostic expectations
  and stock returns. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2018). Diagnostic expectations and credit
  cycles. The Journal of Finance 73 (1), 199–227.
Borghans, L., J. J. Heckman, B. H. Golsteyn, and H. Meijers (2009). Gender
  differences in risk aversion and ambiguity aversion. Journal of the European Economic
  Association 7 (2-3), 649–658.
Burks, S. V., J. P. Carpenter, L. Goette, and A. Rustichini (2009). Cognitive skills
  affect economic preferences, strategic behavior, and job attachment. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences 106 (19), 7745–7750.
Cavallo, A., G. Cruces, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Inflation expectations, learning, and

                                            45
   supermarket prices: Evidence from survey experiments. American Economic Journal:
   Macroeconomics 9 (3), 1–35.
Chabris, C. F., D. Laibson, C. L. Morris, J. P. Schuldt, and D. Taubinsky (2008).
   Individual laboratory-measured discount rates predict field behavior. Journal of risk
   and uncertainty 37 (2-3), 237.
Choi, S., S. Kariv, W. Müller, and D. Silverman (2014). Who is (more) rational? American
   Economic Review 104 (6), 1518–50.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012). What can survey forecasts tell us about
   information rigidities? Journal of Political Economy 120 (1), 116–159.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015). Information rigidity and the expectations
   formation process: A simple framework and new facts.              American Economic
   Review 105 (8), 2644–78.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and R. Kamdar (2018). The formation of expectations,
   inflation, and the phillips curve. Journal of Economic Literature 56 (4), 1447–1491.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and S. Kumar (2018). How do firms form their
   expectations? New survey evidence. American Economic Review 108 (9), 2671–2713.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2019). Monetary policy communications
   and their effects on household inflation expectations. Working Paper .
Crump, R. K., S. Eusepi, A. Tambalotti, and G. Topa (2018). Subjective intertemporal
   substitution. FRB of New York Staff Report (734).
D’Acunto, F., D. Hoang, M. Paloviita, and M. Weber (2018). Human frictions to the
   transmission of economic policy. Working Paper .
D’Acunto, F., D. Hoang, M. Paloviita, and M. Weber (2019). Cognitive abilities and
   inflation expectations. In AEA Papers and Proceedings, Volume 109, pp. 562–66.
D’Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2018). Unconventional fiscal policy. In AEA
   Papers and Proceedings, Volume 108, pp. 519–23.
D’Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2019). Managing households’ expectations with
   simple economic policies. Working Paper .
D’Acunto, F., U. Malmendier, J. Ospina, and M. Weber (2019). Exposure to daily price
   changes and inflation expectations. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago
   Booth School of Business.
D’Acunto, F., U. Malmendier, and M. Weber (2019). Gender roles distort women’s
   economic outlook. Unpublished Manuscript.
Dı̈¿ 21 Acunto, F., M. Prokopczuk, and M. Weber (2019). Historical antisemitism, ethnic
   specialization, and financial development. The Review of Economic Studies 86 (3),
   1170–1206.
Dal Bo, E., F. Finan, O. Folke, T. Persson, and J. Rickne (2017). Who becomes a
   politician? Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4), 1877–1914.
Das, S., C. Kuhnen, and S. Nagel (2017). Socioeconomic status and macroeconomic
   expectations. Working Paper .
De Bruin, W. B., C. F. Manski, G. Topa, and W. Van Der Klaauw (2011). Measuring
   consumer uncertainty about future inflation. Journal of Applied Econometrics 26 (3),
   454–478.
Di Tella, R., R. J. MacCulloch, and A. J. Oswald (2001). Preferences over inflation
   and unemployment: Evidence from surveys of happiness. American Economic
   Review 91 (1), 335–341.
Diether, K. B., C. J. Malloy, and A. Scherbina (2002). Differences of opinion and the
   cross section of stock returns. The Journal of Finance 57 (5), 2113–2141.
Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2010). Are risk aversion and impatience


                                           46
   related to cognitive ability? American Economic Review 100 (3), 1238–60.
Falk, A., A. Becker, T. Dohmen, B. Enke, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2018). Global
   evidence on economic preferences. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (4), 1645–1692.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making. Journal of Economic
   perspectives 19 (4), 25–42.
Fuster, A., G. Kaplan, and B. Zafar (2018). What would you do with usd500? spending
   responses to gains, losses, news and loans. Technical report, National Bureau of
   Economic Research.
Fuster, A., R. Perez-Truglia, M. Wiederholt, and B. Zafar (2018). Expectations with
   endogenous information acquisition: An experimental investigation. Technical report,
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gennaioli, N., Y. Ma, and A. Shleifer (2018). Over-reaction in macroeconomic
   expectations. NBER Working Paper No. 24932 .
Gennaioli, N. and A. Shleifer (2018). A crisis of beliefs: Investor psychology and financial
   fragility. Princeton University Press.
Gerardi, K., L. Goette, and S. Meier (2013). Numerical ability predicts mortgage default.
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (28), 11267–11271.
Glaeser, E. L. and C. G. Nathanson (2017). An extrapolative model of house price
   dynamics. Journal of Financial Economics 126 (1), 147–170.
Grinblatt, M., S. Ikäheimo, M. Keloharju, and S. Knüpfer (2016). IQ and mutual fund
   choice. Management Science 62 (4), 924–944.
Grinblatt, M., M. Keloharju, and J. Linnainmaa (2011). IQ and stock market
   participation. The Journal of Finance 66 (6), 2121–2164.
Grinblatt, M., M. Keloharju, and J. T. Linnainmaa (2012). IQ, trading behavior, and
   performance. Journal of Financial Economics 104 (2), 339–362.
Hanushek, E. A. and L. Woessmann (2008). The role of cognitive skills in economic
   development. Journal of economic literature 46 (3), 607–68.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006). The effects of cognitive and
   noncognitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor
   economics 24 (3), 411–482.
Ilut, C. and R. Valchev (2017). Economic agents as imperfect problem solvers. Unpublished
   Manuscript, Boston College.
Jonung, L. (1981). Perceived and expected rates of inflation in Sweden. The American
   Economic Review 71 (5), 961–968.
Kautz, T., J. J. Heckman, R. Diris, B. Ter Weel, and L. Borghans (2014). Fostering
   and measuring skills: Improving cognitive and non-cognitive skills to promote lifetime
   success. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kuchler, T. and B. Zafar (2018). Personal experiences and expectations about aggregate
   outcomes. Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.
Landier, A., Y. Ma, and D. Thesmar (2018). New experimental evidence on expectations
   formation. Working Paper .
Leiser, D. and S. Drori (2005). Naı̈ve understanding of inflation. The Journal of Socio-
   Economics 34 (2), 179–198.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2016). Learning from inflation experiences. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 131 (1), 53–87.
Manski, C. and F. Molinari (2010). Rounding probabilistic expectations in surveys.
   Journal of Business Economics and Statistics 28 (2), 219–231.
Manski, C. F. (2004). Measuring expectations. Econometrica 72 (5), 1329–1376.
Manski, C. F. (2018). Survey measurement of probabilistic macroeconomic expectations:

                                            47
  progress and promise. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 32 (1), 411–471.
McArdle, J. J., J. P. Smith, and R. Willis (2011). Cognition and economic outcomes
  in the health and retirement survey. In Explorations in the Economics of Aging, pp.
  209–233. University of Chicago Press.
McDowell, M. and P. Jacobs (2017). Meta-analysis of the effect of natural frequencies on
  bayesian reasoning. Psychological bulletin 143 (12), 1273.
Oechssler, J., A. Roider, and P. W. Schmitz (2009). Cognitive abilities and behavioral
  biases. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 72 (1), 147–152.
Parker, J. A., N. S. Souleles, D. S. Johnson, and R. McClelland (2013). Consumer spending
  and the economic stimulus payments of 2008. American Economic Review 103 (6),
  2530–53.
Roth, C. and J. Wohlfart (2018). How do expectations about the macroeconomy affect
  personal expectations and behavior? Working Paper .
Rozsypal, F. and K. Schlafmann (2017). Overpersistence bias in individual income
  expectations and its aggregate implications.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 69 (1), 99–118.
Stanovich, K. E. (2009). What intelligence tests miss: The psychology of rational thought.
  Yale University Press.
Vellekoop, N. and M. Wiederholt (2017). Inflation expectations and choices of households:
  Evidence from matched survey and administrative data. Unpublished Manuscript,
  University of Frankfurt.
Weinberg, R. A. (1989). Intelligence and IQ: Landmark issues and great debates.
  American psychologist 44 (2), 98.
Yellen, J. (2016). Macroeconomic research after the crisis. Speech at the 60th annual
  economic conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Zafar, B. (2011). How do college students form expectations?             Journal of Labor
  Economics 29 (2), 301–348.
Zeldes, S. P. (1989). Consumption and liquidity constraints: An empirical investigation.
  The Journal of Political Economy 97 (2), 305–346.




                                           48
                                            Figure 2: Average Forecast Error by IQ
                               3
                      Mean Forecast Error
                              21




                                              1   2    3   4        5        6   7   8   9
                                                               Normalized IQ

This figure plots the average forecast error for inflation (in percentage points) across IQ levels. Forecast error
is the difference between the numerical forecast for 12-month-ahead inflation and ex-post realized inflation.
Vertical lines represent 95% confidence intervals around the estimated mean for each bin. We use the
confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to measure
inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ
is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9.
The sample period is from January 2001 to March 2015.




                                                                49
        Figure 3: Average Forecast Error by Income and Education Levels

                                           Panel A. Average Forecast Error by Income


                              3
                     Mean Forecast Error
                             21




                                            1    2       3    4       5        6    7       8   9
                                                             9 Income Percentiles




                                      Panel B. Average Forecast Error by Education
                              3
                     Mean Forecast Error
                              1 2




                                             3       4         5            6           7       8
                                                             Education Categories




Panel A of this figure plots the average forecast error for inflation (in percentage points) as a function of
9 income percentiles. Panel B plots the average forecast error for inflation across 6 education categories.
Education levels are based on the International Standard Classification of Education. Forecast error is the
difference between the numerical forecast for 12-month-ahead inflation and ex-post realized inflation. Vertical
lines represent 95% confidence intervals around the estimated mean for each bin. We use the confidential
micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to measure inflation
expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is the
standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. The
sample period is from January 2001 to March 2015.



                                                                  50
                                       Figure 4: Rounding and Implausible Values for Inflation Expectations by IQ




                                                                                                                                                                            .25
                  .7




                                                                                                                              Fraction Implausible Values (larger than |5|)
  Fraction Rounders (multiples of 5)




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                              .6




                                                                                                                                                       .15
                 .5




                                                                                                                                             .1
     .4




                                                                                                                                   .05
                                       1   2     3                                  4        5        6   7     8    9                                                             1     2   3   4        5        6                                          7   8   9
                                                                                        Normalized IQ                                                                                                Normalized IQ



 This figure plots the share of rounders (left panel) and the share of survey respondends who report forecasts for inflation
 larger than 5 in absolute value across IQ levels. We define rounders as survey participants who report multiples of
 5 for the numerical forecast for 12-month-ahead inflation. Vertical lines represent 95% confidence intervals around
 the estimated mean for each bin. We use the confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission
 consumer confidence survey to measure inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500
 individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values
 between 1 and 9. The sample period is from January 2001 to March 2015.




Figure 5: Yearly Standard Deviation of Monthly Inflation Rates and Fraction of Rounders
                                                               1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .16
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Difference Fraction Rounding Low-High IQ
                                                                                1
                                               Dispersion Monthly Inflation Rates




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .14
                                                                      .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .12
                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .1
                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .08
                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                               .06




                                                                                    2000                      2005                                                                2010               2015


 This figure plots the standard deviation of realized inflation within a year on the left y-axis and the differences in the
 fraction of rounders between low- and high-IQ men. We define rounders as survey participants who report multiples of
 5 for the numeric inflation forecast. We use the confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission
 consumer confidence survey to measure inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500
 individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values
 between 1 and 9. We define high-IQ men as survey participants with normalized IQ larger than 5. The sample period
 is from January 2001 to March 2015.




                                                                                                                         51
                  Figure 6: Dispersion of Forecasts of Inflation by IQ
                                                            10
                     Standard Deviation Inflation Expectations
                          4          6   2        8




                                                                 1   2   3   4        5        6   7   8   9
                                                                                 Normalized IQ



This figure plots the standard deviation for inflation (in percentage points) across IQ levels. We use the
confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to measure
inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ
is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9.
The sample period is from January 2001 to March 2015.




                                                                                  52
                        Figure 7: Knowledge about Inflation by IQ


                                                                         Knowledge About Inflation


                                            6
                           Number Correct Answers (out of 6)
                              3           4 2        5




                                                                Low IQ                               High IQ


                                                                Knowledge About Inflation: Scenarios
                                            2
                            Number Correct Answers (out of 2)
                                           10




                                                                Low IQ                               High IQ


                                                                  Knowledge About Inflation: Theory
                                            4
                            Number Correct Answers (out of 4)
                                   2        1     3




                                                                Low IQ                               High IQ




This figure plots the number of correct answers about the concept of inflation by low and high IQ. We fielded
six questions on MTurk about inflation and split the sample by IQ using the number of correct answers in
a cognitive reasoning test. Low-IQ survey participants correctly answered on average 4 and high-IQ survey
participants 4.8. We fielded two waves of the survey in August 2019 with 500 respondents per wave.




                                                                                 53
                                             Figure 8: Forecasting Errors of Random Process by IQ

                                   Panel A. Mean Absolute Forecast Errors: Stable and Volatile Process
                                   Absolute Forecast Error---Stable Process                                        Absolute Forecast Error---Volatile Process
                18




                                                                                                 40
                              15
 Mean Absolute Forecast Error




                                                                                    Mean Absolute Forecast Error
                                                                                                            30
                    12




                                                                                                20
      6       9




                                                                                     10
                3
                0




                                                                                                 0




                                    Low IQ                           High IQ                                        Low IQ                            High IQ




                                         Panel B. Mean Forecast Errors: Stable and Volatile Process
                                        Forecast Error---Stable Process                                                Forecast Error---Volatile Process
                15




                                                                                                 9
                12




                                                                                                        6
 Mean Forecast Error




                                                                                    Mean Forecast Error
             9




                                                                                            3
    6




                                                                                                 0
                3




                                                                                                 -3
                0




                                    Low IQ                           High IQ                                        Low IQ                            High IQ




This figure plots the average mean absolute forecast error (Panel A) and the average mean forecast error (Panel B)
across two groups of individuals based on cognitive abilities. Low-IQ respondents scored 4 or less in our cognitive ability
measure, whereas high-IQ respondents scored between 5 and 7 in the test. We produced these data through a forecasting
task inspired by Landier et al. (2018). We asked respondents to forecast two zero-mean AR(1) processes for 15 periods
with coefficients of mean reversion of 0.9. The left figures plot the statistics for a process with a volatility of 5 and the
right figures plot the statistics for a process with a volatility of 20. The forecasting were part of a survey on MTurk we
fielded in August 2019. The survey consisted of two sessions with 500 respondents each.




                                                                               54
            Figure 9: Concrete versus Abstract Associations with Inflation by IQ

                                                                                  Panel A. Concrete Associations
                                        .5
                                                                          Gas                                                                Amazon                                                                 Stocks




                                                                                                                .5




                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                    Frequency of Association with Infation




                                                                                            Frequency of Association with Infation




                                                                                                                                                               Frequency of Association with Infation
                                            .3




                                                                                                                    .3




                                                                                                                                                                                       .3
                              .2




                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                        .1




                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                                        0




                                                                                                                0




                                                                Low IQ            High IQ                                               Low IQ       High IQ                       0                       Low IQ            High IQ




                                                                                  Panel B. Abstract Associations
                                                                         Prices                                                                  Wages                                                          Savings
                                        1




                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                        .9




                                                                                                                .9




                                                                                                                                                                                   .9
                    Frequency of Association with Infation




                                                                                            Frequency of Association with Infation




                                                                                                                                                               Frequency of Association with Infation
                                                    .8




                                                                                                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                               .8
                                          .7




                                                                                                                  .7




                                                                                                                                                                                     .7
                                .6




                                                                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                       .5




                                                                                               .5




                                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                        .4




                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                        .3




                                                                                                                .3




                                                                                                                                                                                   .3




                                                                Low IQ            High IQ                                               Low IQ       High IQ                                               Low IQ            High IQ




This figure plots the frequency with which individuals mention each of 6 available words with inflation when picking
the first 3 words from the list they think are most related with the concept of “inflation.” Frequencies are reported as
average share of respondents mentioning each word across two groups—low-IQ respondents, who score 4 or less in our
cognitive ability measure, and high-IQ respondents, who score between 5 and 7 in the test. Panel A refer to the 3 words
in the list that constitute concrete concepts, whereas Panel B refer to the 3 words that constitute abstract concepts. We
produced these results through an association game task á la Leiser and Drori (2005), which was part of a survey on
MTurk we fielded in August 2019. The survey consisted of two sessions with 500 respondents each.



                                                                                                                                            55
                                                                          Figure 10: Economic Reasoning by IQ

                                                       Panel A. Rating of Provided Explanation and Euler Equation
                                                  Respondent-produced Explanations for Associations                                               If Higher Future Inflation Should Save More




                                                                                                                             .5
                                              1
 Average Rating Meaningful Explanations (0,1)
                                     .9




                                                                                                                                        .4
                                                                                                              Share Respondents Who Agree
                             .8




                                                                                                                               .3
                     .7




                                                                                                                      .2
              .6




                                                                                                              .1
      .5               .4




                                                                                                                             0




                                                   Low IQ                                      High IQ                                          Low IQ                                       High IQ




                                                                          Panel B. Inflation, Deflation, and Savings
                                                            Inflation Mainly Benefits Savers                                                             Persistent Deflation is Desirable
                       .6




                                                                                                                             .6
                              .5




                                                                                                                                           .5
   Share Respondents Who Agree




                                                                                                                Share Respondents Who Agree
                       .4




                                                                                                                                    .4
               .3




                                                                                                                            .3
         .2




                                                                                                                      .2
 .1




                                                                                                              .1
                       0




                                                                                                                             0




                                                   Low IQ                                      High IQ                                          Low IQ                                       High IQ




This figure plots mean absolute forecast error in Panel A and the mean forecast error in Panel B separately by low and
high IQ. Individuals had to forecast two zero-mean AR(1) processes for 15 periods with coefficients of mean reversion
of 0.9. The left figures plot the statistics for a process with a volatility of 5 and the right figures plot the statistics for
a process with a volatility of 20. We fielded these forecasting tasks on MTurk and split the sample by IQ using the
number of correct answers in a cognitive reasoning test. We fielded two waves of the survey in August 2019 with 500
respondents per wave.




                                                                                                         56
             Figure 11: Fraction of Forward-Looking Households by IQ
                  Fraction Forward Looking (Save for Retirement)
                                     .45.35                 .55




                                                                   1   2   3   4        5        6   7   8   9
                                                                                   Normalized IQ

This figure plots the share of households that report they save for retirement (conditional on saving in
general) as a function of normalized IQ in Finland. We use the confidential micro data underlying the
official European Commission consumer confidence survey to savings for retirement. Statistics Finland asks
a representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish
Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. The sample period is from January 2001 to
March 2015.




                                                                                     57
                             Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
This table reports descriptive statistics for the variables we use in the paper. We use the
confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence
survey to construct these variables. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500
individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces.
IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. The sample period is January 2001 to March
2015.

                    Inflation     Inflation        Total Debt     IQ                Income
Statistic          Perception    Expectation         [EUR]      Dummy       Age      [EUR]
Nobs                 27,184         27,568           27,540      27,568    27,568    27,568
Mean                  3.00           2.47            38,591       0.50     30.70     22,541
Std                   4.63           3.76            53,806       0.50      6.94     14,301
p1                    -5.00         -5.00                0         0         19       900
p10                   0.00           0.00                0         0         21      6,700
p25                   0.00           0.00                0         0         25      13,100
p50                   2.00           2.00            14,400        1         30      21,000
p75                   5.00           3.50            62,300        1         36      28,900
p90                   7.00           5.00           102,200        1         40      38,300
p99                  20.00          15.00           242,400        1         46      74,400

Single                 no          38.93%         Urban                      no     64.41%
                       yes         61.07%                                    yes    35.59%

Unemployed             no          94.17%         Helsinki                   no     72.19%
                       yes         5.83%                                     yes    27.81%

Kids                   no          22.41%         College                    no     65.67%
                       yes         77.59%                                    yes    34.33%

Rounders               no          59.00%         Save                       no     27.70%
                       yes         41.00%                                    yes    72.30%

Implausible            no          89.80%         Save                       no     70.53%
Values                 yes         10.20%         Retirement                 yes    29.47%

Durables           Good time       50.94%         Borrow                     no     85.04%
                    Neutral        28.67%         Education                  yes    14.96%
                   Bad time        20.40%
                                                  Borrow                     no     68.66%
                                                  Consumption                yes    31.34%




                                             58
              Table 2: Numerical Inflation Expectations by IQ
This table reports the average and standard deviation of inflation expectation by IQ category.
We use the confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer
confidence survey to measure inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative
sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish
Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. The sample period is from
January 2001 to March 2015.


                           Low-IQ Men                               High-IQ Men
 IQ           1        2        3        4          5         6        7        8        9
 Mean        3.46    2.80     2.58     2.42        2.40     2.36     2.28     2.30     2.26
 Std         8.70    5.93     5.52     4.66        4.66     4.16     3.47     4.13     3.31
 Nobs        928    2,221    2,860    7,011    9,528       8,099 6,030       3,213    2,688




                                              59
                   Table 3: Absolute Forecast Errors and IQ: Splits by Demographic Groups
     This table reports the coefficient estimates from a linear regression of absolute forecast errors on normalized IQ and individual
     demographics. For each demographic category listed above a column, we perform the analysis separately for respondents who
     belong to the category (Panel A) and respondents who do not belong to the category (Panel B). We define forecast errors
     as differences between inflation expectations and ex-post realized inflation. We use the confidential micro data underlying
     the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to measure inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a
     representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ
     obtains integer values between 1 and 9. The sample period is from January 2001 to March 2015. High IQ is a dummy that
     equals 1 if normalized IQ is larger than 5. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. The sample period is January
     2001 to March 2015.

                                 (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)              (7)
                                                                                         Top 50%         College      Econ/Business
                            Full Sample        Single      Below 35         Urban         Income         Degree          Degree
                                                                    Panel A. Respondent within Category
      High IQ              −0.2388 ∗ ∗∗ −0.2451 ∗ ∗∗ −0.2728 ∗ ∗∗ −0.1837 ∗ ∗∗ −0.2586 ∗ ∗∗ −0.1243 ∗ ∗∗              −0.1530∗
                            (0.0472)    (0.0534)      (0.0704)     (0.0597)     (0.0688)     (0.0508)                  (0.0884)




60
      Demographics               X               X            X               X             X               X                X
      Year-Month FE              X               X            X                             X               X                X
      Adj. R2                  0.0608          0.0509       0.0457          0.0467        0.0446         0.0758           0.0093
      Nobs                     27,568          16,837       11,231           9,812        10,713          9,463            2,949
                                                                 Panel B. Respondent outside Category
      High IQ                              −0.2100 ∗ ∗∗ −0.1915 ∗ ∗∗ −0.2745 ∗ ∗∗ −0.1760 ∗ ∗∗ −0.2830 ∗ ∗∗           −0.2563 ∗ ∗∗
                                            (0.0618)    (0.0481)      (0.0537)     (0.0500)     (0.0552)               (0.0441)
      Demographics                               X            X               X             X              X                X
      Year-Month FE                              X            X                             X              X                X
      Adj. R2                                  0.0663       0.0682          0.0566        0.0626         0.0447           0.0528
      Nobs                                     10,731       16,337          17,756        16,855         18,105           24,619
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
      Table 4: Absolute Forecast Errors and IQ: Types of Skills
This table reports the coefficient estimates from a linear regression of absolute forecast
errors on normalized IQ and individual demographics. We define forecast errors as
differences between inflation expectations and ex-post realized inflation. We use the
confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence
survey to measure inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample
of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish
Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. We also use IQ measures for
different subcategories: visuospatial, verbal, and arithmetic. The sample period is from
January 2001 to March 2015. High IQ is a dummy that equals 1 if normalized IQ is larger
than 5. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. The sample period is January
2001 to March 2015.

                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
 High IQ visuospatial       −0.1510∗∗∗                                       −0.0393
                            (0.0391)                                         (0.0434)
 High IQ verbal                            −0.2228∗∗∗                        −0.1385∗∗∗
                                           (0.0400)                           (0.0447)
 High IQ arithmetic                                         −0.2473∗∗∗       −0.1743∗∗∗
                                                             (0.0401)         (0.0462)

 Demographics                    X                X              X                X
 Year-Month FE                   X                X              X                X
 Adj. R2                       0.0549           0.0555         0.0557           0.0561
 Nobs                          27,484           27,484         27,484           27,484
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                           61
      Table 5: Rounding and Implausible Values by IQ
This table reports the coefficient estimates from a linear regression of a dummy
variable that equals 1 if the respondent reported a multiple of 5 as his inflation
forecast (columns (1)–(2)) and if he reported a number larger than 5 in absolute
value as his inflation forecast (columns (3)–(4)). We use the confidential micro
data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey
to measure inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative
sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score
from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9.
High IQ is a dummy that equals 1 if normalized IQ is larger than 5. Standard
errors are clustered at the quarter level. The sample period is from January
2001 to March 2015.

                                 Rounding                 Implausible Values
                           (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)
 High IQ              −0.1195∗∗∗ −0.0735∗∗∗           −0.0446∗∗∗ −0.0194∗∗∗
                      (0.0051)   (0.0061)             (0.0036)   (0.0044)


 Demographics                               X                            X
 Year-Month FE                              X                            X
 Adj. R2                  0.0142          0.0482         0.0049        0.0417
 Nobs                     38,289          28,807         31,841        24,345
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                          62
                  Table 6: Current Perceptions and Expectations and Past Inflation Expectations and IQ
     This table reports the coefficient estimates from a linear regression of inflation expectations (columns (1)–(2)) and inflation perceptions (columns
     (3)–(8)) on inflation expectations 6 months ago for men with high and low IQs. We use the confidential micro data underlying the official European
     Commission consumer confidence survey to measure inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals
     each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. We define High IQ
     as the sample of men with normalized IQ larger than 5. The sample period is March 1995 to December 1999.

                              Inflation Expectations                                          Inflation Perceptions
                                                                  All Periods           Periods of Stable Inflation      Periods of Changing Inflation
                                (1)              (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)               (7)             (8)
                              High IQ          Low IQ         High IQ     Low IQ        High IQ        Low IQ            High IQ        Low IQ
      Past expectations        0.231∗∗∗         0.025          0.243∗∗∗ 0.053∗∗∗         0.300∗∗∗       0.047∗            0.141            0.061∗∗




63
                              (0.0661)         (0.0476)       (0.047)   (0.021)         (0.054)        (0.028)           (0.090)          (0.024)

      Demographics                X              X               X           X             X              X                 X                X
      Year-Month FE               X              X               X           X             X              X                 X                X
      Adj. R2                    0.03           0.02            0.03        0.02          0.04           0.02              0.03             0.04
      Nobs                      1,082           774            1,367       1,185          922            782               445              403
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
              Table 7: Current Perceptions and Expectations and Past Inflation Expectations and IQ: by Wave
     This table reports the coefficient estimates from a linear regression of inflation expectations (columns (1)–(4)) and inflation perceptions (columns
     (5)–(8)) on inflation expectations 6 months ago for men with high and low IQs. Columns (1)–(2) and (5)–(6) regress answers during the second
     participation on the answers during the first participation in the survey and columns (3)–(4) and (7)–(8) do so for answers in the third and second
     participation. We use the confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to measure inflation
     expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish
     Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. We define High IQ as the sample of men with normalized IQ larger than 5. The sample
     period is March 1995 to December 1999.


                                               Inflation Expectations                                         Inflation Perceptions
                              Only Wave 2 and Wave 1                 All Waves               Only Wave 2 and Wave 1                   All Waves
                                  (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)                (7)          (8)
                                High IQ         Low IQ          High IQ       Low IQ          High IQ         Low IQ             High IQ      Low IQ




64
      Past expectations        0.2620∗∗∗        0.0258          0.2305∗∗∗     0.0253          0.2646∗∗∗       0.0357∗           0.2823∗∗∗     0.0292
                              (0.0347)         (0.0363)        (0.0661)      (0.0476)        (0.0362)        (0.0183)          (0.0530)      (0.0291)

      Demographics                 X               X               X             X               X               X                 X             X
      Year-Month FE                X               X               X             X               X               X                 X             X
      Adj. R2                    0.1308          0.0335          0.0253        0.0189          0.1332          0.0753            0.0359        0.0316
      Nobs                        633             443            1,082          774             619             432              1,064          760
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
                                         Table 8: Forecast Errors on Forecast Revisions by IQ
     This table reports the coefficient estimates from the following linear specification of forecast errors for inflation on forecast revisions for men
     with high and low IQs. We define forecast errors as ex-post realized inflation minus on expected inflation. We define forecast revision as
     the change in forecast for 10-month ahead inflation from six month before. We thus estimate the following specifications (see Coibion and
     Gorodnichenko (2015) and Bordalo, Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2018)):
                                                                                      IQ
                                                          xt+1 − xi,t+1|t = αIQ + βF Ri,t,1 + εi,t ,

     where the forecast errors of agent i is the difference between the realized value of a variable, xt+1 , minus the forecast at time t, xi,t+1|t . The
     forecast revision, F Ri,t,1 = xi,t+1|t − xi,t+1|t−1 . We use the confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer
     confidence survey to measure inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is
     the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. We define High IQ as the sample
     of men with normalized IQ larger than 5. The sample period is March 1995 to December 1999.

                                 (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)           (6)              (7)            (8)




65
                               High IQ         Low IQ         High IQ        Low IQ            High IQ       Low IQ           High IQ        Low IQ
      Forecast revision      −0.7612∗∗∗ −0.5235∗∗∗          −0.7771∗∗∗ −0.5257∗∗∗           −0.8533∗∗∗ −0.6333∗∗∗           −0.8739∗∗∗ −0.5191
                              (0.0979)   (0.1516)            (0.0910)   (0.1519)             (0.0634)   (0.1653)             (0.1114)   (0.4191)

      Year-Month FE                                               X             X                 X             X                X             X
      Demographics                                                                                X             X                X             X
      Individual FE                                                                                                              X             X
      Pseudo R2                 0.6545         0.4817          0.7284         0.5207            0.8193        0.6362           0.9581        0.9426
      Nobs                      1,377          1,203           1,377          1,203             1,082          774             1,082          774
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
                        Table 9: Inflation Expectations and Readiness to Spend: Splits by Demographic Groups

     This table reports the average marginal effects of a multinomial logit regression. Households’ readiness to purchase durables is the dependent variable. Inflation
     increase is a dummy variable that equals 1 when a survey participant replies that inflation will increase. For each demographic category listed above a column, we
     perform the analysis separately for respondents who belong to the category (Panel A) and respondents who do not belong to the category (Panel B). We use the
     confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to construct these variables. Statistics Finland asks a representative
     sample of 1,500 individuals each month whether it is a good time to purchase durables given the current economic conditions. Individuals can reply that it is a good
     time, it is a bad time, or it is neither a good time nor a bad time. In this table, we study the “it is a good time” outcome. IQ is the standardized test score from the
     Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and 9. We define High IQ as the sample of men with normalized IQ larger than 5. Standard errors are
     clustered at the quarter level. The sample period is January 2001 to March 2015.

                                                                                                                         Top 50%                College            Econ/Business
                             Full Sample               Single               Below 35                 Urban                 Income               Degree                 Degree
                            (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)          (7)       (8)         (9)        (10)      (11)        (12)       (13)       (14)
                          High IQ    Low IQ      High IQ     Low IQ     High IQ   Low IQ       High IQ   Low IQ      High IQ    Low IQ    High IQ     Low IQ     High IQ    Low IQ
                                                                                          Panel A. Respondent within Category
      Expects Higher       0.0358∗∗∗ −0.0096      0.0377∗∗ −0.0183       0.0614∗∗∗ −0.004       0.0391∗∗ −0.0131     0.0723∗∗∗ −0.0288     0.0390∗∗    0.0254     0.0459     0.1109∗∗
      Inflation           (0.0119)    (0.0138)   (0.0167)  (0.0177)     (0.0221)   (0.0201)    (0.0192)  (0.0239)   (0.0207)   (0.0233)   (0.0174)    (0.0260)   (0.0309)   (0.0458)




66
      Demographics           X           X         X           X           X           X           X         X          X          X         X           X          X          X
      Year-Month FE          X           X         X           X           X           X           X         X          X          X         X           X          X          X
      Pseudo R2            0.0108      0.0091    0.0098      0.0069     0.0097      0.0054      0.0109    0.0109      0.0094    0.0064    0.0131      0.0156     0.0148     0.0276
      Nobs                 16,606      16,256    10,109      11,107      6,499       7,469       7,070     4,644      6,593      6,703     7,512       3,051      2,024      1,398


                                                                                           Panel B. Respondent outside Category
      Expects Higher                              0.0356∗∗    0.0067     0.0211    −0.0152        0.0333∗∗ −0.0061     0.0121   0.0016     0.0354∗∗ −0.0200       0.0341∗∗∗ −0.0225∗
      Inflation                                  (0.0163)    (0.0211)   (0.0158)    (0.0187)     (0.0169)  (0.0168)   (0.0150) (0.0178)   (0.0173)  (0.0152)     (0.0129)   (0.0135)

      Demographics                                  X           X         X            X           X        X           X          X         X          X          X          X
      Year-Month FE                                 X           X         X            X           X        X           X          X         X          X          X          X
      Pseudo R2                                  0.0145      0.0171     0.0131      0.0127      0.0107    0.0092      0.0146    0.0122    0.0097      0.008      0.0111     0.0085
      Nobs                                        6,497       5,149     10,107       8,787       9,536    11,612      10,013     9,553     9,094      13,205     14,582     14,858
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
                    Table 10: Saving and Borrowing Motives by IQ
This table reports the average marginal effects of individuals’ saving and borrowing motives.
Individuals’ saving and borrowing motives are the dependent variables that equal dummy variables
that equal 1 if the survey participant agrees with the statement. We use the confidential micro
data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to measure inflation
expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. IQ is
the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1 and
9. High IQ is a dummy that equals 1 if normalized IQ is larger than 5. The sample period is from
January 2001 to March 2015.

                              Saving Motives                            Borrowing Motives
                       for any purpose for retirement              for consumption for education
                             (1)             (2)                          (3)           (4)
 High IQ                  −0.1069∗∗∗       0.1045∗∗∗                    0.0632           0.3157∗∗∗
                           (0.0200)       (0.0287)                     (0.0454)         (0.0459)


 Demographics                 X              X                            X                X
 Year-Month FE                X              X                            X                X
 Pseudo R2                  0.0046         0.0482                       0.0795           0.0259
 Nobs                       33,456         13,886                       4,153            4,155

 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                67
     Table 11: Inflation Expectations and Readiness to Spend: Channels
This table reports the average marginal effects of a multinomial logit regression. Individuals’ readiness
to purchase durables is the dependent variable. Inflation expectation is a dummy variable which
equals 1 when a household replies that inflation will increase. We use the confidential micro data
underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to construct these variables.
The surveys ask representative samples of individuals on a monthly basis whether it is a good time to
purchase durables given the current economic conditions. Individuals can reply that it is a good time,
it is a bad time, or it is neither a good time nor a bad time. In this table we study the “it is a good
time” outcome. We measure normalized IQ using data from the official military entrance exam in
Finland. Demographics controls are age, age2 , sex, marital status, log of income, employment status,
number of children, urban versus rural classification, college dummy, and a dummy that equals 1 if
the respondent lives in Helsinki. We cluster standard errors at the quarter level. The sample period
is from January 2001 to March 2015.

                          (1)                 (2)                    (3)                 (4)
 Panel A               Abs Perception Error <= Q50t               Abs Perception Error <= Q25t
                       High IQ         Low IQ                     High IQ         Low IQ
 Expects Higher         0.0472∗∗∗           0.0209                 0.0587∗∗            0.0149
 Inflation             (0.0153)            (0.0165)               (0.0239)            (0.0250)

 Demographics             X                    X                      X                   X
 Year-Month FE            X                    X                      X                   X
 Nobs                   10,115               8,984                  4,800               4,007


 Panel B                Abs Forecast Error <= Q50t                 Abs Forecast Error <= Q25t
                       High IQ         Low IQ                     High IQ         Low IQ
 Expects Higher         0.0401∗∗            0.0069                 0.0409              0.0112
 Inflation             (0.0184)            (0.0243)               (0.0254)            (0.0298)

 Demographics              X                   X                      X                   X
 Year-Month FE             X                   X                      X                   X
 Nobs                    9,699               8,694                  5,869               5,262


 Panel C                      Economics Major                           Engineering Major
                       High IQ         Low IQ                     High IQ         Low IQ
 Expects Higher         0.0619∗             0.1059∗∗             −0.0220             −0.2886
 Inflation             (0.0330)            (0.0475)               (0.0964)            (0.2782)

 Demographics              X                   X                      X                  X
 Year-Month FE             X                   X                      X                  X
 Nobs                    1,751               1,228                   273                 52
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                     68
                         Online Appendix:

            IQ, Expectations, and Choice
Francesco D’Acunto, Daniel Hoang, Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber

                         Not for Publication




                                  1
                 Figure A.1: Implausible Values for Inflation Expectations by IQ




                                       .2          .15
                          Fraction Implausible Values
                         .05           .1
                                       0




                                                         1   2   3   4        5        6   7   8   9
                                                                         Normalized IQ




This figure plots the share of survey respondents who report forecasts for inflation larger than a threhold in absolute
value by IQ levels. The thresholds we consider are 5% (solid line), 7% (long-dashed line), 10% (short-dashed line), and
12% (dash-dotted line). We use the confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer
confidence survey to measure inflation expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals
each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer values between 1
and 9. We define high-IQ men as survey participants with normalized IQ larger than 5. The sample period is from
January 2001 to March 2015.




                                                                           2
   Figure A.2: Distribution of Inflation Perceptions and Expectations by IQ


                     Panel B. Distribution of Inflation Perceptions by IQ
                                            Inflation Perceptions
                     .15
                     .1
                     .05
                     0




                           -20        -10                 0          10          20

                                                High IQ        Low IQ




                    Panel A. Distribution of Inflation Expectations by IQ
                                            Inflation Expectations
                     .15
                     .1
                     .05
                     0




                           -20        -10                 0          10          20

                                                High IQ        Low IQ



This figure plots the density of numerical inflation perceptions (Panel A) and numerical inflation
expectations (Panel B) across men with IQ levels between 1 and 5 (“Low IQ”) and between 6 and 9
(“High IQ”). IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ obtains integer
values between 1 and 9. To measure numerical inflation perceptions and expectations, we use the
confidential micro data underlying the official European Commission consumer confidence survey.
Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals each month. The sample period
is from January 2001 to March 2015. The densities are estimated using an Epanechnikov kernel
with a bandwidth of 1.5 in both Panels.




                                                     3
Table A.1: Absolute Forecast Errors and IQ: Time Since Test
This table reports the coefficient estimates from a linear regression of absolute
forecast errors on normalized IQ and several interaction terms of IQ with dummy
variables and age. 1long ago equals 1 for individuals that are in the top third of the
distribution of the time gap between when they took the IQ test and the survey on
inflation expectations, 1medium ago equals 1 for individuals that are in the middle
third, and 1pre test equals 1 for individuals that answered the survey on inflation
expectations before the IQ test. We use the confidential micro data underlying
the official European Commission consumer confidence survey to measure inflation
expectations. Statistics Finland asks a representative sample of 1,500 individuals
each month. IQ is the standardized test score from the Finnish Defence Forces. IQ
obtains integer values between 1 and 9. The sample period is from January 2001
to March 2015. High IQ is a dummy that equals 1 if normalized IQ is larger than
5. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. The sample period is January
2001 to March 2015.

                                  (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
 High IQ                      −0.2467∗∗∗      −0.2969∗∗∗    −0.2467∗∗∗    −0.3644∗∗
                               (0.0503)        (0.0852)      (0.0406)      (0.1754)
 High IQ ×   1long ago          0.0022         0.0528
                               (0.0787)       (0.1059)
 High IQ ×   1medium ago                       0.0721
                                              (0.1045)
 High IQ ×   1pre test                                        0.0785
                                                             (0.4126)
 High IQ × age                                                              0.0039
                                                                           (0.0056)

 Demographics                     X              X              X             X
 Year-Month FE                    X              X              X             X
 Pseudo R2                      0.0556         0.0558         0.0557        0.0556
 Nobs                           27,568         27,568         27,568        27,568

 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                          4
Table A.2: (Absolute) Forecast Errors and IQ: MTurk Evidence
This table reports the coefficient estimates from a linear regression of mean
(absolute) forecast errors on an IQ dummy and several demographic covariates.
Individuals had to forecast two zero-mean AR(1) processes for 15 periods with
coefficients of mean reversion of 0.9. Stable columns report the statistics for a
process with a volatility of 5 and Volatile columns report the statistics for a process
with a volatility of 20. We fielded these forecasting tasks on MTurk. High IQ is
a dummy that takes a value of 1 if individuals answered more than four out of
seven cognitive reasoning questions correctly. We fielded two waves of the survey in
August 2019 with 500 respondents per wave. Covariates include dummy variables
for risk tolerance, general trust, reciprocity, willingness to take revenge, gender, four
age group dummies, five income group dummies, four education group dummies, as
well as dummies that take the value of one if the survey respondent is in charge of
financial decision and is the main grocery shopper within household.

                       Mean Forecast Errors         Mean Absolute Forecast Errors
                        Stable       Volatile         Stable           Volatile
                         (1)           (2)             (3)               (4)
  High IQ             −6.318∗∗∗ −4.671∗∗∗           −7.057∗∗∗         −2.642∗∗∗
                      (0.996)   (0.822)             (0.971)           (0.560)

  Demographics             X            X               X                 X
  Pseudo R2              0.065        0.059           0.080             0.036
  Nobs                    922          922             922               922

  Standard errors in parentheses
  ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                           5
Table A.3: Economic Reasoning by IQ: Plausible Expectations
This table reports the coefficient estimates from a linear regression of the average
rating of the provided reasoning behind associating inflation with different words
on a scale from 0 to 1 in column (1), whether survey participants think persistent
inflation is desirable in column (2), on whether survey participants think inflation
benefits savers on average in column (3), and whether they would increase their
savings propensity to unexpected news about inflation in column (4) on an IQ
dummy and several demographic covariates for the subsample of individuals that
have reasonable inflation perceptions and expectations. We define reasonable when
perceptions and expectations between 0% and 4%. High IQ is a dummy that
takes a value of 1 if individuals answered more than four out of seven cognitive
reasoning questions correctly. We fielded two waves of the survey in August
2019 with 500 respondents per wave. Covariates include dummy variables for risk
tolerance, general trust, reciprocity, willingness to take revenge, gender, four age
group dummies, five income group dummies, four education group dummies, as
well as dummies that take the value of one if the survey respondent is in charge of
financial decision and is the main grocery shopper within household.

                           Knowledge      Deflation      Saver      Saving
                              (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)
       High IQ                0.0902∗∗   −0.128∗∗      −0.110∗∗ −0.0958∗
                             (0.0318)    (0.0405)      (0.0415) (0.0414)

       Demographics              X            X             X          X
       Pseudo R2              0.0250       0.0550        0.0600     0.0170
       Nobs                     403          412           412        412

       Standard errors in parentheses
       ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                          6
