                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MARGINAL JOBS AND JOB SURPLUS:
                     A TEST OF THE EFFICIENCY OF SEPARATIONS

                                          Simon Jäger
                                       Benjamin Schoefer
                                        Josef Zweimüller

                                      Working Paper 25492
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25492


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019


We thank the editor, Thomas Lemieux, and anonymous referees, as well as Daron Acemoglu,
Josh Angrist, David Autor, Mark Bils, Leo Kaas, Philipp Kircher, Patrick Kline, Moritz Kuhn,
Guido Menzio, Thijs van Rens, as well as audiences at conferences at the ASSA Meeting, briq
Workshop, ECB/CEPR Labour MarketWorkshop, London-Paris Public Economics Conference,
CEPR/IZA Annual Symposium, CEPR Public Economics Symposium, MILLS, Ammersee
Workshop, NBER SI Macro Perspectives, NBER Labor Studies, NBER Public Economics,
NBER Aging Program, NBER Longer Working Lives Workshop, NYU Search Theory
Workshop, SED, CESifo Venice, and at seminars at Banca d’Italia, the Philadelphia Fed,
Harvard, IAB, INSEAD, U Mannheim, UC Berkeley, UC Santa Barbara, UCL, and U Penn. Karl
Aspelund, Carolin Baum, Nikhil Basavappa, Dominik Egloff, Andreas Kettemann, René Livas,
Nelson Mesker, Damian Osterwalder, Nina Roussille, Philippe Ruh, Martina Uccioli, Samuel
Young, and Dalton Zhang provided excellent research assistance. Jäger and Schoefer
acknowledge financial support from the Boston Retirement Research Center, the National
Science Foundation, and the Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Simon Jäger, Benjamin Schoefer, and Josef Zweimüller. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Marginal Jobs and Job Surplus: A Test of the Efficiency of Separations
Simon Jäger, Benjamin Schoefer, and Josef Zweimüller
NBER Working Paper No. 25492
January 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. E2,E24,H0,H3,J0,J01,J18,J23,J31,J63,J64,J65

                                         ABSTRACT

We present a test of Coasean theories of efficient separations. We study a cohort of jobs from the
introduction through the repeal of a large, age- and region-specific unemployment benefit
extension in Austria. In the treatment group, 18% fewer jobs survive. According to the Coasean
view, the destroyed marginal jobs had low joint surplus. Hence, after the repeal, the treatment
survivors should be dramatically more resilient than the ineligible control group survivors.
Strikingly, the two groups instead exhibit identical post-repeal separation behavior. We provide
and empirically support an alternative model in which wage rigidity drives the inefficient
separation dynamics.

Simon Jäger                                     Josef Zweimüller
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
MIT                                             University of Zurich
50 Memorial Drive                               Schoenberggasse 1
Cambridge, MA 02142                             8001, Zurich
and NBER                                        Switzerland
sjaeger@mit.edu                                 josef.zweimueller@econ.uzh.ch

Benjamin Schoefer
Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
schoefer@berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
Coasean theories of jobs assume that an employer and worker exploit all gains from trade
and reach bilaterally efficient outcomes, splitting joint job surplus through unrestricted
transferable-utility compensation arrangements. All job separations are mutually prefer-
able and efficient, occurring if and only if joint surplus would otherwise turn negative. Due
to its theoretical appeal, bilateral efficiency remains the dominant assumption in models of
the labor market. Conversely, non-Coasean frictions such as wage rigidity that can result
in inefficient separations (Hall and Lazear, 1984) are often dismissed a priori (starting with
Barro, 1977; Becker, Landes, and Michael, 1977). The same properties that underlie the
theoretical appeal of the Coasean hypothesis have also shielded it from empirical tests.
First, the abstract concept of surplus is not observable, let alone surplus of a terminated
job. Second, heterogeneous consequences of separations need not be informative. For
example, even though layoffs may leave workers dramatically worse off than quits, both
labels can reflect efficient separations (McLaughlin, 1991). Third, insensitivity of wages
to shocks can still be consistent with bilateral efficiency (MacLeod and Malcomson, 1993;
Hall, 2005; Cahuc, Postel-Vinay, and Robin, 2006; Hall and Milgrom, 2008).1
    We overcome these challenges with a revealed-preference test of group-level separation
behavior using a quasi-experimental research design. We study a transitory treatment that,
while active, reduces joint job surplus and thereby causes separations. The treatment is
then sharply repealed. Now, the group of surviving jobs lacks a mass of marginal (low-
surplus) matches. Under the Coasean view, this group of treatment survivors should
subsequently exhibit resilience to any kind of shocks compared to a control group, in
which low-surplus jobs have remained.
    Our treatment reducing joint job surplus is an unemployment insurance (UI) benefit
extension, which boosted workers’ outside option (nonemployment). Specifically, the
program raised potential benefit duration from originally one to four years in Austria
in 1988. Since eligibility was determined by a sharp age cutoff (age 50 and up) and the
program was region-specific, we implement a difference-in-differences design comparing
age groups and regions in the universe of Austrian social security data. Crucially, the
program was abruptly repealed in 1993, which permits our test: after the program repeal,
the group of formerly treated job survivors should be more resilient – i.e. have fewer
separations – in response to any future shocks, compared to the control group.
    Our first empirical step documents that the program triggered an increase in separa-
   1This challenge also implies that although measured wages in Austria may appear insensitive to (nonem-
ployment) outside option shifts (Jäger et al., forthcoming), such wage insensitivity among stayers need not
be allocative for separations.


                                                    1
tions of 10.9ppt (27%) over the five-year horizon the program was active: 51.4% of jobs
in the treatment group separated (largely into long-term nonemployment), compared to
a counterfactual separation rate of 40.5% absent the reform.2 Alternatively put, 18% of
the surviving jobs in the control group would have separated had the group also been
exposed to the UI extension. Importantly, on their own and without the post-repeal pe-
riod, this initial treatment effect and separation behavior during the policy period are not
directly informative about the efficiency of separations; they simply reflect local densities
of low-surplus, marginal jobs.
    In a second step, we exploit the abrupt repeal of the policy in 1993. We track the jobs
active both already at the onset of the program in 1988 and still active still at the repeal
("survivors"). The repeal realigns the surplus distributions among job survivors in both
the former treatment and control groups, except that, at the group level, the treatment
survivors now feature a missing mass of marginal matches (the initial separators). By
the Coasean view, this set of marginal jobs should have joint surplus between zero and a
cutoff equal to the surplus value of the UI program. These marginal matches should be
the first to separate in the control group, ahead of any inframarginal program survivors.
    Strikingly – and inconsistent with the Coasean prediction – the two groups exhibit
identical post-repeal separation behavior in the data, despite the massive depletion in
the ranks of the former treatment group, which is around 18% smaller than the control
group due to the treatment. The absence of resilience holds unconditionally as well as in
response to negative labor demand events.
    To quantify the gap between the Coasean prediction and the data, we construct a bench-
mark for post-repeal separations among treatment survivors. We exploit the Coasean
pecking order of joint job surplus. For small shocks, separations should occur in the
control group but not the former treatment group. There, separations only start once the
control group post-repeal separation rate crosses the threshold given by the treatment
effect size of the initial UI extension. The treatment effect was large, so this Coasean
benchmark predicts substantial resilience, which the data reject.
    Moreover, we show that variants of the Coasean view can only rationalize the identical
post-repeal separation behavior under narrow conditions: idiosyncratic job-level surplus
would need to exhibit no persistence whatsoever, so that full reshuffling of surplus replen-
ishes the mass of marginal matches in the former treatment group. Yet, since such full
reshuffling would need to occur already within the very first year after the repeal and, we
   2Winter-Ebmer (2003) studies inflow effects of the program between two groups (all below 50 vs. 50-65)
using a 2% sample of our data. Lalive, Landais, and Zweimüller (2015), who focus on job finding spillovers
among the unemployed during the policy period, also include separations as an outcome (Table 3).



                                                    2
estimate, in 96% of jobs, this reconciliation appears implausible. Lastly, we also rule out
various potential concerns that might mask Coasean dynamics such as spillovers (using
our multiple control groups as well as employer-level treatment intensity), or separations
of high- rather than low-surplus jobs.
    Which non-Coasean model can account for the inefficient separation dynamics? We
propose and then provide empirical support for wage rigidity as a parsimonious and plau-
sible alternative model.3 By preventing the flexible (re)bargaining underlying the Coasean
result, wage rigidity complicates the participation constraint from single-dimensional
Coasean joint surplus to two unilateral surpluses: separations occur because either worker
or firm surplus turns negative. As a result, jobs can inefficiently separate despite positive
joint surplus, such that one party’s surplus remains large enough to, in principle, bribe
the other party into continuation.
    In this non-Coasean setting with wage rigidity, the original UI extension, which boosted
worker’s outside options, would have destroyed matches with initially low worker surplus.
But many marginal matches with low firm surplus can remain. After the repeal, the former
treatment group can therefore exhibit just as large a sensitivity to firm surplus shifts as
the control group. Non-resilience emerges if most post-repeal separations are due to firm
shocks, for example if baseline worker surplus is high and firm surplus is small (and the
two are not strongly correlated).
    Our alternative non-Coasean model with wage rigidity is plausible and consistent
with the data and institutional setting along various dimensions. First, we show that non-
resilience holds for negative labor demand shocks, consistent with both groups having
retained matches with low firm surplus and the policy having destroyed low worker-
surplus matches. Second, for our sample of older, high-tenured workers, the required joint
distribution – high worker surplus and low firm surplus – is predicted by several models of
career trajectories, namely compensation backloading in implicit contract models, (Lazear,
1979, 1981; Frimmel et al., 2018), or rising worker rents from renegotiations in employer
competition models (Cahuc, Postel-Vinay, and Robin, 2006). Third, Austria mandates
multiple months of severance payments for longer-tenured workers that are foregone in
unilateral quits. Fourth, the exceptional generosity of the UI extension – three additional
years of eligibility, potentially serving as a bridge into early retirement, proved attractive to
otherwise inframarginal workers in high-worker-surplus matches.4 Fifth, we review wage
   3In contrast to Jäger et al. (forthcoming) studying reforms of replacement rates, we cannot credibly study
wage effects in the present setting given the large attrition implied by the separation effects. Importantly,
wage dynamics among stayers need not be allocative and hence not be informative about the efficiency of
separations as described in our motivation above.
   4A prediction of this view is that smaller shifts in outside options should not induce workers to separate.



                                                      3
setting institutions in Austria. Collectively bargained wage floors often leave considerable
scope for deviations. Most importantly, the type of wage rigidity relevant to our study
likely includes broader frictions such as constraints on firms’ capacity to differentiate
wages between very similar workers exposed to idiosyncratic (in our case sharply age-
specific) surplus shocks.
    Our paper concludes with a direct, constructive test that supports wage rigidity as the
plausible friction underlying the inefficient separation dynamics. We construct empirical
proxies for the kind of wage rigidity relevant to our setting, which is broader than stan-
dard downward rigidity and also reflects firms’ ability to differentiate wages due to the
sharp age eligibility criterion. We sort our sample into quantiles by these indices, and
replicate our full design separately in each cell. First, we find that the initial treatment ef-
fect stemmed from pockets of the labor market with high wage rigidity. The flexible-wage
cells exhibit no initial separation responses (a pattern not driven by higher baseline sur-
plus). Second, the rigid wage groups exhibit essentially no resilience after the repeal, and
confidence intervals permit us to rule out that the data accord with the Coasean bench-
mark in these groups. Instead, the separation behavior in these cells is consistent with
our non-Coasean model with rigid wages. The flexible wage cells do not exhibit resilience
either, which is plausibly consistent with more Coasean dynamics in these cells: here, the
initial treatment effect was attenuated (perhaps through more efficient bargaining, which
we cannot directly measure), thus leaving no "hole" in the joint-surplus distribution. To-
gether, these patterns can also rationalize why the overall labor market we study did not
exhibit any resilience whatsoever.
    Section 2 presents an overview of the Austrian institutional context, the policy, and
our data. Section 3 presents our benchmark Coasean model. In Section 4, we document
the large separation effects entailed by the UI extension. Section 5 reports the results of
our core test comparing separation behavior of the treatment and control groups after
the program was repealed. Section 6 discusses and dismisses variants of the Coasean
model potentially rationalizing the data. Section 7 presents a non-Coasean setting with
wage rigidity that can account for the full set of facts. We provide supporting empirical
evidence for wage rigidity as driving the inefficient separation dynamics in Section 8. The
last section concludes.
Indeed, different, smaller Austrian UI reforms do not appear to entail separation effects even among older
workers and even during the 1980s in Austria (Jäger et al., forthcoming).




                                                    4
2     Institutional Context, the Policy Variation, and Data
We review the Austrian UI system, the reform, other institutional context, and our data.


2.1    The Austrian UI System and the UI Benefit Extension
The Austrian UI System During the 1980s and 1990s Two crucial institutional features
ensure that UI generosity cleanly shifts the nonemployment outside option of workers
in our setting. First, Austrian workers are fully eligible for UI benefits upon quitting after a
four-week waiting period. Second, similar to most other European countries, the Austrian
system does not feature experience rating, as the Austrian UI system is funded through
employer and employee payroll taxes (which were unaffected by the reform we study).
    During the 1980s and 1990s, the gross replacement rate was between 40 and 48% for
most employees, and capped below and above at a minimum and maximum amount.5 The
potential benefit duration (PBD) of UI benefits during the 1980s was 30 weeks, provided
the worker had been employed (and paid UI contributions) for at least three out of the
last five years; otherwise, PBD was 20 weeks. After exhaustion of UI, the unemployed
can apply for unemployment assistance (UA, “Notstandshilfe”), capped at 92 percent of
UI benefits (detailed in Appendix A).

1988-93 Regional Extended Benefit Program (REBP) In 1988, the Austrian government
enacted a regional extended benefit program (REBP), a large region- and age-specific PBD
expansion from originally 30 weeks to 209 weeks . Figure 1 Panel (a) plots the PBD by age
group and region over time. We calculate the present value of the cash value of extended
benefits to correspond to about 71% of a typical worker’s annual salary in Appendix A.
    A job loser had to satisfy the following criteria at the beginning of the unemployment
spell: (i) age 50 or older; (ii) a continuous work history (780 employment weeks during
the last 25 years prior to the current unemployment spell); (iii) residence in any of the 28
selected labor market districts for at least 6 months prior to the claim; and (iv) start of a
new unemployment spell after June 1988 or spell in progress in June 1988.6
    Therefore, the reform induces variation along two dimensions, permitting a difference-
in-differences design. First, across cohorts as we can compare workers aged 50 and above
during the reform period to their younger peers and second, across regions comparing
REBP regions to non-REBP regions. The difference-in-differences nature of our research
design allows us to control for unobservable confounders at the region and cohort level.
    5UI benefits are not taxed. See Jäger et al. (forthcoming) for details on replacement rates.
    6The location requirement was tightened in 1991 to preceding employment in the REBP regions.


                                                   5
We net out region-level shocks (including market-level effects of the reform) by comparing
slightly younger and older workers in the same region who were narrowly affected or
unaffected by the reform. We also net out age- or cohort-specific factors by comparing the
same cohorts across regions.
    Figure 1 Panel (a) also plots an economy-wide UI reform in August 1989 that shifted
benefit duration nation-wide.7 The nation-wide 1989 reform changed PBD based on age
and experience and is thus orthogonal to the cross-regional variation we leverage; it is
netted out through our cross-regional difference. In sum, for job losers from August 1989
onward, REBP’s incremental effect on duration was 3 years (as then the baseline PBD was
52 weeks) and 3.44 years (= 209 weeks – 30 weeks) before August 1989.
    REBP aimed to mitigate labor market consequences of a crisis in iron, steel, and other
heavy industries (“steel sector” in the following). The state-owned company, the Oester-
reichische Industrie AG (OeIAG), had suffered from low commodity prices, shrinking
markets, and low productivity since the mid-1970s. In response, the new OeIAG manage-
ment implemented a sequence of restructuring plans during the 1980s, leading to plant
closures and downsizing. The REBP regions were selected due to their larger share of
employment in the steel sector: in the REBP regions, about 17% of workers were employed
in the steel sector, compared to around 5% in the non-REBP-regions. Figure 1 Panel (b)
provides a map of the REBP labor market districts.
    Importantly, REBP eligibility criteria did not include any industry requirement. Never-
theless, to minimize UI policy endogeneity concerns, our empirical analysis excludes steel
sector employees. Moreover, the second difference (between slightly younger, ineligible
cohorts in the REBP and non-REBP regions) nets out any potential spillovers from the
steel sector decline, or other region-specific shocks or trends. We also dismiss potential
spillovers from treatment intensity at the industry or firm level in Section 6.3.

Repeal of the Program REBP was initially in effect until December 1991 before it was
extended in January 1992.8 REBP was then repealed on August 1, 1993, stopping accep-
tance of new entrants yet also grandfathering in claimants in ongoing spells who had
    7The reform raised PBD for workers aged 40 to 49 (50 and above) to 39 (52) weeks with an experience
requirement of 312 (468) weeks of employment in the last 10 (15) years. The reform also increased the
replacement rate from 41 to 47% in the monthly income bracket from 5,000 to 10,000 ATS, roughly 400 to
800 USD at the time.
    8The 1992 extension enacted two changes for new spells. First, the benefit extension was repealed in 6 of
the original 28 regions. We exclude from our analysis the set of treated regions that were excluded after the
1991 reform. Second, the 1992 extension tightened eligibility criteria: new beneficiaries had to be not only
residents, but also previously employed in a treated region.




                                                     6
previously established eligibility.9 The repeal decision was formally announced in June
1993, an implementation gap of only two months. The program ended abruptly: as late as
January 1993, the Austrian government had considered expanding the program to older
workers in the entire country, along with changes in the eligibility requirements.10 In the
following months, the government reversed course and repealed REBP.


2.2    Other Institutional Features
Wage Setting While collective bargaining coverage is near universal, Austrian institu-
tions also leave substantial room for decentralized, flexible wage setting. Bargaining
agreements, often concluded at the industry-by-occupation level, regulate wage floors for
worker categories usually by experience or tenure (but not age). However, actually paid
wages substantially exceed the wage floors, for example, by more than 20% in manufactur-
ing during our reform period (Leoni and Pollan, 2011). There is also substantial scope for
wage differentiation between firms within an industry, as evidenced, for example, by in-
dividual firms sharing rents with workers and large pay dispersion between firms (Jäger
et al., forthcoming). In fact, at the individual worker level, downward nominal wage
rigidity appears lower or similar in Austria compared to, e.g., Germany or the United
States (Dickens et al., 2007; Elsby and Solon, 2019). In our empirical analysis, we include a
heterogeneity analysis along proxies of firms’ ability to differentiate wages across workers
to probe the role of wage flexibility in our results.

Interaction of UI with Other Social Policies By interacting with other policies, REBP
could serve as a bridge into permanent nonemployment. In the absence of REBP, unem-
ployed men could effectively retire early at age 58 by claiming unemployment benefits for
one year, special income support for another, and then drawing a regular public pension
at age 60.11 Since REBP extended the maximum duration of UI benefits by three years,
eligible workers could permanently withdraw from the labor force as early as age 55.
    Another important program was disability insurance (DI), which can interact with UI
in labor supply (Staubli, 2011). During the study period, the Austrian system granted
   9In addition, a grandfathering clause (§81) covered separations occurring post-repeal due to the advance
notice period. Empirically, we thus analyze post-repeal resilience starting in 1994q1.
  10We confirm this course of events in a newspaper analysis. For instance, a major newspaper (Der Standard)
reported in an article entitled “Länger Geld für alle Altersarbeitslosen (Longer benefits for all older unemployed
workers)” from January 9, 1993: “All older unemployed workers throughout Austria - and not only in [REBP
regions] as in the past - will be eligible for unemployment benefits of four years instead of one. Minister of
Social Affairs, Josef Hesoun, and the social partners have agreed in principle on this [...].” (Our translation.)
  11Special income support is equivalent to UI but 25 percent higher and paid for a period of at most 12
months. Male workers with at least 35 years of contributions may retire at age 60.


                                                        7
relaxed access to a DI pension from age 55 onward, allowing job losers in REBP regions to
retire by age 51 while being on some kind of benefit up until age 60, when they could then
start claiming their public pension.12 (Inderbitzin, Staubli, and Zweimüller, 2016) study
effects of the program on disability insurance entry.

Advance Notice for Layoffs, Works Councils, and Severance Pay While employment
protection is not as stringent as in many other countries, an Austrian firm laying off a
worker has to obey a set of rules. At the time of REBP, the firm had to give advance notice,
which amounted to 5 (4, 3, 2, 1.5) months for workers with at least 25 (15, 5, 2, 0) years of
tenure. Workers, too, are obliged to give a one-month advance notice.
    By law, the firm has to inform and consult the works council (which workers may
organize in establishments with 5 or more employees) when a layoff is planned.
    In our sample period, severance payments are mandated for all separation types except
for dismissals for cause and some quits (one-sided rather than agreed-upon quits as well
as quits into retirement with fewer than ten years of tenure). The amount is a step function
of worker tenure: 3 (5, 10, 15, 20, 25) years of tenure map into 2 (3, 4, 6, 9, 12) monthly
salaries, and zero below three years. We discuss potential implications of the severance
pay system and the interpretation of our results in Sections 6.3 and Appendix F.


2.3    Data and Sample
Our main data set is the Austrian Social Security Database (ASSD), a matched employer-
employee data set covering the universe of private-sector, dependently employed and non-
tenured public sector employees from 1972 onward (Zweimüller et al., 2009). We focus on
workers born after 1933, as older cohorts had already reached the regular retirement age
at the repeal of REBP. We include men and birth cohorts up to 1948, so that our slightly
younger control cohorts are those born between 1943 and 1948, who were younger than
50 at the time the program was repealed in 1993. We report summary statistics in Table 1.
    To assign workers to REBP or control region, we draw on the location of their establish-
ment and, if missing, the residence based on data from the Austrian employment agency.
We drop the six regions covered by REBP only until 1991 (partial treatment regions in
Figure 1 Panel (b)). We also drop the steel sector, which the reform targeted. To broadly
rule out any remaining concerns associated with the steel sector as the policy motiva-
tion, we also show that the effects are pronounced in a variety of industries in Appendix
  12DI applicants below (above) age 55 get a DI pension when a health impairment reduces the work
capacity by more than 50 percent in all (their original) occupation. In practice, this means that not only
health but also employability criteria establish DI access after age 55.


                                                    8
Figure A.4, and study growing and shrinking industries separately in Appendix Figure
A.7. Moreover, the difference-in-difference design compares slightly older and younger
workers in the same region and thus nets out region-specific shocks. We further discuss
potential spillover effects in Section 6.3. We drop women for data reasons (reliability of
the experience data) and institutional reasons (men could retire at age 60, women could
retire at age 55). To assess experience with pre-1972 data, we also draw on data from the
Austrian Ministry of Social Affairs (AMS). The vast majority of our sample fulfilled the
experience requirement (see last two columns in Appendix Table A.2); since this sample
restriction turned out to not affect our estimates, we present the unconditional results.


3    Deriving the Test of the Coasean Model: Resilience from
     Missing Mass of Marginal Matches
We now provide a formal derivation of the predictions from the Coasean framework;
namely, that following the repeal of the large, separation-inducing UI extension, the
treated group should exhibit resilience. Appendix B contains detailed derivations. Figures
2, the leftmost panels of Figure 3, and Figure 4 illustrate the intuitions.

Jobs and Surplus Jobs carry worker surplus SW and firm surplus S F , each of which must
                                                              i
be non-negative: each party i ∈ {W, F}’s inside job value VIn   (amenities, productivity,...)
plus/minus wage w (with which the parties can transfer utility in terms of, e.g., present
                                                                      i
values) must amount to at least her (separation) outside value VOut       (unemployment,
retirement, working for another firm, the value of a vacancy and hiring another worker,...):

                            S W (w, VW )  VIn
                                             W
                                               + w − VOut
                                                      W
                                                          ≥ 0,                            (1)
                              S F (w, VF )  VIn
                                               F        F
                                                 − w − VOut ≥ 0,                          (2)

where Vi  (Vai )a∈{In,Out} , and we also use V  (Vi )i∈{W,F} .
    Figure 2 plots the two-dimensional job space. The x-axis denotes worker surplus, and
the y-axis denotes firm surplus. The figure plots various case studies of jobs characterized
by different surplus coordinates. The solid circles (•) denote gross-of-wage surpluses, i.e.
  W      W                           F     F
VIn  − VOut for the worker and VIn     − VOut for the firm. This is the surplus combination
these job “fundamentals” would carry before wage setting, or equivalently in the scenario
of a zero wage. The empty circles (◦) denote net-of-wage surpluses: for each gross job, we
provide various examples of potential wages. Wages achieve transfers of utility that move
net surpluses of the parties along 135-degree, iso-joint-surplus lines.

                                             9
    Figure 2 also partitions jobs into four regions: feasible jobs (top right, solid lines),
quits (top left, dashed lines), layoffs (bottom right, dotted lines) and mutual separations
(bottom left, dot-dash-patterned line). For a job to be viable net of the wage, it must
be in the top right corner, providing positive surplus to both parties. Three natures of
separations are represented by the three remaining corners. Quits emerge with negative
worker but positive firm surplus. Job A is “born” a quit but the positive wage transforms
it into viable job A1 . The wage can also “overshoot” to job A2 , leading to a layoff due to
negative firm surplus. Job B is born viable even with a zero wage, e.g., an internship or a
high-amenity job. Here, too positive (negative) a wage, B1 (B2 ), leads to a layoff (quit). Job
C is a layoff case with a zero wage, so viability needs a negative wage. Doomed jobs such
as X are born with negative surplus for both parties. It provides negative joint surplus;
no wage can render it viable, and both parties are better off outside this match (mutual
separation). Finally, M is a marginal job, with zero joint surplus. Born a quit, a unique
positive wage moves it to the origin with zero surplus for either party.

Coasean Bargaining The essence of the Coasean setup is that the parties find a wage
within the bargaining set of reservation wages w ∈ [w W , w F ], where S W (w W , VW )  0
and S F (w F , VF )  0, any of which implements the bilaterally efficient allocation: forming
and maintaining matches that carry non-negative joint – rather than private – job surplus
(i.e. whenever w F ≥ w W ).13 As a result, the two-dimensional surpluses that determine
job viability and separations, Equations (1) and (2), collapse to a one-dimensional, single
allocative concept of joint job surplus, defined as:

                                                     S W (w,VW )+S F (w,VF )
                                             z                    }|               {
                                    S(V)      W
                                             VIn     +        F
                                                            VIn   −    W
                                                                      VOut   −    F
                                                                                 VOut   .                             (3)

The wage splits this joint surplus between the worker and firm to satisfy both participation
constraints. Figure 2 illustrates that Coasean, i.e. efficient, bargaining renders feasible all
jobs born upwards or to the right of the marginal-jobs frontier (i.e. those with positive
joint surplus), by moving jobs along the iso-joint-surplus curve. With Coasean bargaining,
jobs can therefore be sorted along the one-dimensional attribute of joint job surplus S(V).
  13For example, by Nash bargaining, the worker [firm] receives their outside option (or reservation wage),
plus fraction β [resp. 1 − β], the party’s bargaining power, of the surplus (the reservation wage difference):
                          β                         1−β
          W
   max [VIn + w] − VOut
                    W               F
                               · [VIn         F
                                      − w] − VOut           ⇒ w N  [VOut
                                                                      W       W
                                                                          − VIn ] + β · S  w W + β · [w F − w W ].
     w




                                                             10
Efficient Separations With Coasean bargaining, we observe a separation if joint surplus
moves into negative territory. To capture idiosyncratic shocks to specific matches, job
values evolve following a Markov process k(V0 |V), where, going forward, x 0 denotes the
next-period value of x. Then, for a job of value vector V, the probability of separating next
period is the probability of transitioning to job values V0 that yield negative joint surplus.
To consider aggregate shocks (such as the policy), we define S(V  e 0) as the short-hand for
the surplus level gross of some given aggregate surplus shifter −ε0 < 0, such that, for an
                  e 0 , ε0  0)  S(V0 , ε0) − ε0 and S(V)
aggregate shock, S(V                                   e      < ε0 ⇔ S(V0 , ε0) < 0. Due to
Coasean bargaining, the incidence of worker or firm shocks do not matter, so we consider
                        0     0
here their sum ε0  ε W + ε F . Therefore, the job-level separation probability is:
                                       ∫
                          d(V, ε0) 
                          e                    1(S(V
                                                 e 0) < ε0)k(V0 |V)dV0 .                    (4)
                                           0
                                        V


Group-Level Separations Figure 3 Panel (a) plots an example distribution of joint sur-
plus. Without loss of generality, we have normalized ε0  0 for aggregate shocks absent
REBP. Separations occur in the black portion, where jobs would yield negative surplus.
Formally, the group-level separation rate is, for a given idiosyncratic shock distribution, a
given aggregate shock and a given distribution of job attributes f(.):
                                        ∫
                                   δ           d(V, ε0) f(V)dV.
                                                e                                           (5)
                                            V

Crucially, this formulation separating gross surplus and an aggregate shock ε implies
that we can think of jobs as being ordered by surplus S(V)
                                                       e     gross of an aggregate shock ε,
which in turn shifts the cutoff into separations along the gross surplus dimension S(V).
                                                                                      e
To maintain this “cutoff” interpretation, our convention is that a positive shock ε denotes
a negative surplus shock. Small shocks destroy jobs with small joint surplus, larger shocks
will additionally sweep up jobs with larger joint surplus.

The UI Extension (REBP) We think of the REBP treatment as one that primarily lowers
                                                                W
joint surplus by improving the worker’s outside option VOut        (b). That is, the reduction
of joint surplus is ε b  VOut (b0 + ∆b) − VOut (b 0 ). In the Austrian context described in
                      W0      W                 W

Section 2, this modeling approach is suitable because even worker-sided quits receive full
benefits (after a brief waiting period), there is no experience rating, and UI take-up is high.
We ballpark the cash value of extended benefits to about 71% of a typical worker’s annual
salary in Appendix A. In Section 6.3, we also empirically evaluate whether heterogeneous
valuations of the reform could shroud resilience and thus the results of our test.

                                                   11
Treatment and Control Groups, and Netting Out Equilibrium Effects In our quasi-
experimental study, we have a treatment and a control group. Formally, UI generosity
b Z  b 0 + Z × ∆b may deviate from baseline level b 0 depending on group indicator Z,
which is Z  1 for the treatment group and Z  0 for the control group. We assume that
initial distributions of job values are the same across groups f 0 (.)  f 1 (.).14
    Our empirical difference-in-differences design has multiple control groups: eligible
cohorts in control regions, and slightly younger (ineligible) workers in both treated and
control regions. The slightly younger, untreated control group in the same region permits
us to net out equilibrium effects of REBP, such as effects on the firm’s separation value
through shifts in recruitment costs or quality of replacement hires. More precisely, the
treatment is then the differential exposure of the treatment group to the program on the
outside option of treated workers, net of market-level effects. In our notation we therefore
suppress such market-level or spillover effects. We more thoroughly discuss this argument
and related considerations in Section 6.3.

Separation Effects The incremental separations caused by REBP should stem from jobs
with joint surplus between zero and the size of the REBP surplus shift. Figure 3 Panel (a)
illustrates this logic. During REBP, all jobs with negative joint surplus (i.e. all jobs in the
left, black area) separate both in the control and in the treated regions, as their surplus
   e 0) < 0. The gray set of jobs separates only if exposed to REBP, but would remain
is S(V
                                                           e 0) < εW 0. The remaining jobs
active absent REBP. These marginal jobs have surplus 0 ≤ S(V         b
– which survive in either group – have surplus S(V e 0) ≥ εW 0. The figure also references
                                                             b
separation rates for the treatment and control groups (δ1 and δ 0 ).

Repeal of REBP The repeal of REBP restores each surviving, formerly treated match’s
surplus to the level of its peer in the control group. Except, the repeal does not bring
back to life the previously destroyed jobs (since we track survivors only). We depict
the surplus distributions of REBP survivors right after the repeal in Figure 3 Panels (d)
and (g) separately for the former treatment and control groups, respectively. The former
treatment group features a missing mass of marginal matches. By contrast, these low-surplus
jobs continue to be present in the former control group.
   14In our difference-in-differences design, this condition need not hold in levels but in between-cohort
differences across regions. In the initial working paper version of our paper, which also featured an analysis
of complier characteristics, we empirically confirmed this assumption for observable characteristics. See
also Table 1 for summary statistics.




                                                     12
Coasean Prediction: Resilience The testable prediction characterizing the Coasean view
is that right after the REBP repeal, the former treated group of REBP survivors should ex-
hibit attenuated sensitivities – should be more resilient – to post-repeal joint-surplus shocks
compared to the control group, where these marginal, low-surplus jobs have remained.
Going from example distributions as in Figure 3 Panels (d) and (g) (i.e. imagining right-
ward shifts in the separation thresholds in the form of a shock), we trace out predicted
separation responses to a series of negative post-repeal aggregate shocks ε00 in Figure 4
Panel (a), separately for the former treatment (solid line) and control (dashed line) groups.
    We denote post-repeal functions with capital letters: ∆ for δ, K for k, and D            d.
                                                                                       e for e
Post-repeal aggregate shocks and job values are denoted by 00 rather than 0. Post-repeal
separation rates in the treatment (control) group Z  1( 0) are:
                         ∫ ∫
                   ∆ 
                    Z
                                         1(S(V
                                           e 00) < ε00)K(V00 |V0)dV00 f Z (V0)dV0 .
                                                                       post                   (6)
                            0       00
                          V     V
                                |                    {z             }
                                                  D
                                                  e (V0 ,ε00 )

                                                                             Z
Post-repeal, differences in separation rates will arise from differences in fpost , the densities
of job qualities between the treatment and the control groups, due to the selective sepa-
rations induced by REBP (rather than from differences in aggregate shocks ε00, which in
turn we here assume to be the same across the groups).
    Intuitively, if there were no idiosyncratic change in job surplus, perfect resilience (no
separations) would emerge as long as the subsequent aggregate shock size ε00 is smaller
than the size of REBP, i.e. for ε00 ≤ ε Wb
                                           0. For larger shocks ε00 > ε W 0, separations start
                                                                         b
emerging even in the former treatment group, with the marginal REBP survivors carrying
e 0)  εW 0 being the first to separate.
S(V        b


Full Idiosyncratic Shocks During REBP, Short-Run Persistence Post-Repeal This pre-
diction of resilience relies on (some) persistence in job-level surplus between the repeal
of REBP and the horizon over which we track survivors’ post-repeal separations. Cru-
cially, our specification does permit arbitrary idiosyncratic shock processes k(.|.) during
the five-year REBP policy period. By contrast, below we assume perfect persistence (i.e.
post-repeal K(.|.) is an identity matrix) solely for the shorter post-repeal horizon of our
resilience analysis, e.g., as low as one single year (1994-95). Appendix B formalizes this
feature. We discuss implications of lack of post-repeal persistence in Section 6.

Coasean Benchmark: Predicted Separation Rates If we could directly observe the REBP
shock size εW
            b
              0 and the subsequent surplus shocks 00, we could implement this test


                                                         13
of efficiency of job separations now by comparing realized post-repeal separations in
former treatment group against the Coasean benchmark. But since surplus is not directly
observable, we need one additional step.
    Crucially, our empirical strategy circumvents the empirical elusiveness of surplus con-
cepts by inferring the Coasean benchmark from the directly observed control separation
rates, which encode the shock size, and the during-REBP-separation rates, which encode
the size of the REBP surplus shock ε W      b
                                              0. To illustrate this transformation of impossible-

to-measure surplus concepts into observable separation rates, Panel (b) of Figure 4 takes
Panel (a) and juxtaposes the two separation rates, permitting us to express the post-repeal
former treatment group separation rates (∆1 ) to that of the former control group (∆0 ) –
under the assumption of Coasean bargaining. The kink location in the ∆0 range is now
given by ∆0  δ1−δ
                 1 −δ 0
                                                                                     0
                     0 . As long as control group post-repeal separation rate ∆ is lower than

the fraction of marginal matches among the survivors δ1−δ
                                                                1 −δ 0
                                                                    0 , no separations should occur

in the treatment group, simply because these matches are missing. Once control group
separations cross that threshold, separations commence in the former treatment group
                                         0
(with a slope steeper than one, 1−δ  1−δ 1
                                           , because the incremental separator count is over a
smaller count of survivors there). Both groups will have, on average, indistinguishable
separation rates if all control jobs dissolve (100% separation rate) or if the initial REBP
treatment effect is zero, so that no marginal matches were destroyed. In that sense, the
design has power if the initial treatment effect during REBP is large – shifting the kink far
to the right and away from zero on the x-axis – and if ∆0 is smaller than one.
    In summary, the predicted ∆1 of the formerly treated survivors can be written as a
piece-wise linear function of ∆0 with slopes and kink positions given by (δ 0 , δ1 ):

                                              1 − δ0 0 00     δ1 − δ0
                                                                          
                            00
                  ∆ (∆ (ε ), δ , δ )  max 0,
                    1   0        0   1
                                                     ∆ (ε ) −                    .              (7)
                                              1 − δ1          1 − δ0

This is the function plotted as the solid line in Figure 4 Panel (b).
    We use this structural equation to benchmark the actual post-repeal separation rates
in the formerly treated group against the model prediction given by Equation (7). This
comparison constitutes our revealed-preference test, which does not rely on observable
characteristics, and is light on distributional assumptions (see Section 6.3). The test relies
on an empirical setting covering the introduction and then sharp repeal of a negative
surplus shock that indeed leads to large separations in the affected treatment group
compared to an unaffected control group.
    This revealed-preference test is the key contribution of our paper.



                                                  14
Preview of Alternatives To rationalize comovement, we discuss two chief extensions
in the later parts of the paper. First, here we implicitly considered the case immediately
following the repeal of REBP. As time progresses after the repeal, reshuffling of idiosyn-
cratic surplus may weaken this prediction by somewhat “filling” the hole again (although
our framework already allows for such idiosyncratic shocks to have hit during REBP).
We permit such idiosyncratic shocks in Section 6. Second, we consider departures from
efficient bargaining in Section 7, specifically wage rigidity, which provides an alternative
framework that can rationalize our empirical findings.


4    Large Separation Effects of the UI Benefit Extension
In this section, we estimate that the differential benefit extension (from 52 to 209 weeks15)
increased job separations among eligible workers by 10.9ppt (compared to a baseline
separation rate of 40.5% in the peer cohorts in the control region) among initial matches
over the five year program horizon. Interpreted through the lens of our Coasean model,
our estimates imply that δ1−δ
                           1 −δ 0
                               0  1.0−0.405  18% of surviving matches in the control group
                                     0.109

are marginal low-surplus matches that would not have survived the extension.
    Our analysis uses the sharp region and cohort variation in a difference-in-differences
design, comparing treated cohorts in REBP regions to their ineligible slightly younger
peers in the same region and contrasting this difference with the analogous one in the
control regions. Most of the excess separations went into long-term nonemployment,
perhaps followed by early retirement, rather than to employment with other firms. We
next present visual evidence of raw data and assess the parallel trends assumption before
turning to regression estimates.

Plotting Raw Data: Cohort Gradients of Separations We sort the population of job
holders in 1988 (the onset of the reform) by month-of-birth cohorts and by REBP and
non-REBP regions, and then plot outcomes in Figures 5 and 6. Each figure presents levels
for each cohort by region, and the within-cohort, between-region difference.
    Younger cohorts born after 1943 turned 50 after REBP was repealed in 1993 and there-
fore could never claim extended benefits under the program. Older cohorts born before
1933, while eligible for extended benefits, were older than 55 at the time REBP was initi-
ated in 1988 and, at that age, also had access to more generous disability/early retirement
benefits with relaxed entry conditions, as described in Section 2. For completeness, we
  15Both groups had at most 30 weeks PBD in 1988, but a national reform in 1989 increased that level to 52
weeks, leading us to choose this benchmark given the program duration through 1993.


                                                   15
plot these cohorts but exclude them in subsequent regression samples. Moreover, they
had reached the retirement age of 60 before the repeal in 1993 in both regions. The in-
termediate cohorts, born between 1933 and 1943, were exposed to the reform in REBP
regions. Exposure was maximal for the cohort born in 1938, who turned 50 at the onset
of the reform in 1988 and was eligible in 1993, when the 1938 cohort turned 55.
    In Figure 5 Panel (a) we plot raw data of the cohort-region share that separates from
the 1988 job (worker-establishment match) by 1993q3, the first quarter after REBP had
been repealed. The red dashed and blue solid lines refer to the REBP and control regions
respectively; Panel (b) shows the cross-regional difference by cohort. The figure reveals a
baseline cohort gradient in the control regions for the 1943 cohort and older, but flat for
younger cohorts (born after 1943).
    We start our analysis of REBP on separations from the right, with the ineligible young
control cohorts born after 1943. These exhibit a separation rate of roughly 40 percent in
both regions, and differences between REBP and control regions are flat (in fact close to
zero). The parallel trends among younger cohorts provide support for the identification
assumptions of our difference-in-differences design, as cohort trends (and even levels) of
separations were similar across the regions. Appendix Figure A.5 confirms this overlap
of the trends among even younger cohorts.
    For potentially eligible cohorts born between 1933 and 1943, separations are markedly
higher in REBP regions than in the non-REBP regions. This vertical difference represents
the treatment effect of REBP and is about 20 percentage points at its peak. Finally, a slight
treatment effect emerges even on the very old workers born before 1933, who, regardless
of region, had mostly retired by 1993 anyway.
    By comparing slightly older and younger cohorts within the same region, we net out
any differences between regions that are constant across cohorts (including market-level
effects of the program). Potential remaining confounders are shocks or unobservables
varying at the region-by-age level. For instance, pathways to retirement could differ
between regions as a consequence of different industry structures. To address this concern,
we switch to separations during a fixed age window, 50 to 55, rather than between time
periods (years 1988 to 1993).16 Panels (a) (levels) and (b) (differences) in Figure 6 show a
similar treatment effect and support of the parallel trends assumption for this separation
definition. By construction, this figure also eliminates the age trends.
    Finally, Figure 6 plots quarters nonemployed (Panels (c) and (d)) and unemployed
(UI/UA benefit receipt) (Panels (e) and (f)) between 1988q2 and 1993q3, mirroring Figure
  16We measure separations between the quarter before 50 (REBP eligibility), and the quarter before 55
(when disability and early retirement incentives change).



                                                 16
5. Trends in control cohorts again lie on top of each other for the two regions. Among
the eligible cohorts, a treatment effect of nonemployment and unemployment opens up.
Similar results emerge for the 50-55 age horizon, in Appendix Figure A.6.

Regression Estimates of Treatment Effect Reporting results in Table 2, we now estimate
the average treatment effect in a difference-in-differences regression specification in the
population of pre-reform, 1988 job holders, for various outcomes Drci , for worker i in
region r in birth cohort c:

Drci  α+β·REBP Regionr +γ·Treated Cohortc +µ·REBP Regionr × Treated Cohortc +χrci .
                                                           |                 {z                 }
                                                                             Z rc
                                                                                                  (8)
The coefficient of interest µ captures the effect of REBP eligibility Z rc , defined by region and
birth cohort. Interpreted through the lens of the model, µ captures the (subsequently, post-
repeal missing) mass of marginal matches, δ1 − δ0 . We set Z rc  1 for workers in the REBP
region born before August 1943, so that they were older than 50 at some point during REBP
(and zero otherwise, for our control groups). Here and in subsequent regression analyses,
we exclude workers born before August 1933 because an overwhelming majority had
retired by August 1993 anyway. The model includes baseline effects for REBP region and
eligible cohort. Our regression specification thus exploits within-region, within-cohort
variation.17 We cluster standard errors at the level of administrative regions (groups of
districts, Arbeitsamtsbezirke) but have also assessed robustness for clustering at other levels.
Table 2 reports results from the cohort-based design (1998-93 outcomes); we report the
age-based estimates (50-55) in Appendix Table A.3, finding similar results. We keep the
young control cohorts to a five-year range. We also assess outcomes for even younger
cohorts, which we discuss in our analysis of spillovers in Section 6.3.
    Table 2 column (1) reports a treatment effect of 10.9ppt on separations by 1993q3 from
the 1988q2 employer. This effect represents a 27% increase from a counterfactual separa-
tion share of 40.5% in the absence of REBP (regression constant plus the baseline effects
for treatment region and old cohorts). The 95% confidence interval for the separation
effect ranges from 2.9 to 18.9ppt. In turn, our estimates imply that δ1−δ
                                                                             1 −δ 0
                                                                                 0  1.0−0.405  18%
                                                                                       0.109

of surviving matches in the control group are marginal, low-surplus matches that would
not have survived the benefit extension.
    We also decompose separations into persistent nonemployment (i.e. those without
  17We shied away from a triple-diff specification with a placebo reform in 1978 since the long program
duration would require long lags for a placebo reform analysis, and additionally the post-repeal analysis.



                                                   17
employment at another employer between 1988 and 1993) and the complement. REBP-
induced separations are entirely made up of the former. In column (2), we report a
sizable increase in nonemployment separations of 12.0ppt (SE 4.3ppt). Column (3) of
Table 2 reports effects on quarters nonemployed between 1988 and 1993, finding a positive
effect of 1.46 quarters (SE 0.38). Column (4) reports that quarters unemployed (UI/UA
receipt) increased by 0.95 quarters (SE 0.53). Column (5) shows that a large share of the
increase in nonemployment can be accounted for by a reduction of 1.05 quarters (SE 0.37)
in continuous employment with the initial employer.


5     Puzzle to Coase: No Resilience After the Repeal
We now exploit the sudden repeal of the reform in August 1993 (described in Section 2)
to study whether REBP survivors – jobs that existed before the onset of the reform in 1988
and continued through its repeal in 1993 – subsequently exhibited lower separation rates
unconditionally and in response to negative labor demand shifts.
    Recall that the missing mass of low-surplus jobs in the former treatment group is large
in the data: by the end of REBP, the eligible older cohorts in the REBP region shed 10.9ppt
of workers from their ranks. Among older cohorts in the control group, who had a 40.5%
                                                                     0.109
separation rate, these marginal, low-surplus jobs still comprise 1.0−0.405   18% of active
jobs. As a result, our test of the Coasean hypothesis in the form of post-repeal resilience
has power, as we should see few separations in the previously treated group as long as
the control group separation rates remain below 18%.
    Yet we find in the data that, after the reform was repealed, the survivors in the dra-
matically shrunk former treatment group exhibited exactly the same separation behavior
as the control group – on average, and in response to labor demand shifts. Together, the
large quantity of REBP-induced separations before 1993, and the zero differential post-
repeal behavior, are inconsistent with the core prediction of resilience from our Coasean
benchmark. We dedicate the rest of the paper to understanding this result.


5.1   Empirical Post-Repeal Separation Behavior
We study post-repeal separation behavior as our core test of the Coasean prediction that
extraction of marginal jobs from the treatment group will lead to post-repeal resilience,
compared to the former group control group, where the marginal matches are still present.
   Our sample consists of “REBP survivors” in the former treatment and control regions:
jobs already active right before the onset of REBP in 1988 that continued through its repeal


                                            18
in 1993. In practice, we allow for REBP spillovers over time due to layoff notices and explicit
grandfathering that the law permitted for pre-scheduled layoffs (see Section 2), so we focus
on jobs that survived through the first quarter of 1994 for the post-repeal analysis and
our cutoff defining the survivor sample is 1994q1. Barring this sample restriction, the
figures mirror the structure of Figures 5 and 6. We explore the fraction of REBP survivors
subsequently separating at various horizons.

Plotting Raw Data: Post-Repeal Separation Rate Gradients by Cohort In Figures 7
(1994-96 horizon) and 8 (other horizons) we plot the post-repeal separation cohort gradient
among the surviving jobs, for the former control region (blue solid line) and the former
treatment region (red short-dashed line). Panel (a) [(a), (c), (e) in Figure 8] shows levels,
while Panel (b) [(b), (d), (f)] shows differences between regions. These raw data convey
nonparametric evidence for our main finding, the absence of resilience. There are no
post-repeal separation differences among surviving jobs previously exposed to REBP,
compared to control cohorts, despite its large initial separation effects.

Quantifying the Differences in Separation Behavior Figure 7 also reports the average
difference-in-differences estimate for the effect on post-separation behavior analogous to
specification (8) for the survivor sample. Quantitatively, we find a 0.6ppt (SE 0.9ppt)
estimate, indicating that the former treatment group, if anything, had a slightly higher
separation rate in the post-repeal period rather than exhibiting resilience. The tight
confidence intervals include zero and allow us to rule out effects smaller than −1.2ppt.
We report the full estimation result in Table 3, column (1), along with the other outcomes
from the initial treatment effect Table 2.18


5.2    Coasean Benchmark for Post-Repeal Separations
Predicted Separation Rates By Cohort To gauge the gap between the former treatment
group’s post-repeal separations in the data and the Coasean prediction, we compute the
predicted separations following a strictly interpreted Coasean view with full post-repeal
persistence in idiosyncratic job surplus as presented in Equation (7). Specifically, for each
(monthly) cohort c, we collect during-REBP separation rates in the control and REBP
   18Table 3 reports on 1994–1996; Appendix Tables A.4-A.6 report on the other horizons. We also report a
version dropping workers close to the retirement age, in Appendix Table A.7. In Table 3, we find similar
effects on the separation-into-nonemployment margin in column (2). In columns (3) through (5), we consider
more continuous measures of time in nonemployment, time on unemployment benefits or assistance, and
continuous employment with the original employer. Across all margins, we detect no resilience and the
point estimates are small with tight confidence intervals.


                                                   19
regions to proxy for (δ 0c , δ1c ) (the blue solid and red dashed lines respectively in Figure 5
Panel (a)). We feed in post-repeal cohort-specific separation rates from the peer cohorts in
the control group ∆0c (blue solid line in Figure 7).
    In the cohort-based Figure 7, we include these predicted Coasean separation rates as
a yellow dashed line. Intuitively, the Coasean model predicts smaller separation effects
in the formerly treated group post-repeal for larger initial treatment effects of REBP on
separations in a given cohort (in turn depicted in Figure 5 Panel (b)). This is because
these cohorts feature a larger mass of marginal matches, and separations in these formerly
treated cohorts pick up only once the counterfactual – proxied by the peer cohort in the
control region – exceeds the initial treatment effect.
    The gap between the Coasean prediction and the observed separation rates in the
control group is quantitatively large, confirming that our test has power. For instance, by
1996 (Figure 7(a)), the benchmark model would predict close to zero separations in the
formerly treated group for the majority of formerly treated cohorts, whereas the control
group’s actual post-repeal separation rate is 20% or higher. Even multiple years later, the
design retains power but the differences shrink (since ∆0 grows) as Figures 8(c) through
(f) clarify. Yet, at those multi-year horizons such as from 1994 to 1998, the assumption of
persistence in idiosyncratic job-level surplus may serve as a weaker approximation.

Quantitative Benchmark We also calculate the Coasean benchmark for the DiD regres-
sion coefficient. We aggregate the yellow predicted line across cohorts, weighing cells
by their 1994 employment. The Coasean view would predict an average DiD separation
effect of -12.5ppt. This predicted resilience is clearly outside of the confidence interval of
the actual DiD estimate 0.6ppt (SE 0.9ppt) for the post-repeal separation rates.


5.3   Labor Demand Shocks
We now show that the absence of resilience persists even in response to negative aggregate
shocks to job surplus (i.e. ε00 in our model), for which we construct empirical proxies in
the form of negative industry and establishment labor demand shifts.

Heterogeneity by Industry Growth We plot the differential post-repeal separation rates
separately for the top, middle and bottom tercile of the industry growth distribution from
1994 to 1996 in Figure 9 (a). Appendix Figure A.7 reports on the other horizons. Even in
declining industries (bottom tercile), the formerly treated cohorts do not exhibit resilience
compared to the control group.


                                              20
Establishment-Level “Hockey Sticks” We construct establishment labor demand shocks
by tracing out “hockey stick” graphs (Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger, 2013): separa-
tion rates sharply increase when firms shrink (largely driven by layoffs), feature a kink
around zero employment growth, and also grow slightly in growing firms (due to turnover
associated with net hiring). We replicate these graphs in the full population data for Aus-
tria in Figure 9 Panel (b), where we plot establishment-level annual separation rates for all
male employees employed in Q1, by bins of annual net employment growth.
    Figure 9 Panel (c) plots cohort-region-specific separation rates through 1996 (other hori-
zons in Appendix Figure A.7). The Coasean view would predict that separations occur by
a pecking order following the ranking of job surplus within an establishment, so that, as a
group compared to the control cohorts, the formerly treated program survivors would be
less sensitive to negative surplus shocks proxied by establishment shrinkage. We estimate
linear slopes separately for shrinking and growing establishments and for four separate
groups: by birth cohort eligibility and region. The slopes for the former control and
treatment workers essentially lie on top of each other. Hence, the massive extraction of
marginal jobs does not seem to affect subsequent layoffs (or separators) at firms.
    Lastly, in Figure 9 Panel (d) we report cohort-specific slopes of separations with respect
to establishment employment growth. For each birth-year cohort and region cell, we
regress an indicator for separating from 1994-96 on the worker’s establishment’s 1994-
96 growth for shrinking establishments (other horizons in Appendix Figure A.7). Both
regions exhibit a downward-sloping sensitivity gradient in birth date, indicating that older
workers appear shielded. Yet, the lines lie on top of each other (if anything, the REBP lines
appear slightly more sensitive).


6     Can a Coasean Model Rationalize the Absence of Re-
      silience?
We clarify that the Coasean setting can explain the absence of resilience only under
narrow conditions: no persistence in job-level surplus whatsoever. We find that in order
to account for our empirical results, nearly all labor market cells of our sample must exhibit
this feature. We review and dismiss several other alternative Coasean model variants.


6.1   Coasean Reconciliation: No Persistence in Job Surplus
While our Coasean model accommodated idiosyncratic surplus shocks during the pro-
gram period, our Coasean prediction for the post-repeal period drew on an assumption

                                             21
of persistence of surpluses. What types of alternative assumptions about surplus evolu-
tion would reconcile the observed similarity of post-repeal separation rates (∆1  ∆0 ), on
average and across cells, with our Coasean model? The answer is that one would need
to assume no persistence in job-level surplus (such that the idiosyncratic Markov process
reshuffles the position of jobs into the same, stationary surplus distribution in each period).
This “reshuffling” of the surplus distribution of survivors would render inconsequential
the extraction of marginal jobs during REBP, such that the former treatment and control
groups fully reconverge already within a year after the repeal (in our 1995 specification),
filling in the “hole” left by REBP. We relegate the formal derivations to Appendix B.


6.2   Estimating a Mixed Model
Neither a full-persistence nor the perfect-reshuffling setting will completely and accurately
describe the labor market as a whole. To gauge the quantitative explanatory power of each
extreme view, we present a simple structural estimation of a “mixed model” of the Coasean
setting that asks which fraction of labor market cells must exhibit perfect reshuffling to
rationalize the observed separation dynamics. That is, we essentially estimate the weight
the data put on the 45 degree line or the kinked line in Figure 4 Panel (b).
    Consider a labor market cell i (for example, cohort or industry-occupation group)
present in both regions. A given cell i is either of the full reshuffling or the perfect
persistence benchmark. We posit that share κ is of the full-reshuffling type; share 1 − κ
is of the perfect-persistence type. (An alternative interpretation of our setup is that
we permit a share κ of matches within a cell to be of the full-reshuffling type and the
remainder of the perfect-persistence type.) Perfect reshuffling implies ∆1i  ∆0i while
perfect persistence implies that ∆1i follows the piece-wise linear curve as predicted from
Equation (7) (also depending on cell-specific truncation points given by policy-period
separation rates (δ0i , δ1i ). ). We estimate κ in the following econometric model:
                                                          (                                      )
                                                                1 − δ0i              δ1i − δ0i
         ∆1i  κ ×           ∆0i            +(1 − κ) × max 0,              · ∆0i −                   +νi .   (9)
                           |{z}                                 1−   δ1i             1 − δ 1i
                     Coasean: Reshuffling            |                {z                         }
                                                              Coasean: Persistence

Error νi captures region-cohort-specific shocks and other model misspecification.
    Our main strategy estimates model (9) at the birth-year cohort cell level. We take
quarterly data points from the cohort separation gradients in Figure 7 of the predicted
Coasean (persistence) benchmark, along with the original realized post-repeal separation
rates by cohort for the treatment and control groups. Intuitively, the data selects weights on

                                                    22
the yellow dashed line (perfect persistence) versus the blue solid line (perfect reshuffling).
Here, we estimate coefficients α̂ κ as estimate for κ and α̂ 1−κ as estimate for 1 − κ (and do
not constrain coefficients to add to one).
    Table 4 reports the estimates for various horizons after the repeal of REBP. For the short
run, 1995, the estimates imply an essential unit weight on the perfect reshuffling scenario
as α κ  1.027 (SE 0.034) and an insignificantly different from zero, small negative weight
on the perfect persistence scenario α 1−κ  −0.037 (SE 0.035). In later years, when the
power of the resilience prediction likely decreases, the estimate of weight α 1−κ becomes
more negative and even statistically significant. That is, if we were in a Coasean world,
we would fully reject any persistence of job surplus whatsoever, even in the short run.
The lower limit of the 95% confidence interval for κ is 0.96 at the 1995 horizon (and even
higher for longer horizons), indicating that at least 96% of separations had to come from
full reshuffling of job surplus for the data to be consistent with a Coasean setting.
    In Appendix E, we confirm these results from the simple cohort-based design in a richer
model with (i) variation at the industry-by-occupation level, (ii) constraining α κ +α 1−κ  1,
and (iii) estimation with non-linear GMM. There, in our most conservative specification,
the lower limit of the 95% confidence interval for κ is 0.890.


6.3   Alternative Coasean Explanations
Here, we discuss and dismiss several potential alternative mechanisms that could prima
facie rationalize our findings under a Coasean framework.

Some Persistence in Idiosyncratic Job Surplus The model and its estimation above
have clarified that the Coasean model can only rationalize the evidence under a narrow
and strong assumption: with no persistence whatsoever in job-level surplus. We believe
that this assumption is unlikely to explain our results. First, such full convergence would
be required already at the one-year horizon. Second, the reform was large such that
the idiosyncratic shocks would need to be accordingly large to replenish the mass of
marginal matches: REBP increased separations by about 27%; and as discussed above,
REBP amounted to around 71% of the average worker’s annual salary. Third, our sample
contains older workers with high labor force attachment, whose baseline turnover is
typically low, perhaps suggesting, if anything, higher persistence of surplus. Fourth, we
reiterate that our Coasean prediction permits arbitrary idiosyncratic shocks during the
five-year policy period (and only for the short-run window right after the appeal does the
simple benchmark appeal to persistence).


                                              23
Market-Level and Firm-Level Spillovers on Control Workers A potential concern is
that, for instance through spillovers, REBP also affected separation-relevant factors (sur-
plus distribution or the shock processes) of the control group in the treated region during
and after REBP. Importantly, our difference-in-differences design eliminates the wide class
of factors that would affect both groups equally, namely by studying within-region differ-
ences between treatment and control cohorts.
    The remaining mechanisms that would pose a problem for our design would be differ-
ential and persistent indirect effects on separation-relevant factors on the control cohorts in
the REBP region, compared to the treatment cohorts and their control region counterparts.
For instance, firms could have shifted training to younger workers in the REBP regions,
lowering their post-repeal separation rate, leading us to underestimate relative resilience
among the formerly treated cohorts.
    We present two pieces of evidence against the concern that spillovers on younger
workers in the treatment region might mask resilience among treated older workers.
First, such spillovers are not indicated by our second difference, between young control
groups across regions, in Figure 5 and 7. The corresponding coefficients on the REBP
region indicator in column (1) of Tables 2 and 3 are essentially zero (0.003 and -0.003),
although this test implicitly assumes no other differences between regions absent the
reform and related spillovers. Thus, to further probe potential spillovers on our slightly
younger control group, Appendix Figure A.5 confirms this result with essentially a third
difference for substantially younger control cohorts through 1958 (which are arguably
less close substitutes in production or search in other markets, and hence less prone to
certain spillovers, as in Card and Lemieux, 2001; Lalive, Landais, and Zweimüller, 2015),
for which we also find zero differences between regions.
    Second, we provide an employer-level test of spillovers. Since such spillovers (retrain-
ing or diminishing products) may occur primarily within industries or firms, we construct
industry- or firm-level treatment intensity measures, specifically the share of workers in
program-eligible cohorts (1933-43) pre-reform (1987). We then divide our worker sample
into four quartiles of this exposure measure. The kind of spillovers that would dilute
our younger control group would appear as lower post-repeal separation rates in the top
quartile. In Appendix Figure A.8, we plot the differences between treatment and control
regions in post-repeal separation behavior by cohort for top (dashed black line) and bottom
(solid blue line) quartiles, for firms (Panel (a)) and industries (Panel (b)). The graph shows
no increased resilience among the younger control group workers in the most heavily
treated industries or firms, and neither among the slightly older treated cohorts.



                                              24
Heterogeneous Sensitivity to the REBP Treatment Our model assumes homogeneous
shifts in outside options and, thus, in the level of surplus – such that the jobs marginal
to REBP are low-surplus jobs. Yet there could exist jobs whose surplus is treatment-
sensitive for a variety of reasons (e.g., due to heterogeneous valuation of the extension).
If, specifically, REBP-induced separations have (initially, and, absent the treatment) higher
surplus, then the program would have removed high-surplus workers. In principle, such
a positive correlation between surplus valuation ε W b
                                                       0 and gross-of-REBP surplus S  e could
rationalize our findings even in a Coasean world with persistent surplus.
     We empirically assess the broadest possible version of this concern: that the incremen-
tal separators would, absent REBP, have had a higher separation rate. We use complier
analysis methods to characterize the marginal jobs destroyed by REBP with regards to
separation-relevant attributes.19 In a first step, we estimate a model regressing realized
separations on pre-separation attributes in a separate, pre-reform sample. Second, using
the estimated coefficients we predict the probability of separating in the sample of workers
employed in 1988 and create a predicted separation score. Third, we study the predicted
separation rates in the sample of actual separators in the treatment and control region.
Appendix Table A.8 presents the full results, and its note details the prediction model.
     Reassuringly, we find that these compliers (i.e. marginal jobs) had higher predicted
separation rates (0.67, SE 0.098) compared to the treatment region survivors (0.33, SE
0.078). In turn, the predicted separation rate of the treatment group survivors is lower
than that of the control group survivors (0.37, SE 0.080), a small, insignificant negative
difference that, if anything, points in the opposite direction of the concern.

Homogeneity Our test relies on surplus heterogeneity within the treatment/control
groups, such that the separations leave behind a hole of low-surplus jobs. Conversely,
complete homogeneity of surplus absent REBP could, in principle, rationalize our find-
ings in a Coasean setting. In this case, REBP lowers surplus among the treated group and
leads to separations, but absent REBP and after the repeal, all cohorts will have homo-
geneous surplus again, leaving no room for resilience. (Here, baseline separations may
occur through i.i.d. shocks.) Crucially, our framework applies as long as there is some
heterogeneity within each age group. In light of a vast body of evidence on, for example,
large dispersion of separation rates between firms and worker types and our evidence
above that predicted separation rates differ between compliers and non-separators, we find
the case of perfect homogeneity of little empirical relevance and hence not a plausible
  19The longer NBER working paper version of the paper (Jäger, Schoefer, and Zweimüller, 2019) provides
the methodology of extending complier analysis to difference-in-differences settings such as ours.



                                                  25
candidate to reconcile the evidence with a Coasean framework.

Large Firms and Perfect Substitutes As a related alternative, we discuss a large-firm
model with homogeneous workers (e.g., by types broader than age) and decreasing
marginal products, in which old and young workers are perfect substitutes. Here, sep-
arations could occur because of firm-wide shocks to, e.g., productivity, which change
the optimal employment levels. REBP-eligible workers optimally separate first, shield-
ing the young control group during REBP. But absent heterogeneity, the repeal of REBP
restores the homogeneity of surplus, such that no post-repeal resilience emerges (as in
the hockey sticks in Figure 9 Panel (c)), even through a Coasean lens. We do not find
empirical evidence for the predicted shielding in the spillover tests on average and by
firm-level treatment intensity discussed above, plausibly because there is considerable
heterogeneity in surplus within the treatment and control cohorts.

Severance Payments In Appendix F, we recap that the presence of severance payments
is neutral in a Coasean setting. Moreover, we show that the Coasean wage dynamics
required to neutralize the actual institutional tenure-severance pay schedule in Austria
could be easily offset in small shifts in the wage-tenure gradient.


7     A Non-Coasean Model With Wage Rigidity
An alternative interpretation of the absence of resilience is that the separations were not
Coasean, due to frictions that prevent the efficient (re-)bargaining. Consequently, we
develop and discuss a non-Coasean model with wage rigidity that can rationalize our
findings. Section 8 provides direct empirical support for wage rigidity as the driver of the
inefficient separations we have documented.


7.1   Model
A non-Coasean model with fixed wages can rationalize the empirically documented sim-
ilarity of the post-repeal separation rates even with persistence in idiosyncratic surplus,
if post-repeal separations are largely due to firm surplus shocks. We present the core
features of the model here and relegate the full derivations to Appendix C.

Fixed Wages The strong Coasean result of efficient separations arises from the assump-
tion of flexible (re-)bargaining of compensation, from which joint job surplus stems as the


                                            26
sole allocative concept. Wage rigidity precludes exactly this step. Intuitively, in Figure
2, wage rigidity prevents the parties from moving towards a wage in the feasible-jobs
frontier even though the job carries positive joint surplus, thereby shrinking the set of
feasible jobs to the upper right quadrant.

Separations Separations occur if at least one of worker surplus or firm surplus turns
negative at the given wage, and due to fixed wages the parties do not move beyond the
two-dimensional participation constraints given in Equations (1) and (2). Hence, inefficient
separations – i.e. of jobs with positive joint surplus – can emerge. In this non-Coasean
setting, we therefore think of wage w as one additional job attribute that can evolve or
be fixed, such that jobs are now characterized by (w, V). Besides unilateral worker and
firm surpluses net of the (fixed) wage and net of the surplus shifter SW (w, VW , εW 0) and
S F (w, VF , ε F0), we also define unilateral surpluses gross of the aggregate shifters (which we
now cannot simply sum into joint-surplus shifters) as S    eW (w, VW ) and SeF (w, VF ). Formally,
the job-level separation probability is given by:

                                                               Mutual Sep.: ∧
                            ∫                                      z}|{                         
  d (w, V; εW 0 , ε F0) 
  e                                      1 SeW (w0 , VW 0) < εW 0    ∨     eF (w 0 , VF0) < ε F0 k((w 0 , V0)|(w, V))d(w 0 , V0),
                                                                           S
                            (w 0 ,V0 )        |     {z         }           |       {z        }
                                                    Quit                          Layoff
                                                                                                                               (10)

 where separations can be labeled as quits (negative worker surplus but positive firm
surplus), layoffs (reversed), or mutual separations (both negative). The non-Coasean
expression also formalizes that here the initial incidence of a shock matters for separations
for lack of automatic Coasean rebargaining, such that worker and firm values are not
“fungible”, and we must separately track ε W 0 and ε F0. Analogously to the Coasean case,
                                           d (w, V; εW 0 , ε F0) f(w, V)d(w, V).
                                     ∫
group level separation rates are δ  (w,V) e

REBP Effects in a Non-Coasean Setting We now provide a narrative of REBP and its
aftermath in the non-Coasean setting. We largely rely on intuitive graphs in Figure 3
(which assume perfect persistence in job-level surpluses after – but not necessarily during
– REBP), and relegate the formal derivations of the full model (permitting evolution of
idiosyncratic job surplus post-repeal) into Appendix C.
    In the non-Coasean model, the participation constraints remain two-dimensional and
cannot be collapsed into joint surplus, as in the left panels of Figure 3. Instead, we illus-
trate the logic of the model by plotting example contour maps of the joint distribution


                                                                    27
of firm (y-axis) and worker (x-axis) net of wage and shifter surpluses SW (w, VF , ε F0) and
SW (w, VW , εW 0). We do so in the right panels of Figure 3. Here, the participation con-
straints are given by the y-axis and x-axis. Figure 3 Panel (c) illustrates that REBP improved
worker’s outside option (i.e. lowered worker surplus), so the treated jobs shift left.
    For comparison, we also plot the Coasean analogues of the contour maps of gross-
of-wage surpluses in the middle panels of Figure 3, generalizing the one-dimensional
distribution from the left panels of Figure 3. In the Coasean setting, separations occur
only for jobs that fall below the zero-joint-surplus diagonal.

Post-Repeal (Non-)Resilience After the repeal of REBP, Figure 3 Panel (f) depicts the
former treatment group at the original position but with a missing mass of matches
with low worker surplus (but not necessarily low firm surplus) compared to the control
group, depicted in Panel (i). Formally, this gray set of marginal matches is defined by
{(w 0 , V0) : 0 ≤ S
                  eW (w 0 , VW 0) < εW 0 ∧ S
                                     b
                                           eF (w 0 , VF 0) ≥ 0}.
    As in the Coasean case, the post-repeal separation behavior of the former treatment
group tracks that of the former control group, except for the contribution of the marginal
jobs. But in the non-Coasean case, these marginal jobs feature low worker surplus – the
dimension along which REBP selects them into separation. Thus, resilience need not arise
to firm surplus shocks. That is, unlike in the Coasean case, the initial incidence of shocks,
on the worker or firm, is no longer fungible, and they can no longer be collapsed into joint
surplus shock ε00. Below we consider worker and firm shocks separately for exposition.
    For worker surplus shocks, resilience emerges. Figure 4 Panel (c) reflects this intu-
ition and plots post-repeal separations in response to worker-surplus shifters. Resilience
emerges as separations in the former treatment group are zero until the shock size crosses
the truncation point of surplus, i.e. the REBP shock size. Starting then, the slope is steeper
than in the control group. This resilience is analogous to the Coasean case in that REBP
selected jobs by worker surplus. Formally, this line is the conditional CDF of worker
surplus truncated at the REBP shock size. Panel (c) reflects that few workers are marginal
to worker shocks in the control group, so separations only weakly respond to such shocks.
    For firm shocks, separations start immediately, and can be very similar in both groups,
as in Figure 4 Panel (d), because the former treatment group has retained jobs marginal
to firm shocks. In the control group, separations are more responsive to firm than to
worker shocks in Panel (c), reflecting low baseline firm surplus but high worker surplus.20
Absence of resilience can therefore arise even with perfect persistence in job surplus.
   20Identical separation responses to firm shocks arise, for example, if worker and firm surpluses are
independently distributed.



                                                  28
7.2    Reinterpreting the Mixed Model
Combining the worker and firm shock cases in Figure 4 Panels (c) and (d), we can recon-
struct a non-Coasean version of Panel (b), relating the groups’ post-repeal separations.
Analogously, we can reinterpret the same mixed model in Equation (9) within the non-
Coasean framework as putting weight κ on firm shocks driving post-repeal separations
(leading to perfect comovement, i.e. the 45 degree line) and 1− κ on worker shocks driving
post-repeal separations (leading to resilience, i.e. the kinked piece-wise linear function).21
While we cannot directly observe the worker vs. firm shocks, the estimated κ of essentially
one would point to a large share of post-repeal separations due to firm-side shocks.


7.3    Discussion of the Non-Coasean Framework
Which ingredients enable the non-Coasean model to rationalize the data?

High Initial Worker Surplus Strictly interpreted, our firm-shocks setting assumes that
no aggregate worker shocks hit. A more realistic interpretation is that, in order for the siz-
able truncation along worker surplus to be quantitatively inconsequential for subsequent
separation behavior, it must be that worker shocks are smaller than firm shocks compared
to the baseline (no-REBP) surplus levels. The figure depicts a version of this property as
worker surplus is far to the right.
    High worker (but low firm) surplus is particularly plausible for our sample: older,
high-tenured workers. In fact, this exact constellation is predicted by the long-standing
hypotheses of implicit contract models, in the form of backloading of compensation over
the job spell (Lazear, 1979, 1981): in a period-by-period consideration, young workers
are “underpaid,” while older workers are “overpaid.” This backloading is supported by
implicit contracts or formal institutions.22 Perhaps additionally supporting such implicit
contracts (and also limiting the selectivity of layoffs, as in Bewley, 2002) is the Austrian
institutional setting, which features an explicit consultation role for works councils in the
separation process. Lastly, Austria mandates multiple months of severance payments in
the case of layoffs or retirement, which are foregone for quitters, thus raising workers’
inside value. We discuss the role of severance payments in Appendix F.
   21Both interpretations assume persistence. (Full) reshuffling in the non-Coasean model would further
load on the 45 degree line.
   22While models of job ladders and negotiation capital such as Cahuc, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2006)
generate this joint distribution for high-tenured jobs, they feature efficient (re-)bargaining and separations.




                                                      29
Large Worker Surplus Shift From REBP In the above scenario of initially high worker
surplus, the boosts to worker outside option must be large to sweep up otherwise infra-
marginal workers. The exceptional size of the initial REBP UI treatment – three additional
years of full UI eligibility, hence also serving as a bridge into early retirement – plausibly
achieved this. In Appendix A, we benchmark that, for the average worker, the cash value
is 71% of annual earnings. This view is consistent with the fact that in response to other UI
shifts that were smaller in magnitude or apply to younger workers, there is little evidence
for separation effects (as shown in Jäger et al., forthcoming, and often shown to support
the identification assumption when studying unemployment duration effects).

Limited Correlation Between Baseline Firm and Worker Surpluses In the non-Coasean
setting, the low-worker surplus jobs REBP extracted evidently were not marginal with
respect to firm surplus. Such limited correlation can arise if firm and worker gross-of-wage
fundamentals VF and VW are uncorrelated, or if net-of-wage surpluses are in an extreme
case independently distributed, for example, due to wage frictions.23 (By contrast, in the
Coasean setting, the correlation of the fundamentals is irrelevant due to rebargaining.) In
Section 5 we documented evidence consistent with firm surplus not being correlated with
the REBP selection along worker surplus, in light of non-resilience in response to proxies
for industry- and firm-level labor demand shocks.


8     Evidence for Wage Rigidity as Source of Non-Coasean
      Job Dynamics
We close by providing evidence for wage rigidity as the source of the non-Coasean sep-
aration behavior. Our test investigates heterogeneity of separation behavior during and
after the treatment, across cells of the labor market sorted by proxies of wage rigidity.
We find that the cells with more wage rigidity, and hence less efficient renegotiation,
experience higher initial treatment effects on separations. Accordingly, we continue to
find no evidence for resilience in these high wage-rigidity cells despite the large previous
separation effects. Turning to the flexible-wage cells substantiates our main interpretation.
In fact, the heterogeneity in the initial REBP-induced separations across cells is so stark
that the effect shrinks to zero in the flexible-wage cells – perhaps because of more efficient
   23 The non-Coasean model could even generate higher separations among the former treatment group in
response to firm shocks, e.g., under a “random” wage triggering a negative correlation between worker and
firm surplus: REBP quitters would then be particularly valuable to firms. In contrast, Figure 9 Panels (c) and
(d) documents similar slopes for the treated group compared to, e.g., older cohorts in the control region.


                                                     30
bargaining. As a consequence, these “more Coasean” cells are not predicted to exhibit
resilience.


8.1   Empirical Strategy
Intuitively, if we could cleanly isolate rigid and flexible wage cells, we would partition
the workers in our initial pre-reform sample in 1988 into the Coasean and non-Coasean
regime. We approximate this design with proxies for the degree of wage rigidity.
    For each rigidity proxy, we split firms into quartiles. We keep these quartiles (deter-
mined in 1988, i.e. pre-reform) fixed throughout the analysis period for each match. We
can think of the bottom quartiles are being closer to the non-Coasean, rigid-wage world,
and the upper quartiles as being closer to the Coasean benchmark.
    We then study, within each quartile, first the initial treatment effect on separations. In
this first step, we predict that wage rigidity proxies are associated with larger separation
effects, because only worker (rather than joint) surplus needs to turn negative and wages
are not renegotiated. Second, we study post-repeal resilience. In this second step, we
predict that – conditional on a given initial treatment effect – the flexible-wage cells will
exhibit more resilience and thus accord more closely with the Coasean model (whereas
the rigid cells need not exhibit resilience).


8.2   Proxies for Wage Rigidity
The type of wage friction relevant for our sharply cohort-specific treatment would con-
strain firms’ differentiation of wages between similar workers. Moreover, downward
rigidity would not suffice, as the initial REBP treatment induces wage increases (but sub-
sequent shocks may go either way). As a caveat, we stress that identifying allocative
consequences of wage rigidity remains a notorious empirical challenge in the literature
– motivating our strategy as we described in our introduction. We now introduce our
proxies for wage rigidity. Further details on their construction are in Appendix D.

Within-Firm Standard Deviation of Log Wages For each firm, we take the panel of male
workers from 1982 to 1987 and calculate the standard deviation of log wages by firm-year.
Then, we average these observations across years to get a single observation per firm. This
proxy reflects firms’ revealed ability to differentiate wages between workers, e.g., slightly
older and slightly younger ones.




                                             31
Within-Firm Standard Deviation of “Distance from CBA Cell Average” We construct
a proxy of wage flexibility controlling for collective bargaining agreement (CBA) cell
averages (as in Jäger et al., forthcoming). It mirrors the previous procedure, but we take
residuals from a regression of winsorized log earnings on tenure-experience-occupation-
industry-year fixed effects, with standard deviations calculated at the firm-year level.24
We thereby also provide a composition adjustment of the raw wage dispersion measure
above, capturing the wage differentiation between more similar workers.

Within-Firm Standard Deviation in Wage Growth Cross-sectional dispersion in wage
levels may be partially driven by unobservables. We therefore also consider the within-firm
standard deviations of worker-level changes in the two wage measures above, studying the
five year horizon in the firm’s pre-reform period. This measure may also more closely
proxy firms’ ability to adjust wages in response to worker- or worker-group-specific shocks
such as REBP. We choose the five-year specification since that time window (i) corresponds
to the duration at which we study the initial separation response to the REBP policy, (ii)
imposes a tenure threshold somewhat similar to the bottom quartile for our sample, and
(iii) captures longer-run shifts in wages perhaps less subject to year to year noise.25

Summary Statistics and Correlations Appendix Table A.9 presents, quartile by quar-
tile, ranges and means of and correlations between the proxies. The four measures are
positively correlated, so they capture some underlying similarities of the firms. But the
correlations are far from perfect, with rank correlations as low as 0.33.


8.3    Empirical Results
We show heterogeneity across quartiles of our four wage rigidity measures in Figure
10, for firm-level standard deviation of log wages (Panel (a)), their residuals (Panel (b)),
changes of log wages (Panel (c)), and their residuals (Panel (d)). We show post-repeal
separations through 1996; Appendix Figure A.9 presents the other horizons.
    For the initial REBP separation effects (plotted in red circles), all panels reveal larger
effects for cells with higher wage rigidity, consistent with our theoretical predictions.
   24Tenure n(i, t) is made up of 5 three-year categories and a category for those with more than 15 years of
tenure. Experience e(i, t) is made up of 5 five-year categories and a category for those with more than 25
years experience. (Importantly, neither we nor CBAs define wage groups based on age.) Occupation refers
to white- vs. blue-collar.
   25We have confirmed robustness to shorter horizons. At the shortest, one-year horizon, results turn
noisier, perhaps due to, e.g., wage fluctuations of workers with short tenure dominating the variance or
reflecting adjustment to shorter-lived shocks.



                                                     32
Specifically, in the top quartile – with lowest wage rigidity i.e. closest to the flexible-wage
setting – we find essentially a zero treatment effect from REBP. Hence, wage rigidity did
mediate the initial REBP separation responses.
    We plot post-repeal separations in hollow blue circles. The yellow dashed line repre-
sents each quartile’s benchmark for post-repeal separations, calculated as an analogous
difference-in-differences effect, as in Section 5.2 but within each rigidity quartile. It de-
scribes the Coasean benchmark for any shock or the non-Coasean one for worker shocks.
    For the high-rigidity quartiles, we find essentially no resilience across wage rigidity
proxies. The benchmarks are between -30% and -20% for the rigid-wage cells, due to the
large initial treatment effect in these cells. Yet, the actual post-repeal separation DiD effect
is close to zero. Interestingly, this point estimate is negative and statistically significant,
but very small at around -0.025 (SE 0.009) in the rigid-wage cells.
    For each proxy, the high-rigidity cells provide a resounding rejection of the predicted
Coasean resilience of efficient separations. Instead, the post-repeal patterns for the high-
rigidity group is consistent with the non-Coasean, fixed-wage model we put forth, specif-
ically if post-repeal separations are overwhelmingly driven by firm shocks rather than
worker-sided shocks (some worker-driven separations may explain the small degree of
resilience). A similar pattern emerges in the second group of wage rigidity, where ini-
tial treatment effects are smaller, hence the predicted resilience is weaker, but the point
estimates for empirical post-repeal resilience effects fall to zero.
    Importantly, we do not find resilience in the lowest-rigidity quartile either. But this
absence of resilience is of a different nature than that in the rigid-wage cells: the flexible-
wage cells did not have a treatment effect to begin with, perhaps exactly due to wage
flexibility, and hence also have no missing mass after the repeal. Therefore, the flexible-
wage group should not exhibit resilience according to the Coasean model, the prediction
of which we plot in the yellow dashed line, which is zero for this group.
    A potential worry might be that sorting firms by our wage rigidity proxies would also
sort them by overall surplus, so that baseline separation rates would differ even absent
any shock. To assess this concern, we also plot for each quartile the separation rate for the
control group during the REBP period (hatched navy line). This gradient is flat, rather
than steeply declining, limiting the relevance of this concern. This flat gradient perhaps
again reflects that, aside from the tremendous shock induced by REBP, most separations
in our sample of older workers are generally not driven by worker-side shocks.

Overall Assessment The heterogeneity analysis by wage rigidity of both the initial
REBP introduction and the aftermath of its repeal provides evidence consistent with wage


                                              33
rigidity as a source of non-Coasean job dynamics. First, the REBP separations stem from
rigid-wage pockets of the Austrian labor market, which in the aftermath of the repeal
show no resilience. By contrast, the flexible-wage group turns out to not exhibit an initial
separation effect to begin with, perhaps exactly due to wage flexibility – and hence did
not have a missing mass.26 As a caveat, this investigation is limited by the difficulty of
measuring wage rigidity on the basis of observables and flow wage behavior.


9    Conclusion
We have provided an empirical test of the Coasean theory of efficient separations. We
overcame the challenge of the unobservability of job surplus by tracking a cohort of jobs
through a transitory policy that led to separations, but then was repealed. In contradiction
to the Coasean view, the survivors did not exhibit resilience to subsequent shocks. Our
resilience test concerns the fungibility of surplus factors through efficient bargaining. It
requires panel data and a transitory, sharply ending treatment lowering surplus. The
strategy could be implemented beyond our setting and perhaps beyond the labor market.
Our test adds a robust tool to a small empirical literature studying the efficiency of
employment determination (Brown and Ashenfelter, 1986; Card, 1990; Bils, Chang, and
Kim, 2012; Mui and Schoefer, 2020).
    Wage rigidity emerges as the friction plausibly underlying the inefficient separations.
Theoretically, the non-Coasean model with wage rigidity provides a parsimonious account
of the full set of empirical results. Empirically, we find that the inefficient separation
dynamics stemmed from high wage rigidity cells, supporting this interpretation.
    We close by reiterating that the type of wage rigidity relevant to our treatment (a
sharply age-specific boost to the worker outside option) is firms’ ability to differentiate
wages between similar workers. Such frictions may reflect broader forces than formal
institutions, such as equity concerns, which appear present in a variety of institutional
arrangements and countries (Card et al., 2012; Dube, Giuliano, and Leonard, 2019; Saez,
Schoefer, and Seim, 2019; Drenik et al., 2020), and are inherent to models of wage posting
and monopsony.




   26As a complement to our wage rigidity proxies, Appendix Figure A.4 presents a more speculative het-
erogeneity analysis by industry, a tangible category. We do find larger REBP treatment effects – but no
post-repeal resilience – in industries where wages may plausibly be more rigid, for example in manufactur-
ing, than in industries such as finance or entertainment, where, e.g., due to performance pay, wages may be
more flexible, as in Lemieux, MacLeod, and Parent (2012).


                                                    34
Bibliography
Barro, Robert. 1977. “Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy.” Journal
  of Monetary Economics 3 (3):305–316.

Becker, Gary, Elisabeth Landes, and Robert Michael. 1977. “An Economic Analysis of
  Marital Instability.” Journal of Political Economy 85 (6):1141–1187.

Bewley, Truman. 2002. Why Wages Don’t Fall during a Recession. Harvard University Press.

Bils, Mark, Yongsung Chang, and Sun-Bin Kim. 2012. “Comparative Advantage and
  Unemployment.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (2):150–165.

Brown, James and Orley Ashenfelter. 1986. “Testing the Efficiency of Employment Con-
  tracts.” Journal of Political Economy 94 (3, Part 2):S40–S87.

Cahuc, Pierre, Fabien Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2006. “Wage Bargaining with
  On-the-Job Search: Theory and Evidence.” Econometrica 74 (2):323–64.

Card, David. 1990. “Unexpected Inflation, Real Wages, and Employment Determination
  in Union Contracts.” American Economic Review 80 (4):669–88.

Card, David and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return
  to College for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
  116 (2):705–746.

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “Inequality
  at Work: The Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction.” American Economic Review
  102 (6):2981–3003.

Davis, Steven, Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger. 2013. “The Establishment-Level
 Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2):581–622.

Dickens, William, Lorenz Goette, Erica Groshen, Steinar Holden, Julian Messina, Mark
  Schweitzer, Jarkko Turunen, and Melanie Ward. 2007. “How Wages Change: Micro
  Evidence from the International Wage Flexibility Project.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
  (2):195–214.

Drenik, Andres, Simon Jäger, Pascuel Plotkin, and Benjamin Schoefer. 2020. “Paying
  Outsourced Labor: Direct Evidence from Linked Temp Agency-Worker-Client Data.”
  NBER Working Paper No. w26891 .


                                             35
Dube, Arindrajit, Laura Giuliano, and Jonathan Leonard. 2019. “Fairness and Frictions:
 The Impact of Unequal Raises on Quit Behavior.” American Economic Review 109 (2):620–
 63.

Elsby, Michael and Gary Solon. 2019. “How Prevalent Is Downward Rigidity in Nominal
  Wages? International Evidence from Payroll Records and Pay Slips.” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 33 (3):185–201.

Fink, Martina, Esther Kalkbrenner, Andrea Weber, and Christine Zulehner. 2010. “Extract-
  ing Firm Information from Administrative Records: The ASSD Firm Panel.” Austrian
  Center for Labor Economics and the Analysis of the Welfare State Working Paper No. 1004 .

Frimmel, Wolfgang, Thomas Horvath, Mario Schnalzenberger, and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer.
  2018. “Seniority Wages and the Role of Firms in Retirement.” Journal of Public Economics
  164:19–32.

Hall, Robert and Edward Lazear. 1984. “The Excess Sensitivity of Layoffs and Quits to
 Demand.” Journal of Labor Economics 2 (2):233–257.

Hall, Robert and Paul Milgrom. 2008. “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the
 Wage Bargain.” American Economic Review 98 (4):1653–74.

Hall, Robert E. 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness.”
 American Economic Review 95 (1):50–65.

Inderbitzin, Lukas, Stefan Staubli, and Josef Zweimüller. 2016. “Extended Unemployment
  Benefits and Early Retirement: Program Complementarity and Program Substitution.”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (1):253–288.

Jäger, Simon, Benjamin Schoefer, Samuel Young, and Josef Zweimüller. forthcoming.
  “Wages and the Value of Nonemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Jäger, Simon, Benjamin Schoefer, and Josef Zweimüller. 2019. “Marginal Jobs and Job
  Surplus: A Test of the Efficiency of Separations.” NBER Working Paper No. 25492 .

Lalive, Rafael, Camille Landais, and Josef Zweimüller. 2015. “Market Externalities
  of Large Unemployment Insurance Extension Programs.” American Economic Review
  105 (12):3564–3596.

Lazear, Edward. 1979. “Why Is there Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy
  87 (6):1261–1284.


                                            36
———. 1981. “Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions.” American
 Economic Review 71 (4):606–620.

Lemieux, Thomas, Bentley MacLeod, and Daniel Parent. 2012. “Contract Form, Wage
  Flexibility, and Employment.” American Economic Review 102 (3):526–31.

Leoni, Thomas and Wolfgang Pollan. 2011. “Lohnentwicklung und Lohnunterschiede in
  der Industrie seit 2000.” WIFO Monatsberichte, WIFO October .

MacLeod, Bentley and James Malcomson. 1993. “Investments, Holdup, and the Form of
 Market Contracts.” American Economic Review 83 (4):811–837.

McLaughlin, Kenneth. 1991. “A Theory of Quits and Layoffs with Efficient Turnover.”
 Journal of Political Economy 99 (1):1–29.

Mui, Preston and Benjamin Schoefer. 2020. “Reservation Raises: The Aggregate Labor
 Supply Curve at the Extensive Margin.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP14209 .

Saez, Emmanuel, Benjamin Schoefer, and David Seim. 2019. “Payroll Taxes, Firm Behavior,
  and Rent Sharing: Evidence from a Young Workers’ Tax Cut in Sweden.” American
  Economic Review 109 (5):1717–63.

Staubli, Stefan. 2011. “The Impact of Stricter Criteria for Disability Insurance on Labor
  Force Participation.” Journal of Public Economics 95 (9-10):1223–1235.

Winter-Ebmer, Rudolf. 2003. “Benefit Duration and Unemployment Entry: A Quasi-
 Experiment in Austria.” European Economic Review 47 (2):259–273.

Zweimüller, Josef, Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, Rafael Lalive, Andreas Kuhn, Jean-Philippe
 Wuellrich, Oliver Ruf, and Simon Buchi. 2009. “Austrian Social Security Database.”
 Austrian Center for Labor Economics and the Analysis of the Welfare State Working Paper No.
 0903.




                                            37
Tables

                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                          Treatment Region                        Control Region
                                 Eligible Cohort Ineligible Cohort     Eligible Cohort Ineligible Cohort
                                        (1)              (2)                  (3)               (4)


 Birth Year                          1938.636            1945.704         1938.749           1945.692
                                      (2.800)             (1.526)          (2.802)            (1.544)
 Experience                           22.138              20.536           20.988             19.150
                                      (5.408)             (5.509)          (6.006)            (6.100)
 Tenure                               11.168               9.630           10.075              8.719
                                      (5.885)             (6.027)          (5.941)            (5.932)
 Annual Earnings (1,000 EUR)          36.332              35.747           36.466             35.908
                                     (10.002)            (10.103)         (10.787)           (11.025)
 White Collar                          0.378               0.401            0.470              0.483
                                      (0.485)             (0.490)          (0.499)            (0.500)

 Observations                         52,294              29,059           198,124           116,852


Note: The table reports summary statistics, means and standard deviations (in parentheses), for our sample
of workers employed at the onset of the reform (1988q2). Columns (1) and (2) do so for the treatment regions
and columns (3) and (4) for the control regions, described in Section 2 and outlined in Panel (b) of Figure
1. Columns (1) and (3) report on the eligible cohorts (cohorts born between 1933 and 1943 who were 50 or
older at some point while REBP was active), columns (2) and (4) for the ineligible control cohorts (cohorts
born between 1943 and 1948 who did not turn 50 during the policy period). Details on the sample selection
are in Section 2.3. Annual earnings (in logs) are based on 2018 EUR (in 1,000s) .




                                                    38
     Table 2: Initial Treatment Effect: Difference-in-Differences Effects on Separations (1988-93) Among Pre-Reform Job Holders

                                                  (1)                (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                               Separation         Separation    Nonemployment Unemp. (Benefits) Cont. Empl.
                                                             Into Nonemployment   (Quarters)     (Quarters)      (Quarters)

        REBP Region × Treated Cohort            0.109***              0.120***                1.461***                0.951*             -1.048***
                                                 (0.041)               (0.043)                 (0.378)                (0.531)             (0.365)

        REBP Region                               0.003                -0.003                   -0.230                 -0.101              0.024
                                                 (0.044)              (0.008)                  (0.280)                (0.182)             (0.677)

        Treated Cohort                            0.030               0.108***                0.805***               0.150***              0.146
                                                 (0.026)               (0.005)                 (0.126)                (0.056)             (0.391)
39




        Constant                                0.372***              0.057***                 1.518**                 0.665             16.017***
                                                 (0.098)               (0.017)                 (0.668)                (0.445)             (1.820)

        Observations                             390,791              390,791                  390,791               390,791             390,791
        Adjusted R 2                              0.008                0.046                    0.023                 0.018               0.002
        No of Clusters                             100                  100                      100                   100                 100

     Note: The table reports results of the econometric specification in (8). The coefficient of interest is that on REBP Region × Treated Cohort and
     captures the effect of REBP-eligibility on the outcomes listed in columns (1) through (5) on a sample of workers employed at the onset of the reform
     (1988q2). We exclude workers born before 1933 and after 1948. Separation denotes an indicator function that is 1 if a worker separated from their
     1988-employer by the end of the REBP period (1988q2 to 1993q3). Separation into Nonemployment denotes an indicator for Separation from the initial
     employer interacted with an indicator for not taking up employment with another employer. Nonemployment (Quarters), Unemployment (Benefits)
     (Quarters), and Continuous Employment (Quarters) denote the quarters of nonemployment, unemployment benefits, and continuous employment with
     the initial employer between 1988q2 and 1993q3. Standard errors clustered at the administrative region level are reported in parentheses. Levels of
     significance: ∗ 10%, ∗∗ 5%, and ∗∗∗ 1%.
     Table 3: Resilience Test: Difference-in-Differences Effects on Post-Repeal Separations (1994-96) Among Program Survivors

                                                   (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                Separation          Separation    Nonemployment Unemp. (Benefits) Cont. Empl.
                                                               Into Nonemployment   (Quarters)     (Quarters)      (Quarters)

        REBP Region × Treated Cohort                0.006                0.005                     0.017                   -0.072              -0.052
                                                   (0.009)              (0.008)                   (0.027)                 (0.045)             (0.034)

        REBP Region                                 -0.003               0.008                     -0.007                  0.005               0.116
                                                   (0.019)              (0.011)                   (0.056)                 (0.041)             (0.088)

        Treated Cohort                            0.140***              0.164***                 0.718***                 0.145**            -0.630***
                                                   (0.009)               (0.002)                  (0.010)                 (0.069)             (0.057)
40




        Constant                                  0.157***              0.068**                   0.324**                  0.136              8.166***
                                                   (0.051)              (0.030)                   (0.142)                 (0.107)             (0.241)

        Observations                              207,785               207,785                   207,785                207,785              207,785
        Adjusted R 2                               0.026                 0.047                     0.038                  0.006                0.018
        No of Clusters                              99                     99                       99                      99                   99

     Note: The table reports results of the specification in (8). Here, the sample is restricted to workers employed at the same establishment in May 1988 and
     February 1994, i.e. survivors. The coefficient of interest is REBP Region × Treated Cohort and captures the effect of REBP-eligibility on the outcomes
     listed in columns (1) through (5), with outcomes measured by February 1996. We exclude workers born before 1933 and after 1948. Separation
     denotes an indicator function that is 1 if a worker is not employed by their employer from February 1994 (and May 1988) in February 1996. Separation
     into Nonemployment denotes an indicator for Separation from the initial employer interacted with an indicator for not being employed in February
     1996. Nonemployment (Quarters), Unemployment (Benefits) (Quarters), and Continuous Employment (Quarters) denote the quarters of nonemployment,
     unemployment benefits, and continuous employment with the initial employer between February 1994 and 1996. Standard errors clustered at the
     administrative region level are reported in parentheses. Levels of significance: ∗ 10%, ∗∗ 5%, and ∗∗∗ 1%.
Table 4: Estimating the Mixed Model of Two Coasean Model Variants: Full Persistence vs.
Full Reshuffling of Post-Repeal Job-Level Surplus


                                               1995      1996       1997      1998


                      α κ (Reshuffling)        1.027 1.084 1.237       1.338
                                              (0.034) (0.030) (0.040) (0.047)
                      95% CI                   0.960 1.025 1.158       1.245
                      (Lower Limit)

                      α 1−κ (Persistence)      -0.037 -0.070 -0.208 -0.289
                                              (0.035) (0.030) (0.041) (0.048)

                      R2                       0.929     0.960     0.971      0.978
                      N                         181       181       181        181

Note: The table reports estimates of the coefficients in Equation (9). We regress the post-repeal separation
rate from February 1994 to February of each year among REBP survivors in the REBP region, by month of
birth, on both the separation rate among stayers in the non-REBP region and the predicted separation rate
based on a perfect persistence Coasean model. We weight the observations of the month of birth by the
number of employed workers born in that month and report standard errors clustered at the administrative
region level.




                                                    41
Figures

                   Figure 1: The Regional Extended Benefit Program (REBP)

                                                             (a) Timeline of Potential Benefit Duration During REBP


                        Potential Benefit Duration (Weeks)   209




                                                              52
                                                              39
                                                              30




                                                                           July 1988 1989                                   July 1993
                                                                          Introduction                                       Repeal

                                                                              Eligible for Extension: ≥50 in Treated (REBP) Region
                                                                              Ineligible Due to Region Test: ≥50 in Control (non-REBP) Region
                                                                              Ineligible Due to Age Test: <50 in Both Regions




                                                                   (b) Map of REBP Treatment and Control Regions




Note: Panel (a) shows the timeline of reform changes in potential benefit duration (PBD) for eligible workers
in treatment (REBP) and control (non-REBP) regions. It first shows the PBD for individuals aged 50 or older
in the REBP region, which increased from 30 to 209 weeks starting July 1988. Second, individuals 50 or older
but in the control (non-REBP) region were ineligible. Lastly, individuals not meeting the age requirement
were ineligible in either region. The figure also shows a smaller, nation-wide PDB reform in 1989, which
our difference-in-differences design nets out. Section 2 summarizes further details on eligibility. Panel (b)
depicts a map of Austrian municipalities categorized into REBP treatment and control regions. We drop
the partially treated regions, where REBP was repealed in 1991. Source for map: Inderbitzin, Staubli, and
Zweimüller (2016), Figure 1.




                                                                                                    42
                                                                  Figure 2: Case Studies of Jobs

                                                                               +w
                                                      Quits                ●                               Feasible Jobs
                                                                  B2      A
              VfIn − VfOut [− w]                                  ●
                                                                                             −w

                                                                      C1
                                                                      ●        B            ●
                                                              ●
                                                                               ●            A1
                                                              M
                   Firm Surplus Gross [Net] of Wage




                                                                           ●
                                                                                    C
                                                                    (0,0)               ●             B1
                                                                                                      ●         A2
                                                                      ●
                                                                    X                            C2             ●
                                                                                                 ●




                                                       Mutual
                                                      Separations
                                                                                                                Layoffs

                                                                                           w     w
                                                       Worker Surplus Gross [Net] of Wage VIn − VOut [+ w]


Note: The figure plots job case studies in the two-dimensional space of worker and firm job surplus. The
                                                         W    W                        F    F
solid circles (•) denote gross-of-wage surpluses, i.e. VIn − VOut for the worker and VIn − VOut for the firm. The
empty circles (◦) denote net-of-wage surpluses, i.e. VIn + w − VOut for the worker and VIn − w − VOut
                                                         W          W                       F          F
                                                                                                           for the
firm. The 135-degree lines are iso-joint-surplus lines, along which wages reallocate surplus between the
firm and the worker. The empty lines (||) at a right angle at the origin denote the participation constraints
of the worker and the firm, namely positive net-of-wage surpluses. The bold diagonal line (I) represents the
threshold for job viability on the basis of joint job surplus (which an appropriately set wage can in principle
distribute to render each parties’ surplus positive).




                                                                                   43
             Figure 3: Separation Dynamics and Surplus Distributions: Coasean vs. Wage Rigidity Model

                                        Coasean Model                                                                                                  Non-Coasean Model
                        Joint Job Surplus         Unilateral Surpluses                                                                                 With Wage Rigidity
                                                                              (b)                      Feasible Jobs                                  (c)                  Feasible Jobs
                                                                                                                                                      Quits




                                                                                                                           Firm Surplus Net of Wage
                                                 Firm Surplus Gross of Wage
                                                                                                  − εW'
                                                                                                     b <0                                                             − εW'
                                                                                                                                                                         b <0
  UI Benefit Increase
   Initial Treatment




                                                                                     (0,0)
                                                                                                                                                            (0,0)

                                                                              Mutual                                                                   Mutual
                                                                              Separations                                                              Separations                 Layoffs
                                                                              Worker Surplus Gross of Wage                                              Worker Surplus Net of Wage

                                                                              (e)                                                                     (f)




                                                                                                                           Firm Surplus Net of Wage
                                                 Firm Surplus Gross of Wage




                                                                                                  εW'' < 0                                                              εW'' < 0
  Treatment Group
    Post-Repeal




                                                                                                                εF'' < 0                                                             εF'' < 0


                                                                                     (0,0)
                                                                                                                                                              (0,0)




                                                                              Worker Surplus Gross of Wage                                              Worker Surplus Net of Wage

                                                                               (h)                                                                    (i)
                                                                                                                           Firm Surplus Net of Wage
                                                 Firm Surplus Gross of Wage




                                                                                                  εW'' < 0                                                              εW'' < 0
  Control Group
   Post-Repeal




                                                                                                                εF'' < 0                                                             εF'' < 0


                                                                                     (0,0)
                                                                                                                                                            (0,0)



                                                                              Worker Surplus Gross of Wage                                              Worker Surplus Net of Wage

Note The figure illustrates surplus distributions underlying the separation dynamics. The left column shows a Coasean
case in a joint-surplus representation; the middle column shows the model in a two-dimensional representation in terms of
unilateral gross-of-wage surpluses building on Figure 2. The right column shows net-of-wage surpluses for a rigid-wage
model. There, the empty lines (||) denote separation thresholds for net-of-wage unilateral surpluses. The bold diagonal line
(I) does so for joint surplus in the middle column. The top row shows initial effects of REBP. The middle (bottom) row shows
post-repeal surplus distributions among surviving matches in the former treatment (control) group. For the middle and
right column, the two last rows also show responses to shocks. Panel (a) also includes separators unrelated to REBP but due
to idiosyncratic shocks, indicated by the black mass of share δ0 . Throughout, the marginal jobs are gray, making up share
δ1 − δ 0 . Inframarginal jobs surviving REBP are white and share 1 − δ 1 . At the point of repeal, among survivors in the control
group (δ1 − δ 0 )/(1 − δ0 ) are marginal, low surplus jobs.




                                                                                             44
                                      Figure 4: Separations and Shocks in the Coasean and Non-Coasean Framework

        (a) Shocks to Joint Surplus in a Coasean Setting                                                  (b) Empirical Strategy: Observable Separation Rates

                                                                                                                                                        1
                                          Former Control Group (Δ0)                                                                                               Perfect Comovement: Full Reshuffling




                                                                                                              Separation Rate in Treatment Group (Δ1)
                                          Former Treatment Group (Δ1)                                                                                             Resilience: Perfect Persistence
   Post-Repeal Separation Rates (Δ)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1-δ0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ____
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1-δ1




                                                                                                                                                        0
                                      0                                                              1                                                      0                                           δ1-δ0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ____              1
                                      0                                             ε '
                                                                                      W
                                                                                      b                                                                                                                 1-δ0
                                              Post-Repeal Joint Surplus Shocks (ε'' = ε '' + ε '')
                                                                                            W   F                                                                          Separation Rate in Control Group (Δ0)



                                      (c) Worker Shock in a Non-Coasean Setting                                                                             (d) Firm Shock in a Non-Coasean Setting

                                          Former Control Group (Δ0)                                                                                             Former Control Group (Δ0)
                                          Former Treatment Group (Δ1)                                                                                           Former Treatment Group (Δ1)
   Post-Repeal Separation Rates (Δ)




                                                                                                              Post-Repeal Separation Rates (Δ)




                                      0                                                              1                                                  0                                                                 1
                                      0                                             εWb '                                                               0                                                εWb '
                                                  Post-Repeal Worker Surplus Shock (εW'')                                                                                 Post-Repeal Firm Surplus Shock (εF'')



Note: The figures plot the dynamics of post-repeal job separations in the model, in the Coasean (efficient
bargaining) and non-Coasean (fixed-wage) settings. Panel (a) plots the separations in the former treatment
group (∆1 ) and former control group (∆0 ) in response to joint surplus shocks (i.e. either a worker or
firm shock) in a Coasean setting. Panel (b) plots the relationship between treatment group and control
group separation rates, after the treatment, for the Coasean setting, assuming perfect persistence and full
reshuffling of job surplus. Panels (c) and (d) compare the separations of survivors in the former treatment
and control groups, respectively, in response to post-repeal worker (c) and firm (d) surplus shocks for the
non-Coasean settings.




                                                                                                         45
Figure 5: Initial Treatment Effect: Separations (1988-93) Among Pre-Reform Job Holders

                                                                                                   (a) Levels

                                                                       1
                                                                                           Potentially Eligible Workers (were 50-60    Workers Never Eligible
                                                                                          During the Program) Depending on Region          in Any Region
                                                                                                                                      (Turned 50 Post-Repeal)
                Share of Cohort that Separated from
                                                                       .8
                 Original 1988 Employer by 1993

                                                                                                     Treatment Region

                                                                       .6




                                                                       .4

                                                                                               Control Region

                                                                       .2




                                                                       0
                                                                       July 1928   July 1933             July 1938               July 1943              July 1948
                                                                                                      Month of Birth



                                                                                                (b) Differences
                Original 1988 Employer by 1993 (Treatment - Control)




                                                                       .3
                 Difference in Share of Cohort that Separated from




                                                                                               DiD Estimate: 0.109 (SE 0.041)


                                                                       .2




                                                                       .1




                                                                       0




                                                                       July 1928   July 1933             July 1938               July 1943              July 1948
                                                                                                      Month of Birth



Note: Panel (a) shows the share of workers who separated from their 1988q2-employer (right before the
reform) by 1993q3 (when reform had just ended). We plot rates by month of birth and within the treated
(red, short dashes) and the control (blue, solid) regions. Panel (b) shows the difference between the treated
and the control region by cohort. Cohorts born after 1943 were not covered by the policy as they turned 50
after the program was repealed 1993. Cohorts born before 1933 had all reached retirement age by 1993.




                                                                                                       46
                                                                                           Figure 6: Initial Treatment Effect: Additional Results

                                                                                                            Separations Between Ages 50 and 55
                                                                                             (a) Levels                                                                                          (b) Differences (Treatment - Control)
                                                  1                                                                                                                                         .3
      Separation from Age 50 Employer by Age 55




                                                                                                                                                Separation from Age 50 Employer by Age 55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DiD Estimate: 0.124 (SE 0.026)




                                                                                                                                                     Differences (Treatment - Control)
                                                  .8
                                                                                                                                                                                            .2


                                                                                                 Treatment Region
                                                  .6

                                                                                                                                                                                            .1


                                                  .4


                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                           Control Region
                                                  .2




                                                  0
                                                          Jul28                Jul33                    Jul38              Jul43   Jul48                                                    July 1928     July 1933             July 1938            July 1943          July 1948
                                                                                                   Month of Birth                                                                                                            Month of Birth




                                                                                                                Quarters Nonemployed (1988-93)
                                                                                             (c) Levels                                                                                          (d) Differences (Treatment - Control)
                                                  20                                                                                                                                        4
      Quarters Nonemployed (1988-93)




                                                                                                                                                Quarters Nonemployed (1988-93)
                                                                                                                                                Differences (Treatment - Control)


                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                  15                                                                                                                                                                                        DiD Estimate: 1.462 (SE 0.378)


                                                                                                                                                                                            2

                                                  10
                                                                                            Treatment Region
                                                                                                                                                                                            1



                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                             Control Region

                                                      0                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                          Jul28                    Jul33                Jul38              Jul43   Jul48                                                    July 1928     July 1933             July 1938            July 1943          July 1948
                                                                                                   Month of Birth                                                                                                            Month of Birth




                                                                                                    Quarters Unemployed (Benefits) (1988-93)
                                                                                             (e) Levels                                                                                          (f) Differences (Treatment - Control)
                                                  5                                                                                                                                         3
      Quarters Unemployed (Benefits) (1988-93)




                                                                                                                                                Quarters Unemployed (Benefits) (1988-93)
                                                                                                                                                    Differences (Treatment - Control)




                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                            2



                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DiD Estimate: 0.951 (SE 0.531)

                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                            Treatment Region
                                                  2



                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                  1


                                                                  Control Region
                                                  0                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                       Jul28                   Jul33                   Jul38               Jul43   Jul48                                                    July 1928     July 1933             July 1938            July 1943          July 1948
                                                                                                   Month of Birth                                                                                                            Month of Birth




Note: Panel (a) shows the share of workers who separated from their initial employer (measured in quarter
before turning 50) by the quarter before turning 55. Panels (c) and (e) show the average number of quarters
that the workers are nonemployed and on unemployment benefits, respectively, during the REBP period,
among those employed in the quarter before the start of REBP (1988q2). We plot rates by month of birth and
within the REBP (treated) (red, short dashes) and control (blue, solid) regions. Panels (b), (d), and (f) show
the differences between the treatment and the control regions by cohort. Cohorts born after 1943 were not
covered by the policy as they turned 50 after the program was repealed in 1993.

                                                                                                                                           47
 Figure 7: Resilience Test: Post-Repeal Separations (1994-96) Among Program Survivors


                                                                                                           (a) Levels

                                                                     1
                                                                                  Formerly Potentially Eligible Workers                    Workers Never Eligible
                Post-Repeal Share of Separations (1994-96)
                                                                                        Depending on Region                                   in Any Region
                   Among Program Survivors (1988-93)

                                                                     .8

                                                                                        Former    Treatment Region: Data
                                                                                        ------------------------------------------

                                                                     .6
                                                                                          Former Control Region: Data
                                                                                          _______________________
                                                                                                                                         Former Treatment Region:
                                                                                                                                           Coasean
                                                                                                                                            – – – – – Benchmark
                                                                                                                                                      ––––––
                                                                     .4




                                                                     .2




                                                                     0
                                                                     July 1933                     July 1938                         July 1943                 July 1948
                                                                                                                Month of Birth



                                                                                                       (b) Differences
                Difference: Post-Repeal Separation Rates (1994-96)




                                                                     .2
                                                                                    Data (DiD Estimate: 0.006, SE 0.009)
                        (Former Treatment - Former Control)




                                                                      0




                                                                     -.2


                                                                                                               Coasean Benchmark (DiD Prediction: -0.125)



                                                                     -.4
                                                                      July 1933                    July 1938                         July 1943                 July 1948
                                                                                                                Month of Birth


Note: Panel (a) shows, by month of birth, the share of workers observed in the same establishment between
1988q2 and 1994q1 who separate from that employer by 1996q1. The sample is split into treated (red,
short dashes) and control (blue, solid) regions. The yellow dashed line plots the Coasean benchmark using
Equation (7) (perfect persistence case). Panel (b) shows, by month of birth, the difference in separation
rates from Panel (a) between the treated and control regions (red, solid), and between separations predicted
based on the Coasean benchmark in treated regions and observed separations in control regions (yellow,
dashed). The retirement age for Austrian men was 60 years old in this period, which explains the spike in
separations among older cohorts.

                                                                                                                48
Figure 8: Resilience Test at Other Horizons: Post-Repeal Separations Among Program
Survivors

                                                                                                           Horizon: 1994-95
                                                              (a) Levels                                                                                                                                     (b) Differences




                                                                                                                                 Difference: Post-Repeal Separation Rates (1994-95)
                                               1
                                                                             Former Control Region: Data
  Post-Repeal Share of Separations (1994-95)




                                                                             Former Treatment Region: Data                                                                            .2
                                                                             Former Treatment Region: Coasean Benchmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Data (DiD Estimate: 0.008, SE (0.005))
     Among Program Survivors (1988-93)




                                                                                                                                         (Former Treatment - Former Control)
                                               .8




                                               .6                                                                                                                                      0




                                               .4

                                                                                                                                                                                      -.2

                                               .2                                                                                                                                                                          Coasean Benchmark (DiD Prediction: -0.014)



                                               0                                                                                                                                      -.4
                                               July 1933   July 1938                    July 1943                    July 1948                                                         July 1933               July 1938                     July 1943             July 1948
                                                                       Month of Birth                                                                                                                                       Month of Birth




                                                                                                           Horizon: 1994-97
                                                              (c) Levels                                                                                                                                     (d) Differences
                                                                                                                                 Difference: Post-Repeal Separation Rates (1994-97)




                                               1
                                                                             Former Control Region: Data
  Post-Repeal Share of Separations (1994-97)




                                                                             Former Treatment Region: Data                                                                            .2
                                                                             Former Treatment Region: Coasean Benchmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Data (DiD Estimate: 0.022, SE (0.010))
     Among Program Survivors (1988-93)




                                                                                                                                         (Former Treatment - Former Control)




                                               .8




                                               .6                                                                                                                                      0




                                               .4

                                                                                                                                                                                      -.2

                                               .2                                                                                                                                                                          Coasean Benchmark (DiD Prediction: -0.106)



                                               0                                                                                                                                      -.4
                                               July 1933   July 1938                    July 1943                    July 1948                                                         July 1933               July 1938                     July 1943             July 1948
                                                                       Month of Birth                                                                                                                                       Month of Birth




                                                                                                           Horizon: 1994-98
                                                              (e) Levels                                                                                                                                      (f) Differences
                                                                                                                                 Difference: Post-Repeal Separation Rates (1994-98)




                                               1
                                                                             Former Control Region: Data
  Post-Repeal Share of Separations (1994-98)




                                                                             Former Treatment Region: Data                                                                            .2
                                                                             Former Treatment Region: Coasean Benchmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Data (DiD Estimate: 0.026, SE (0.011))
     Among Program Survivors (1988-93)




                                                                                                                                         (Former Treatment - Former Control)




                                               .8




                                               .6                                                                                                                                      0




                                               .4

                                                                                                                                                                                      -.2

                                               .2                                                                                                                                                                          Coasean Benchmark (DiD Prediction: -0.088)



                                               0                                                                                                                                      -.4
                                               July 1933   July 1938                    July 1943                    July 1948                                                         July 1933               July 1938                     July 1943             July 1948
                                                                       Month of Birth                                                                                                                                       Month of Birth




Note: Panels (a), (c), and (e) show variants of Figure 7 Panel (a) for various post-repeal horizons. Panels (b),
(d), and (f) show the observed and predicted differences in separation rates as in Figure 7 Panel (b).

                                                                                                                          49
Figure 9: Resilience Tests: Post-Repeal Separation Responses to Negative Industry and
Establishment-Level Growth Events (1994-96)
          (a) Difference in Separation by Industry Growth                                                                                      (b) Separations vs. Annual Establishment Growth

                                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                   Annual Separation Rate Among All Male Workers
  Difference: Post-Repeal Separation Rate (1994-96):




                                                        .1
          Former Treatment - Former Control




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .3



                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2

                                                       -.1


                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                                                       -.2
                                                                                                 1st Tercile (Lowest Industry Growth)
                                                                                                 2nd Tercile
                                                       -.3                                       3rd Tercile (Highest Industry Growth)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                            1933q3                   1938q3         1943q3                       1948q3                                                                 -30        -25    -20   -15    -10     -5     0      5   10    15   20     25   30
                                                                                        Quarter of Birth                                                                                                           Establishment-Level Employment Growth (1994-95)



                   (c) Survivor Separations by Cohort and Region                                                                                                                                               (d) Birth Cohort-Specific Slopes
          Post-Repeal Separation Rate (1994-96)




                                                       .4                                                                                                                                                 -.6
                                                                                                                                                   Cohort-Specific Sensitivities of Separation Share
                                                                                                                                                    to Negative Establishment Growth (1994-96)
                Among Stayers since 1988




                                                                                                                                                         Among 1988-94 Program Survivors




                                                       .3                                                                                                                                                 -.7



                                                       .2                                                                                                                                                                               Control Region
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.8



                                                       .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.9


                                                       0
                                                            -30    -25   -20   -15    -10   -5    0     5    10    15     20    25       30                                                                   -1
                                                                   Establishment-Level Employment Growth (1994-96)                                                                                                       Treatment Region
                                                                  Former Treatment Group: Eligible, Old Cohorts in Treatment Regions
                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1.1
                                                                  Former Control Group: Old Cohorts in Control Regions
                                                                  Former Control Group: Young Cohort in Treatment Regions                                                                                          1936         1938         1940         1942      1944    1946        1948
                                                                  Former Control Group: Young Cohorts in Control Regions                                                                                                                            Year of Birth



Note: Panel (a) splits the by-cohort regional difference from Figure 7 (b) into terciles of industry growth, with
the first tercile denoting the lowest and the third tercile denoting the highest industry growth. Specifically,
we calculate employment growth between 1994q1 and 1996q1 for each industry (two-digit NACE), among
all workers (not just stayers) born after 1938. Panels (b), (c) and (d) plot the results of an analysis focusing on
labor demand shifts within establishments. We confirm the “hockey-stick” relationship between separations
and employment growth at the establishment level (Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger, 2013) in Panel (b). It
plots annual separation rates for male workers employed in a given year by bins of 1994q1-95q1 establishment
employment growth. Panel (c) focuses on separations among the four REBP groups: eligible and ineligible
cohorts and regions, against total establishment employment growth. We ignore the cohorts born before 1936
since they have reached retirement age in 1996. Panel (d) plots the slope of the cohort-specific relationship
between separations and establishment growth (1994-1996) among shrinking establishments by cohort and
region. We adjust throughout for spurious layoffs due to mergers, take-overs, and administrative changes
using the procedure in Fink et al. (2010).


                                                                                                                                              50
                               Figure 10: Separations by Wage Rigidity Measures


                     (a) By SD of Log Wage                                            (b) By SD of Residuals of Log Wage

      .4                                                                     .4



      .3                                                                     .3



      .2                                                                     .2



      .1                                                                     .1



       0                                                                     0



      -.1                                                                   -.1



      -.2                                                                   -.2


      -.3   More Rigid                               Less Rigid             -.3   More Rigid                               Less Rigid
            1              2                 3                4                   1               2                 3                4
                          Wage Rigidity Quartile                                                 Wage Rigidity Quartile



                    (c) By SD of ∆Log Wage                                            (d) By SD of Residuals of ∆Log Wage
      .4                                                                     .4


      .3                                                                     .3


      .2                                                                     .2


      .1                                                                     .1


       0                                                                     0


      -.1                                                                   -.1


      -.2                                                                   -.2


      -.3   More Rigid                               Less Rigid             -.3   More Rigid                               Less Rigid
            1              2                 3                4                   1               2                 3                4
                          Wage Rigidity Quartile                                                 Wage Rigidity Quartile




Note: The figure plots several coefficients by quartiles of the within-firm standard deviation of log wages (Panel (a)), the within-firm
standard deviation of Mincer residuals from a regression of log earnings on tenure-experience-occupation-industry-year fixed effects
(Panel (b)), and analogous measures for changes in log wages over a 5-year horizon (Panels (c) and (d)). We measure wage rigidity
at the firm level in the pre-reform period. Cells further to the right exhibit more between-worker dispersion and thus less rigidity.
The blue vertical dashes display the control group separation rate during REBP. The red circles plot the treatment effect of REBP on
separations among the sample of workers who held a job in 1988 right before the onset of the program. The blue hollow circles plot
the effect on separations in the post-repeal period (separation by 1996) in the sample of those workers who were employed in 1988
and whose job survived until 1994. Finally, the yellow dashed lines plot the predicted effect based on the Coasean benchmark. It also
corresponds to the non-Coasean benchmark with worker shocks only.


                                                                  51
                     Appendix for Online Publication:
                    Marginal Jobs and Job Surplus:
                 A Test of the Efficiency of Separations

          Simon Jäger, Benjamin Schoefer, and Josef Zweimüller




Contents
A Quantifying Worker’s Value of the REBP UI Extension                                              54

B Theoretical Appendix: Full Coasean Model                                                         56

C Theoretical Appendix: Full Non-Coasean Model Featuring Wage Rigidity                             62

D Variable Construction                                                                            68

E Estimation of the Mixed Model with Industry-by-Occupation Variation with
  Non-Linear Least Squares                                                 70

F The Role of Severance Payments                                                                   73

G Additional Tables                                                                                82

H Additional Figures                                                                               90

Online Appendix References                                                                         96


List of Tables
   A.1 Structural Estimation of Share κ of Separations within a Coasean Frame-
       work with Perfect Reshuffling of Job-Level Surplus: Industry-Occupation
       Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   71
   A.2 Tenure Quartiles and Underlying Years of Tenure, Monthly Salaries of Sev-
       erance Pay, and Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        79
   A.3 Initial Treatment Effect: Difference-in-Differences Effects on Separations
       Between Age 50 and 55 Among Job Holders at Age 50 . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 83
   A.4 Resilience Test: Post-Repeal Separations (1994-95) Among Program Survivors                  84
   A.5 Resilience Test: Post-Repeal Separations (1994-97) Among Program Sur-
       vivors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      85
   A.6 Resilience Test: Post-Repeal Separations (1994-98) Among Program Survivors                  86


                                                52
  A.7 Robustness to Retirement Dynamics (Dropping Cohorts Born Before 1938)
      for Resilience Test: Post-Repeal Separations (1994-96) Among Program Sur-
      vivors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
  A.8 Complier Analysis by Predicted Separations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
  A.9 Summary Statistics of Wage Rigidity Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89


List of Figures
  A.1 Post-Repeal Separation Rates of REBP Survivors and non-REBP Survivors
      at the Industry-Occupation Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   72
  A.2 Results by Quartiles of Tenure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   80
  A.3 Results by Months of Severance Pay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   81
  A.4 Industry Heterogeneity of Separation Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   90
  A.5 No Evidence for Aggregate Spillovers: Separations during REBP and after
      REBP with Even Younger Control Cohorts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           . 91
  A.6 Initial Treatment Effect: Outcomes by Age . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        . 92
  A.7 Difference by Industry Growth and Establishment-Level “Hockey-Sticks”                  . 93
  A.8 No Evidence for Employer-Level Spillovers: Differences in Post-Repeal Sep-
      arations by Firm and Industry Exposure to REBP (Share of Program-Eligible
      (Old) Workers) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . 94
  A.9 Separations by Wage Rigidity Measures (Other Horizons) . . . . . . . . . .             . 95




                                              53
A      Quantifying Worker’s Value of the REBP UI Extension
We calculate the cash value of extended benefits following the approach in Card, Chetty,
and Weber (2007) and complement it with new data on unemployment assistance (UA,
“Notstandshilfe” in German). Our estimate for the average cash value of the reform
corresponds to about eight to nine months of pay or 71% of a worker’s annual salary.
    REBP changed potential UI benefit duration from 30 or 52 weeks to 209 weeks for
older workers (see Figure 1 Panel (a)).27 To provide a conservative estimate of the value
of the reform, we take 52 weeks as the alternative potential benefit duration. Under this
assumption, REBP changed benefits by 157 weeks or 36.1315 months.
    When benefits run out, many workers are eligible for lower UA benefits. UA benefits
are means-tested and depend on other (spousal) sources of income as well as the number
of dependents. They are capped at 0.92 of the worker’s UI benefits, according to the
formula

 UA  min{0.92 × UI, max{0, 0.95 · UI − Spousal Earnings + Dependent Allowances}}.
                                                                              (A1)

To impute counterfactual UA payments, we draw on data from the AMS, the Austrian
employment agency, on unemployment benefit and UA receipt. This allows us to observe
actually paid out UI and UA benefits. We draw on data from a period when both UI and
UA payments are observed in the AMS data (2001-2009), and zoom in on workers whose
UI benefits ran out and who did not take up employment in the subsequent 60 days. We
then calculate the average ratio of UA to UI benefits. We assign everyone zero UA benefits
if they do not receive UA benefits in the 60 days after UI benefits ran out, even though
they may have been eligible for non-zero UA benefits but did not take them up. In our
sample, we find that the average UA benefit corresponds to 50.5% of previous UI benefits.
    The average replacement rate between 1988 and 1993 was 40.0%. We calculate the
average replacement rate for workers in eligible cohorts in the REBP region by simply
assigning replacement rates to workers based on their earnings and averaging over workers
from 1988 to 1993.
    As a final input into our calculation, we account for the fact that benefits are not taxed.
The average tax rate for personal income in Austria was 11.2% after a 1989 tax reform OECD
(1990). In addition, employee-borne payroll taxes of about 18% were levied on wages.28 We
thus scale up UI and UA benefits relative to gross income by 1/((1 − τaverage )(1 − τaverage
                                                                                      Soc. Sec. ))

to account for non-taxation of benefits.
    We can then calculate the cash value of the reform to the average worker according to
   27For most of the treatment period, since 1989, the potential benefit duration for older workers was 52
weeks. Until 1989, the potential benefit duration was 30 weeks.
   28Specifically, the total payroll taxes contribution rates for workers and firms were, in sum, 34.5% for blue-
and 38.6% for white-collar workers OECD (1990). In our sample, about 35.4% of workers among 1988 job
holders were white-collar workers so that the average social security contribution rate is 0.345 · (1 − 0.354) +
0.386 · 0.354 ' 0.36, leading to a worker contribution rate of 18%.




                                                       54
the formula:

        31.1315           × 0.400 × (1 − 0.505) × ((1 − 0.115)(1 − 0.18))−1 ×w ' 8.494 · w,        (A2)
        | {z }              |{z} | {z } |                           {z                   }
   Additional UI months     UI RR   ( UI RR - UA RR
                                                    )                     Soc. Sec. −1
                                                        ((1−τaverage )(1−τaverage  ))
                                          UI RR


where w denotes the average worker’s monthly gross wage and RR denotes replacement
rates. According to this calculation, the average cash value of the REBP reform to workers
was about eight to nine months of salary or 71% of an annual salary.29




   29Wages in Austria are paid based in 14, rather than 12, installments. The additional two installments
are incorporated in the calculation of UI benefits. The monthly wage we mention above corresponds to an
average wage corresponding to the annual salary divided by 12.


                                                        55
B     Theoretical Appendix: Full Coasean Model
The full model below formalizes the effect of REBP and its repeal within the general
Coasean model of jobs.

During-REBP Separation Behavior Separations (during [after] REBP denoted by δ [∆])
occur if joint surplus were to turn negative, either due to aggregate shocks denoted
by ε (e.g., ε W
              b
                 0 from the shift in UI benefits) or idiosyncratic shocks (health, productivity,

amenities,...). Denote by k(V0 |V) the Markov process governing the transition of job values
into REBP and by K(V00 |V0) the Markovian transition out of REBP, into the post-repeal
period. We define S(V  e 0) as the short-hand for the surplus level gross of a given aggregate
surplus shifter, such that, for an aggregate shock −ε0 < 0, S(Ve 0 , ε0  0)  S(V0 , ε0) − ε0. For
REBP, ε0  ε W b
                  0, and hence separations in the treatment [control] group Z  1[ 0] are:

                              ∫ ∫
                        δ 
                        Z
                                          1(S(V
                                            e 0) < Z × εW 0)k(V0 |V)dV0 f Z (V)dV.
                                                        b                                            (A3)
                                      0
                              V       V
                                  |                    {z              }
                                                   d
                                                 ≡ e (V,Z×ε W
                                                            b
                                                              0)



where e   d is a slight modification of d to a gross-surplus concept with separate aggregate
shocks, and f Z (.) denotes the distribution prevailing at the onset of REBP, where we will
assume that initial distributions are the same across groups f 0 (.)  f 1 (.). By contrast,
 Z
fpost (.) will denote post-REBP distributions that will naturally diverge due to REBP, not
only in terms of surplus, but also in terms of some direct observables.
   In this framework, the treatment effect of REBP corresponds to:
             ∫ ∫                                                       ∫ ∫
δ −δ 
 1     0
                       1(0 ≤ S(V
                             e )< 0
                                          εW 0   0     0 0
                                           b )k(V |V)dV f (V)dV                     k(V0 |V)dV0 f 0 (V)dV
                   0
             ∫V h V                                                    V   V0 ∈M 0
                                       i
                d (V, ε b ) − d (V, 0) f 0 (V)dV,
                 e       W0    e
              V
                                                                                                     (A4)

where the last line clarifies that the difference in separation rates comes from different
thresholds (the gross-of-REBP surplus in the treated regions needs to meet a higher bar)
and not from different pre-REBP distributions between the treated and the control regions
(which instead we assume to be the same). The marginal jobs extracted by REBP make up
set M 0  {V0 : 0 ≤ S(V
                     e 0) < εW 0 }. Our model makes no assumption on the origin of the
                                 b
surplus-relevant factors’ distributions through surplus evolution k(V0 |V). The surplus
distribution can be partitioned into: (i) jobs that separate even in the control group –
fraction δ0 of the total mass at the onset of REBP; (ii) marginal jobs that separate due to
REBP – fraction δ 1 − δ 0 ; and (iii) infra-marginal jobs that don’t separate even with REBP –
fraction 1 − δ1 .




                                                        56
REBP-Induced Truncation of the Surplus Distribution After the repeal of REBP, the
program has truncated the treatment group’s joint-surplus distribution below ε W
                                                                               b
                                                                                 0. Hence,

while the wider set of surviving jobs in the control group is J 0  {V0 : S(V
                                                                          e 0) ≥ 0}, in the
treatment group, the entire mass of survivors is concentrated in the inframarginal jobs,
V0 ∈ (J 0 \ M 0). 30

Post-Repeal Separation Behavior We denote post-repeal-of-REBP functions with capital
letters, namely ∆ for δ, D for d, and K for k. Post-repeal aggregate shocks and job value
factors are denoted by 00 rather than 0. The post-repeal separation behavior of the formerly
treated and control groups can be formalized by considering aggregate (common to both
                                                00        00
groups) worker and firm surplus shocks εW and ε F , which we combine into a joint-
                        00     00
surplus shock ε00  ε W + ε F . Post-repeal, these shocks lead to the following separation
rates in the treatment [control] group Z  1[ 0]:
                               ∫ ∫
                     ∆ 
                       Z
                                                  1(S(V
                                                    e 00) < ε00)K(V00 |V0)dV00 f Z (V0)dV0 .
                                                                                post                     (A6)
                                     0       00
                                 V       V
                                         |                        {z                }
                                                              D
                                                            ≡ e (V’,ε00 )

                                                                             Z
Post-repeal, differences in separation rates will arise from differences in fpost , the densities
of job qualities between the treatment and the control groups, due to the selective separa-
tions induced by REBP (rather than from differences in aggregate shocks and thresholds
    00       00
εW and ε F , which in turn we here assume to the same across the groups, hence unlike
during REBP, which shifted thresholds Z × ε W  b
                                                  0):

                                              ∫                   h                      i
                        ∆ −∆ 
                           1         0
                                                       D (V’, ε ) fpost (V ) − fpost (V ) dV0 .
                                                       e       00   1     0     0      0
                                                                                                         (A7)
                                                  V0
                 1
  30The density fpost (V0) is zero for the marginal jobs, while the inframarginal REBP survivors reflect the
(conditional) distribution in the control group starting from truncation point εW
                                                                                b
                                                                                  0:



                                      0
                                     
                                     
                                                                  if V0 < (J 0 \ M 0) ⇔ S(V
                                                                                         e 0) < εW 0
                                                                                                 b
                     1
                    fpost (V0)                0
                                              fpost (V0 )                                                (A5)
                                           ∫                       if V0 ∈ (J 0 \ M 0) ⇔ S(V
                                                                                         e 0) ≥ εW 0 .
                                         1− V∈M0 fpost (V0 )dV0
                                                   0                                             b
                                     
                                     
                                     




                                                                   57
We now derive the separation rate of the former treatment group by replacing its densities
as truncated versions of the control group’s, as following Equation (A5):31
                 ∫
       ∆ 
         1
                          D
                          e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                        1
                                             (V0)dV0
                      0
                 ∫V                                                     ∫
                              D      0
                               e (V , ε     00      1
                                                 ) fpost (V0)dV0    +                D
                                                                                     e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                        (V0)dV0
                     V0 ∈M 0                                             V0 <M 0
                                                                         − δ0
                          ∫                                                  
                                                                        1
             0+                     D
                                     e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                                   0
                                                        (V0)                   dV0                                               (A9)
                           V0 <M 0                                      1 − δ1
                          δ0
                              ∫                                                      ∫                                      
               1−
                              D
                               e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                             0
                                                  (V0)dV0 ±         D
                                                                    e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                                                                  0
                                                                                       (V0)dV0
               1 − δ1 V0<M0                                    0
                                                             V ∈M 0

                1 − δ0 0
                            ∫                                 
                        ∆ −          D    0   00        0   0
                                      e (V , ε ) fpost (V )dV .
                                                    0
                1 − δ1        V0 ∈M 0

                                                                                                   0
The intuition is straightforward: modulo re-scaling by 1−δ
                                                       1−δ 1
                                                             (since, post-repeal, the fraction
of original jobs that remain in the treatment and in the control group is different), the
separation behavior of the treatment group (∆1 ) is the same as that of the control group
(∆0 ) except for the contribution of marginal matches (V0 ∈ M 0) to the separation behavior
of the control group, which the expression nets out.
    In order to map Equation (A9) into an empirically tangible object, we now put some
structure on K(V00 |V0).

Post-Repeal Idiosyncratic Shocks K(V00 |V0) Up until now we have not made any as-
sumption on the processes underlying the evolution of job surplus, k(V0 |V) and K(V00 |V0)
– neither during REBP, nor for separations after the repeal. Two extreme cases are now
presented below: perfect persistence as well as immediate reshuffling of idiosyncratic
surplus. Importantly, in both cases, the evolution of surplus during the five-year REBP period
k(V0 |V) is left fully general. We only specify the Markov process for right after REBP is repealed
in 1993, namely K(V00 |V0), so that this assumption only covers a shorter time horizon than the
original REBP period.

Case I: Perfect Persistence This case permits fully general pre-repeal evolution k(V0 |V).
But it assumes that right after the repeal of REBP, specifically between the repeal period
and the next period, the underlying job surplus is persistent. The sensibility of this
assumption naturally depends on the given time interval from the repeal to the time
we measure separations in the data; our most conservative horizon is one single year
  31Specifically, from Equation (A5), for V0 < M 0:
                                                            0
                                                           fpost (V0)                 0
                                                                                     fpost (V0)                   1 − δ0
                                1
                               fpost (V0)                                                         fpost
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                           (V0)          ,       (A8)
                                                                                          δ1 −δ0                  1 − δ1
                                                       ∫
                                                  1−           f 0 (V0)dV0
                                                       V0 ∈M 0 post
                                                                                     1−   1−δ0

where the second equality follows from the fact that the mass of marginal jobs (i.e. V0 ∈ M 0) in the control
group is δ1−δ
           1 −δ 0
               0 .




                                                                            58
following the repeal. Formally, the post-repeal transition matrix is now∫ the identity
matrix: K(V00 |V0)  1 if V00  V0 and 0 otherwise; as a result, D
                                                                 e (V’, ε00)  00 1(S(V
                                                                               V
                                                                                    e 00) <
ε00)K(V00 |V0)dV00  1(S(V e 0) < ε00).
    It is useful to distinguish two cases: ε00 ≤ ε W   b
                                                          0, and ε00 > ε W 0. In case ε00 ≤ ε W 0, it
                                                                         b                    b
follows   from the definition    of ∆ 1 in Equation (A6) that only marginal matches separate i.e.

∆0  V0 ∈M0 D
       ∫
              e (V0 , ε00) f 0 (V0)dV0, and therefore:32
                            post


                                                                 ∆1ε00 ≤εW 0  0.
                                                                        b


In case ε00 > εWb
                  0, all marginal matches separate in the control group and more, and so

D
e (V0 , ε00)  1 ∀V0 ∈ M 0, and ∆0 > 0 0 D
                                       ∫
                                              e (V0 , ε00) f 0 (V0)dV0. Hence, for this case,
                                        V ∈M                post
Equation (A9) becomes:

                                                  1 − δ0 0
                                                                            ∫                         
                                 ∆1 ε00 >εW 0             ∆ −           0
                                                                       fpost (V0)dV0
                                          b       1 − δ1         0
                                                                V ∈M 0

                                                  1 − δ0 0 δ1 − δ0
                                                                      
                                                          ∆ −            ,
                                                  1 − δ1       1 − δ0

where δ1−δ−δ    1   0
            0 is the fraction of marginal jobs in the control group, as discussed above.
    Putting the two cases together, for the full range of aggregate shocks ε00 – which are
unobserved but sufficiently revealed through realized control group post-repeal separation
rate ∆0 – we obtain the model-predicted ∆1 as a function of ∆0 , piece-wise
                                                                   n        hlinear with slopes
                                                                                            io                0             δ 1 −δ 0
and kink positions given by (δ0 , δ1 ): ∆1 (∆0 (ε00), δ0 , δ1 )  max 0, 1−δ
                                                                         1−δ    0 00
                                                                             1 ∆ (ε ) −                                     1−δ 0
                                                                                                                                       .
As long as control group post-repeal separation rate ∆0 is lower than the fraction of
marginal matches δ1−δ
                      1 −δ 0
                          0 , no separations should occur in the treatment group, simply
because these matches are missing. Once control group separations cross that threshold,
                                                                   0
separations commence, and with a slope steeper than one, 1−δ   1−δ 1
                                                                     , because the incremental
separator count is over a smaller count of survivors in the formerly treated group, and
both groups will have separation rates of 100% if all control jobs dissolve. Similarly, if the
initial REBP treatment effect was zero, the curve would trace out a 45 degree line ∆1  ∆0 .
In that sense, the design has power if the initial treatment effect during REBP was large –
shifting the kink far to the right away from zero on the x-axis.
    That is, the revealed-preference treatment/control group approach makes empirically
and quantitatively tractable the Coasean benchmark (with persistence) by reformulating
the empirically elusive surplus concepts in the form of observables – ∆1 , ∆0 and (δ 0 , δ1 ).
These properties sufficiently encode the surplus concepts S as well as shocks εW    b
                                                                                      0 of REBP,

and the post-repeal shocks (ε W 00 , ε F00).

                                                                                                            1(S(V
                                                                                                   ∫
  32To see this, note that under the assumption of perfect persistence, ∆0                            V0
                                                                                                              e 0) < ε00) f 0 (V0)dV0.
                                                                                                                           post
If ε00 ≤ εW 0 , all the separations come from V0 such that 1(S(V
                                                             e 0) < εW 0), which are V0 ∈ M 0; therefore
          b                                                          b
               1(S(V                                           1(S(V                                   D
       ∫                                        ∫                                            ∫
∆0    V   0
                 e 0) < ε00) f 0 (V0)dV0 
                              post              V   0
                                                        ∈M 0
                                                                 e 0) < ε00) f 0 (V0)dV0 
                                                                              post           V0 ∈M 0
                                                                                                       e (V0 , ε00) f 0 (V0)dV0 .
                                                                                                                     post




                                                                        59
Case II: Perfect Reshuffling Next, we clarify the conditions required for the Coasean
framework to rationalize the observed pattern: ∆1  ∆0 . Since we will compare ∆0 and
∆1 across cells (cohorts and for an even wider range across an industry-occupation cells),
we look for the condition that is capable of delivering ∆1 (ε00)  ∆0 (ε00) for the entire range
of post-repeal aggregate shocks ε00 hence captured by any level of ∆0 ∈ [0, 1], and for any
(δ0 , δ1 ) arising from REBP determining the missing mass of low-surplus matches in the
former control group. We show that this condition yields a particular assumption about
the process governing idiosyncratic surplus evolution – which then renders inconsequen-
tial the extraction of marginal jobs during REBP, by reshuffling immediately and fully
the surplus distribution, such that the former treatment and control groups reconverge
despite the massive extraction of marginal, low-surplus jobs. This condition requires that
individual jobs do not have any persistence in their job-level surplus and their ranking,
such that even within just a year the “hole” left by REBP in the treatment group is fully
filled again. Formally, the Coasean case requires the following condition for equality
between the separation rates:

                                                              ∆1 (ε00 , δ0 , δ1 )  ∆0 (ε00 , δ0 , δ1 )
        ∫                                                 ∫                                      ∫
 ⇔             D
               e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                             1
                                  (V0) dV0 +                          D (V , ε ) fpost (V ) dV +
                                                                      e   0 00    1      0    0
                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                         e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                            (V0) dV0 
    V0 ∈M 0                                         V0 ∈(J 0 \M 0 )                             V0 < J 0
                           | {z }                                               | {z }                               | {z }
                                0                                                      1−δ 0
                                                                                                f 0 (V0 )                                 0
                                                                                        1−δ 1
                       ∫                                                    ∫                                             ∫
                              D
                              e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                            0
                                                 (V0)dV0 +                              D
                                                                                        e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                           (V0)dV0 +               D
                                                                                                                                   e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                      (V0) dV0
                    V0 ∈M 0                                           V0 ∈(J 0 \M 0 )                                   V0 < J 0
                                                                                                                                               | {z }
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                  1 − δ0                                                                                1 − δ0
                   ∫                                                                       ∫                                                
                ⇔         D
                          e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                        0
                                             (V0) 1      dV0                                                   D
                                                                                                                e (V0 , ε00) fpost
                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                   (V0)        dV0
                  V0 ∈M 0                         δ − δ0                                        V0 ∈(J 0 \M 0 )                         1 − δ1
    ∫          ∫                                           ∫               ∫
                           00    00   00 0   00 ˜0  0    0                         e 00) < ε00 }K(V00 |V0)dV00 f˜0 (V0)dV0 ,
⇔                    1{ S(V ) < ε }K(V |V )dV f M (V )dV 
                        e                                                       1{ S(V                           I
     V0 ∈M 0     V00                                        V0 ∈(J 0 \M 0 ) V00
    |                            {z                     } |                               {z                             }
        Avg. sep. rate for the marginal jobs                                                          Avg. sep. rate of inframarginal jobs
                                                                                                                                                           (A10)
                                     h              i
                                         1−δ 0
where f˜M  fpost
             0
                  (V0)                   δ 1 −δ 0
                                                        is the density of the marginal jobs in the control group and
                       h       0
                                 i
 f˜I0  fpost
         0
              (V0) 1−δ
                   1−δ 1
                         is the density of the inframarginal jobs in the control group.
      The derivation above shows that, to observe the same post-repeal separation rate in
the treatment and the control group, the average post-repeal separation rate for the jobs
in the marginal group (V0 ∈ M 0) must be the same as that for the jobs in the inframarginal
group (V0 ∈ (J 0 \ M 0)).
      This condition is fulfilled if we have perfect reshuffling of job surpluses one period to
the next (formally, a transition matrix with identical rows).33 That is, perfect reshuffling
    33Strictly speaking, for a given single surplus shock ε00 we do not need perfect reshuffling: the condition
is that the average separation probabilities of marginal versus inframarginal jobs are the same. However, for
the condition to hold globally i.e. for all ε00 surplus shocks and REBP treatment effects δ1 − δ0 – a range we
try to trace out with cohort cells but then also when splitting up the sample into industry-occupation cells



                                                                                        60
of idiosyncratic job surplus can mask Coasean separations: if the economy featured no
persistence in worker and firm surplus whatsoever (such that the idiosyncratic Markov
process reshuffles the position of jobs into the same, stationary surplus distribution in
each period), the economy would not actually feature a truncated distribution when
REBP is repealed – despite the massive extraction of temporarily-marginal jobs from
REBP. We quantify the weight the data put on this extreme interpretation in the mixed
model estimation, and discuss this assumption and hence more broadly the capacity of
the Coasean model to account for the empirical separation outcomes in the main text.34




with large variation in separation rates –, perfect reshuffling (i.e. identical rows in the transition matrix)
becomes necessary.
    34Another assumption fulfills the condition at a particular point, but cannot account for the full set of
findings: if all jobs have the same separation probability (say, some large negative (e.g., health) shock that is
independent of the current job surplus), then the condition holds. But while tractable and intriguing, this
assumption would be inconsistent with differential separation in the treated regions in response to REBP
(i.e. our treatment effect in the first place) or across cells after the repeal.


                                                       61
C     Theoretical Appendix: Full Non-Coasean Model Featur-
      ing Wage Rigidity
Non-Coasean Bargaining and Inefficient Separations The strong Coasean result of ef-
ficient separations arises from the assumption of flexible (re-)bargaining of compensation,
from which joint job surplus stems as the sole allocative concept. However, a variety of
potential real-world frictions, e.g. wage rigidity, may preclude such wage setting. Such
frictions prevent the parties from moving towards a wage in the feasible-jobs frontier even
though the job carries positive joint surplus, thereby shrinking the set of feasible jobs.
Then, the Coasean allocation is not necessarily attainable, and inefficient separations can
emerge. In this non-Coasean setting, we therefore think of wage w as one additional job
attribute that can evolve or be fixed, such that jobs are now characterized by (w, V), and
unilateral worker and firm surpluses S W (w, VW ) and S F (w, VF ) are allocative.
    In consequence, with non-Coasean bargaining, a separation occurs if at least one of
worker surplus or firm surplus turns negative at the given wage. Hence, the job-level
separation probability is given by

                                                Mutual Sep.: ∧
            ∫                                                                   
d(w, V)                   1 S (w , V ) < 0
                                                    z}|{
                                    0      W0
                                W
                                                      ∨    S (w , V ) < 0 k((w 0 , V0)|(w, V))d(w 0 , V0),
                                                               F   0    F0
              (w 0 ,V0 )        |       {z      }          |           {z    }
                                        Quit                       Layoff
                                                                                                    (A11)

where separations can be labled as quits (negative worker surplus but positive firm sur-
plus), layoffs (reversed), or mutual separations (both negative). The non-Coasean expres-
sion also formalizes that here the initial incidence of a shock matters for separations for lack
of automatic Coasean rebargaining, such that worker and firm values are not “fungible.”

Separation Effects from REBP REBP reduced worker surplus, as REBP directly shifted
workers’ (nonemployment) outside option. Any market-level effects that in turn affected
firm outside options or inside values we net out with a control group in the data.
    Formally, the two separation rates by treatment group (Z  1) and control group
(Z  0) therefore occur to differential worker surplus cutoffs, albeit at the same firm
cutoff (here again normalized to zero without loss of generality). Let S ei (w 0 , V0) denote the
surplus of party i ∈ {W, F} gross of a given aggregate shock, e.g. during REBP again the
REBP worker surplus shifter εW  b
                                  0. We thus have:     where ed is a slight modification of d
defined in Equation (A11).
    REBP therefore pushed the following mass of jobs initially viable in 1988 into quit or
layoff (or both) territory of negative unilateral surpluses, where again f Z (.) denotes the
pre-REBP initial surplus distribution:     That is, the incremental jobs destroyed by REBP
had low worker surplus, between 0 and εW   b
                                             0, making up the set of marginal-to-REBP jobs

M 0NC  {(w 0 , V0) : 0 ≤ S
                          eW (w 0 , VW 0) < εW 0 ∧ S
                                             b
                                                   eF (w 0 , VF 0) ≥ 0}. By contrast, the firm surplus
of these jobs were positive (and moreover need not have been low, unless the two are very
correlated).

                                                          62
REBP-Induced Truncation of the Surplus Distribution As a result of REBP, right after
the repeal, the treatment group therefore features a missing mass of marginal matches
between 0 and εW   0, making up the set of marginal-to-REBP jobs M 0NC  {(w 0 , V0) : 0 ≤
                 b
eW (w 0 , VW 0) < εW 0 ∧ S
S                           eF (w 0 , VF 0) ≥ 0} with low worker but not necessarily low firm
                     b
surplus. By contrast, the distribution of surpluses in the control group remains a larger
set J 0NC  {(w 0 , V0) : S
                          eW (w 0 , VW 0) ≥ 0 ∧ S
                                                eF (w 0 , VF 0) ≥ 0}, still containing the low worker-
surplus jobs M    0NC .35

Post-Repeal Separation Behavior We again define the post-repeal separation rate of
treatment [control] group Z  1[ 0] as a function of common worker and firm shocks
    00      00
εW and ε F (which we can now, in contrast to the Coasean model, no longer collapse into
a joint surplus shock ε00 as shocks are no longer fungible):
        ∫              ∫                                                      
∆ 
  Z
                                          1 S (w , V ) < ε ∨ S (w , V ) < ε K((w 00 , V00)|(w 0 , V0))d(w 00 , V00)
                                            eW  00  00    W 00 eF 00 00    F00
          (w 0 ,V0 )       (w 00 ,V00 )
                       |                                                                            {z                                                        }
                                                                                            D
                                                                                         ≡ e (w 0 ,V0 ;ε W 00 ,ε F00 )
         Z
        fpost (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0).                                                                                                                  (A13)

The non-Coasean analogue of the Coasean predicted post-repeal separation rate (A9) is
(from a closely analogous derivation):

             1 − δ0 0
                                              ∫                                                                                              
         ∆ 1
                    ∆ −                                                  D      0
                                                                         e (w , V ; ε0      W 00
                                                                                                   ,ε   F00      0
                                                                                                              ) fpost (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0)       .   (A14)
             1 − δ1                              (w 0 ,V0 )∈M 0NC

As in the Coasean case, the post-repeal separation behavior of the former treatment group
tracks that of the former control group, except for the contribution of the marginal jobs
((w 0 , V0) ∈ M 0NC ) to such separation behavior. Unlike in the Coasean setting, these missing
matches are marginal with respect to worker surplus – the dimension along which REBP
selects them into separation – but not necessarily with respect to a firm surplus shock.

The Incidence of Worker vs. Firm Surplus Shifts In fact, this non-Coasean model can
rationalize the observed patterns of separations even if we assume perfect persistence
in job surplus following the REBP repeal (an assumption perhaps particularly plausible
within the one-year interval following the repeal to 1995). By contrast, the Coasean model
was not able to explain the empirical post-repeal separation behavior, except if one were
willing to assume full reshuffling in idiosyncratic surplus.
   35Formally in terms of densities, after REBP is repealed, the former treatment group’s post-repeal surplus
              1
distribution fpost (.) is now again truncated, but specifically with regards to worker rather than joint surplus:

                        0
                       
                       
                                                                              if (w 0 , V0) < (J 0NC \ M 0NC ) ⇔ S
                                                                                                                  eW (w 0 , VW 0) < εW 0 ∨ S
                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                                           eF (w 0 , VF0) < 0
 1
fpost (w 0 , V0)                           0
                                           fpost (w 0 ,V0 )
                              ∫                                                if (w 0 , V0) ∈ (J 0NC \ M 0NC ) ⇔ S
                                                                                                                  eW (w 0 , VW 0) ≥ εW 0 ∧ S
                                                                                                                                           eF (w 0 , VF0) ≥ 0.
                                                  0
                                                       (w 0 ,V0 )d(w 0 ,V0 )                                                         b
                       
                           1− (w0 ,V0 )∈M0NC fpost
                       
                                                                                                                                                      (A12)



                                                                                     63
    As in the Coasean case, our objective is to rewrite expression (A14) in an empirically
tractable form of realized control group separation rates (and the original size of the REBP
treatment effects). In order to do this, we first specify the model to feature persistence
of idiosyncratic job surplus (while still permitting any structure on k((w 0 , V0)|(w, V)) i.e.
no restriction on idiosyncratic shocks during the five years REBP was active), such that
K((w 00 , V00)|(w 0 , V0))  1 if (w 00 , V00)  (w 0 , V0) and 0 otherwise, such that for Z  0, 1,
post-repeal separation rates given by (A13) are specified to:
                  ∫                                                    
                                                  W 00             F 00
      ∆ 
       Z
                                  1 S (w , V ) < ε ∨ S (w , V ) < ε fpost
                                    eW  0   W0         eF 0  F0           Z
                                                                            (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0).                                               (A15)
                  (w 0 ,V0 )

Then, the general relationship between treatment and control separations given by Equa-
tion (A14) is specified to:

    1 − δ0 h 0
                                      ∫                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                            00                            00
∆ 
  1
            ∆ −                                                 1 SeW (w 0 , VW 0) < εW ∨ SeF (w 0 , VF0) < ε F                     0
                                                                                                                                   fpost (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0) .
    1 − δ1                                (w 0 ,V0 )∈M 0NC
                                                                                                                                                 (A16)

As a second and last step to obtaining empirically tractable expressions, we now distin-
guish two cases: only worker or only firm shocks driving separations.

Resilience: Post-Repeal Separations Driven by Worker Surplus First, suppose most
(all) post-repeal separations arise from worker shocks. In this case, the formerly treated
group again exhibits resilience in the form of a piece-wise linear comovement between
treatment and control separations featuring a flat-at-zero region, mirroring the Coasean
case. This analogue arises because the selection during REBP was with respect to the
same allocative concept post-repeal. Accordingly, the resulting expression is analogous
to Coasean Equation (B):36


                                                                 1 − δ 0 0 W 00     δ1 − δ0
                                                                                                                        
                              ∆1 (∆0 (εW 00), δ0 , δ1 )  max 0,         ∆ (ε   ) −                                                .             (A19)
                                                                 1 − δ1             1 − δ0
   36To see this, consider again the two cases, εW 00 ≤ εW 0 and ε W 00 > ε W 0 , in order to derive ∆1                                              (εW 00)
                                                         b                  b                           W 00                             ε   >εW
                                                                                                                                               b
                                                                                                                                                 0

and ∆1 W 00    (εW 00) similarly to the Coasean persistence case. For the case of ε W 00 ≤ ε W 0 , it holds that jobs
       ε ≤εW
           b
             0                                                                               b
                                            eW (w 0 , VW 0) < εW 0 and hence these jobs were in the marginal set
          eW (w 0 , VW 0) < εW 00 also have S
for which S                                                    b
w.r.t. REBP (w 0 , V0) ∈ M 0NC . Therefore, using Equation (A15), we have for the case of ε W 00 ≤ ε W  b
                                                                                                          0 (i.e. now

we can limiting the integral to M    0NC ):
                                  ∫                                                                     
                                                                                 00
              0
           ∆ (ε       W 00
                             )                            1 SeW (w0 , VW 0) < εW ∨ SeF (w0 , VF0) < 0 fpost
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                             (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0),                  (A17)
                                  (w 0 ,V0 )∈M 0NC

which implies that ∆1 W 00                           (εW 00)  0 by Equation (A16). By contrast, for the case of ε W 00 > ε W 0 , all
                                          ε    >ε Wb
                                                     0                                                                      b
                                                                                                                     00
                                              (w 0 , V0)                                 eW (w 0 , VW 0) < εW ∨ S
                                                           ∈ M 0NC satisfy the condition S                      eF (w 0 , VF0) < 0 , and
                                                                                                                                                 
marginal-to-REBP jobs




                                                                                    64
Therefore, when there is perfect persistence and only worker shocks, the marginal jobs
are those which separate first and hence the average separation rate of the inframarginal
jobs is lower than that of the marginal jobs, resulting in ∆1 (εW 00) ≤ ∆0 (ε W 00) as in Equation
(A19).

Perfect Comovement: Post-Repeal Separations Driven by Firm Surplus We now ask
which properties let the non-Coasean model rationalize the (empirically consistent) co-
movement between the groups post-repeal. Of course, making an assumption of perfect
reshuffling right after the repeal could again generate the perfect comovement in the non-
Coasean setting (which was the only way the Coasean setting could rationalize this pat-
tern).37 Yet, additionally even with persistence in idiosyncratic surplus, the non-Coasean
model can rationalize very similar separation sensitivities between the treatment and
control group REBP survivors: if post-repeal separations are largely due to firm surplus
shocks. More precisely and subtly, another ingredient is that worker and firm surplus are
approximately independently distributed, since REBP extracted jobs that were marginal
with respect to worker (rather than firm) surplus.
    With firm shocks, again assuming persistence in job surplus right after REBP is re-
pealed but permitting arbitrary surplus evolution during REBP, the empirical relationship
between post-repeal separation rates in the treatment and in the control group is driven
by the relative separation behavior of marginal and inframarginal matches with respect
to firm shocks – which in turn is determined by the distribution of firm surplus in the
marginal vs. inframarginal matches. To formally derive this result, we start from the
general relationship between the separation rates in the non-Coasean setting (with two
therefore Equation (A16) becomes

                           1 − δ0 h 0 W 00
                                                      ∫                                                                                          i
                                                                                               00
∆1εW 00 ≤εW 0 (ε W 00)            ∆ (ε )−                               1 SeW (w0 , VW 0) < εW ∨ SeF (w0 , VF0) < 0 fpost
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                           (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0)
          b                1 − δ1                     (w 0 ,V0 )∈M 0NC
                             1 − δ0 h
                                                      ∫                                                i
                                       ∆0 (εW 00)−                       0
                                                                         fpost (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0)                                  (A18)
                             1 − δ1                   (w 0 ,V0 )∈M 0NC
                             1 − δ0 h 0 W 00          δ1 − δ0 i
                                    ∆ (ε ) −        ,
                             1 − δ1           1 − δ0

where δ1−δ
            1
            −δ  0
              0 is the fraction of marginal jobs in the control group. Combining the two cases, we obtain
Equation (A19).
   37Perfect comovement requires that, in response to the shock being considered, the average separation
rate of the marginal jobs is equal to the average separation rate of the inframarginal jobs. The same identical
derivation as Coasean section in paragraph “Case II: Perfect Reshuffling” applies: simply replace V0 with
(w 0 , V0), D
            e (V0 , ε00) with D
                              e (w 0 , V0; εW 00 , ε F00), M 0 and J 0 with M 0NC and J 0NC respectively. This condition
holds for any shock and any joint density fpost           0
                                                            (w 0; VW 0 , VF0) when there is perfect reshuffling in surplus.
Additionally, it holds for only-firm-shocks when there is perfect persistence and firm and worker surpluses
are independently distributed, as discussed below.




                                                                              65
unilateral surpluses and participation constraints):38

                       ∆1 (ε F00 , δ0 , δ1 ) S ∆0 (ε F00 , δ0 , δ1 )
                                     ∫                                                                                
                                                                                                                  00
              ⇔                                      1 SeW (w 0 , VW 0) < 0 ∨ SeF (w 0 , VF0) < ε F                        f˜I0 (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0)
                   (w 0 ,V0 )∈(J 0NC \M 0NC )
                                         ∫                                                                            
                                                                                                                  00
                          S                          1 SeW (w 0 , VW 0) < 0 ∨ SeF (w 0 , VF0) < ε F                        f˜M
                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                               (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0)
                                (w 0 ,V0 )∈M 0NC
                                     ∫                                  
                                                                     F 00 ˜0
              ⇔                                      1 S (w , V ) < ε fI (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0)
                                                       eF  0   F0
                                                                                                                                                      (A21)
                   (w 0 ,V0 )∈(J 0NC \M 0NC )
                                         ∫                              
                                                                     F 00 ˜0
                          S                          1 S (w , V ) < ε f M (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0)
                                                       eF  0   F0

                                (w 0 ,V0 )∈M 0NC
                                                           00
              eF (w 0 , VF0) < ε F | S
   ⇔ Prob(0 ≤ S                      eW (w 0 , VW 0) ≥ εW 0)
                                                        b
                 eF (w 0 , VF0) < ε F 00 |0 ≤ S
      S Prob(0 ≤ S                            eW (w 0 , VW 0) < εW 0),
                                                                 b
                                         h 0i
where f˜I0 (w 0 , V0)  fpost
                         0
                              (w 0 , V0)                        1−δ
                                                                1−δ 1
                                                                        is the density of the inframarginal jobs in the
                                                                              h        0
                                                                                           i
control group and f˜M       0
                              (w 0 , V0)  fpost
                                            0
                                                 (w 0 , V0) δ1−δ
                                                              1 −δ 0 is the density of the marginal jobs in
the control group.
    The second step recognizes that condition S                eW (w 0 , VW 0) < 0 is slack without worker
aggregate shocks and with persistence in idiosyncratic surplus (i.e. for these jobs,
  0
 fpost (w 0 , VW 0 , VF 0)  0 ).
    The third step clarifies that the conditions now compare two simple conditional cumu-
lative distribution functions of firm surplus with threshold given by the firm surplus shock,
for the range of worker surplus shocks partitioned by the REBP surplus cutoff.39
    Our empirically interesting case is:

                                                       ∆1 (ε F00 , δ0 , δ1 )  ∆0 (ε F00 , δ0 , δ1 ),                                                 (A24)

such that the two post-repeal separation rates are equal for all post-repeal firm shocks and
  38This expression is derived by specializing Equation (A15) to the case of firm shocks only, and then,
analogous to the Coasean derivation (A10), combining the inframarginal jobs in the treatment and control
groups on one side, using:
                   ∫                                                              
                                                                            00
  1
 ∆ (ε   F00
              )                1 SeW (w0 , VW 0) < 0 ∨ SeF (w0 , VF0) < ε F fpost
                                                                               1
                                                                                   (w 0 , V0)d(w 0 , V0)
                   (w 0 ,V0 )
                                                                                                                                                      (A20)
                                                                                                                                1 − δ0
                   ∫                                                                                                               
                                                                                               00
                                               1 SeW (w0 , VW 0) < 0 ∨ SeF (w0 , VF0) < ε F             0
                                                                                                        fpost (w 0 , V0)               d(w 0 , V0),
                   (w 0 ,V0 )∈(J 0NC \M 0NC )                                                                                   1 − δ1

where the second equality follows from Equation (A12) (after reformulating the densities there into 1 − δ 0
and 1 − δ 1 ).
                                                                                     0
  39To see this formally, note that the property of joint densities implies that fpost  (w 0 , VW 0 , VF0) 


                                                                            66
moreover for any size of the set of marginal jobs REBP extracted (δ1 − δ 0 ). This “global”
condition is fulfilled if worker and firm surpluses are independently distributed.40 The non-
Coasean setting can then rationalize our findings of no post-repeal resilience whatsoever
even with perfect persistence in idiosyncratic job surplus.




 0
fpost (w 0 , VF0 |w 0 , VW 0) fpost
                               0
                                    (w 0 , VW 0), we can write condition (A22) as
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                              eF (w0 ,VF 0 )≥0 1 S (w ,V )<ε
                                                                                                                                                                                            h           i
                                                                                                                                                                                                1−δ 0
           ∫                                                 ∫
                             eW (w0 ,VW 0 )≥εW 0
            (w0 ,VW 0 ) s.t. S                               (w0 ,VF 0 ) s.t. S
                                                                                                 eF 0 F 0    F 00            0
                                                                                                                            fpost (w 0 ,VF 0 |w 0 VW 0 )d(w 0 ,VF 0 ) fpost
                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                            (w 0 ,VW 0 )                    d(w 0 ,VW 0 )
                                             b                                                                                                                                                  1−δ 1
                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                         1 SeF (w0 ,VF 0 )<ε F 00
                                                                                                                                                                                        h            i
                                                                                                                                                                                             1−δ0
      ∫                                              ∫
  S                        eW (w0 ,VW 0 )<εW 0
      (w 0 ,VW 0 ) s.t. 0≤ S                         (w0 ,VF 0 ) s.t. S
                                                                      eF (w0 ,VF 0 )≥0
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                        fpost (w 0 ,VF 0 |w 0 ,VW 0 )d(w 0 ,VF 0 ) fpost
                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                         (w 0 ,VW 0 )                    d(w 0 ,VW 0 ),
                                           b                                                                                                                                                δ1 −δ0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (A22)

which we can rewrite in terms of surpluses directly, defining densities of surpluses h(.) rather than of
job/wage attributes fpost (.):

                                                   ∫                                          
                                                                                                              1 − δ 0 eW 0
                                                 ∫                                                              
                                                   
                                                           1 S < ε hpost (S | S )d S  hpost (S )
                                                               eF      F00   0    eF0 eW 0 eF0  0    e W0
                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                              1 − δ1
                                                   
                                                                                              
                                      S      W
                                      eW 0 ≥ε 0 S eF 0 ≥0
                                                                                              
                                             b                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (A23)
                                            ∫                                               
                                                                                                   eW 0) 1 − δ d S
                                                                                                                 0
                                  ∫                                                                           
                           S
                                            
                                                     1 Se < ε hpost (Se | Se )d Se  hpost
                                                           F0     F00     0    F0   W 0   F0   0
                                                                                                 (S                    eW 0 .
                                                                                                          δ1 − δ0
                                            
                                                                                            
                                eW 0 <εW 0 S
                             0≤ S            eF 0 ≥0                                         
                                        b                                                    
Up until now we rewrote condition (A22). Now assume that worker surplus and firm surpluses are
                 0
independent: hpost  (S     eW 0)  h 0 (S
                     eF0 | S              eF0). Then condition (A22) collapses to equality. That is, if worker and
                                     post
firm surpluses are independently distributed, ∆1 (ε F00 , δ0 , δ1 )  ∆0 (ε F00 , δ0 , δ1 ), i.e. post-repeal separation
rates co-move perfectly in response to a firm shock even if there is perfect persistence of surplus for one
period to the next.
   40Of course, in practice, the shocks may be percent shifters of the given job surplus, so that the condition
would not literally need to apply in levels.


                                                                                                         67
D       Variable Construction
Outcome Variables We describe the construction of the outcome variables presented in
the paper. In the descriptions below, status refers to a variable in the ASSD aggregating
hundreds of administrative designations into 12 labor market statuses Zweimüller et al.
(2009). We classify self-employment (status == 6) and mini-jobs (status == 10) as
employment.
    1. Separation
         • Create an indicator if equal to one, between two periods (e.g., 1988q2 and
           1993q3), the worker is observed in the same establishment.
         • If not, the worker is separated
    2. Separation into Nonemployment
         • Create an indicator equal to one if the worker separated as defined above and
           had no other employer between 1988q2 and 1993q3.
    3. Unemployment (Quarters)
         • Between two periods (e.g., 1988q2 and 1993q3), count the number of quarters
           where the worker is observed on UI or UA (status  1).
         • Multiply the quarter count by 3 to get a monthly count for tractability.
    4. Continuous Employment (Quarters)
         • Between two periods (e.g., 1988q2 and 1993q3), count the number of quarters
           where the worker is employed in the same establishment as the quarter before.
         • Stop counting when the worker is observed either employed in a new establish-
           ment or with another labor market status.

Wage Rigidity Measures We consider active male workers within the ASSD earnings
caps in the five-year period before REBP (1982-87).41 The four indices of wage rigidity are
standard deviations at the firm level of the following underlying variables, which are all
nominal and winsorized at the 1% level by year:
    1. Log wage: the natural logarithm of annual earnings in 2018 euros.
    2. The residuals of log wage regressed on tenure-experience-occupation-industry-year
       fixed effects. Tenure is made up of 5 three-year categories and a category for those
       with more than 15 years of tenure. Experience is made up of 5 five-year categories
       and a category for those with more than 25 years experience. Occupation refers
       to white- vs. blue-collar, for which there are often separate collective bargaining
       agreements. Industry refers to four-digit industries per the NACE 2008 (Rev. 2)
       classification.
  41We consider full-time jobs, mini-jobs, and self-employment. We only keep the last quarter for each year,
and drop workers at the yearly earnings caps.

                                                    68
  3. Five-year wage growth for stayers: we compute wage growth for all workers between
     1982 and 1987, and only keep workers who stayed with the same firm in 1982 and
     1987.

  4. The residuals of five-year wage growth for stayers based on the same regressors as
     in 2. above.

We next merge onto the 1988 job holders sample using firm identifiers, compute quartiles
weighing by 1988 job holders, and carry forward by worker to subsequent periods.




                                          69
E    Estimation of the Mixed Model with Industry-by-Occupation
     Variation with Non-Linear Least Squares
We now present a formal structural estimation of our model to estimate κ, by estimating
Equation (9) with (i) richer variation at the industry-by-occupation level, (ii) providing
a single estimate and confidence interval for κ in each specification, and (iii) accounting
for the nonlinear nature of the specification (due to the max operator in Equation (7)).
This estimation again reveals point estimates κ̂ that are close to or even above 1. Even
in our most conservative specification, the lower limit of the 95% confidence interval for
κ is 0.890, indicating that at least 89% of separations had to come from full reshuffling
of job surplus for the data to be consistent with a Coasean setting. With such a high
share of reshuffling-consistent (or persistence-inconsistent) separations, the estimation of
the structural model thus delivers parameters estimates that directly mirror the reduced-
form evidence in Section 5, which – at odds with perfect persistence within a Coasean
framework – had shown that post-repeal behavior did not differ between treated and
untreated matches.
    Formally, we estimate κ using non-linear least squares/GMM based on the moment
condition E[νi |∆0i ]  0 in Equation (9). Intuitively, the parameter κ is identified through
the non-linearity in the relationship between ∆1i and ∆0i induced by the resilience to non-
large shocks to surplus predicted by the Coasean model with persistence.
    To proxy for ∆0i , we use post-repeal separation rates among workers in the non-REBP
region in the same industry-occupation cell who were not treated by the program and who
thus still contain marginal jobs but are exposed to plausibly similar industry-level surplus
shocks. We use observed separation rates during REBP in the REBP and non-REBP regions
to measure δ1i and δ0i in each industry-occupation cell.

Reduced-Form Evidence on Comovement of Separation Rates Before providing results
of the structural estimation, we plot the reduced-form relationship between ∆1i and ∆0i at
the industry-by-occupation level in binned scatter plots in Appendix Figure A.1. The
figure shows the relationship between post-repeal separation rates (at horizons ranging
from 1995 to 1998) at the industry-by-occupation cell level in formerly treated cohorts
(born between 1938 and 1943) in the REBP regions against separations rates in the same
cohorts in non-REBP regions who did not experience the treatment. The relationship
appears strong, positive, and linear. As a placebo benchmark, we also plot as outcome
variable the separation rate in slightly younger, ineligible cohorts (born between 1943
and 1948). The relationship is just as strong and positive, thus providing evidence that
the industry-by-occupation cells in the different regions were affected by similar shocks
to surplus. As Appendix Figure A.1 reveals, there is no discernible difference between
the slope of the relationship of separation behavior of formerly treated cohorts to their
same-aged peers in the non-REBP region and the relationship in slightly younger cohorts.
In particular, we do not observe evidence for resilience, i.e. lower separation rates, at low
post-repeal separation rates in the non-REBP regions (which our structural model will
then formally also link with variation in the cell-specific kink position).



                                             70
Results of Estimation Appendix Table A.1 reports estimates of κ based on estimation of
Equation (9) with non-linear least squares. Across specifications, we find estimates of κ
that are always above 1 in the non-linear least squares model. The smallest point estimate
is 1.027 with variation at the four-digit level and considering post-repeal separations by
1995. Even the most conservative i.e. lowest 95% confidence interval for κ̂ rules out
κ̂ ≤ 0.89, that fewer than 89% of cells in the Austrian labor market in our sample would
need to be of the perfect-shuffling type to rationalize the data through the Coasean lens.
    The table further reveals even larger estimates at longer horizons, e.g., with the con-
fidence intervals excluding one when considering separations by 1998, according with
intuition that full reshuffling becomes less implausible at multi-year horizons. However,
even at the shortest horizon, considering separations by 1995 as outcome variable, we find
that 100% (lower 95% confidence interval: 89%) of the cells would need to be of the perfect
reshuffling kind.42

Table A.1: Structural Estimation of Share κ of Separations within a Coasean Framework
with Perfect Reshuffling of Job-Level Surplus: Industry-Occupation Cells


                      2-Digit Industry × Occupation Cells       4-Digit Industry × Occupation Cells
                       1995     1996     1997     1998           1995     1996     1997     1998

 κ (Reshuffling)       1.046     1.077     1.053     1.158       1.027     1.077     1.119     1.169
                      (0.054)   (0.067)   (0.080)   (0.099)     (0.070)   (0.066)   (0.076)   (0.074)
     95% CI            0.939     0.943     0.894     0.962       0.890     0.947     0.968     1.023
  (Lower Limit)

        R2             0.426    0.531     0.588     0.528        0.174    0.278     0.273     0.275
        N                95       95        95        95          262      262       262       262

Note: The table reports estimates of κ based on estimation of Equation (9) with non-linear least squares
allowing for an intercept shift. We collapse the data at the industry by occupation (blue/white collar) level
and weight each observation by the number of workers in the cell, dropping cells with fewer than ten workers
who survived REBP and those cells with a smaller separation rate in the REBP compared to the non-REBP
region during the program (27.8 and 38.6% of cells for 2-digit and 4-digit industry cuts, respectively). The
outcome variable is the separation rate from February 1994 to February of each year among REBP survivors
in the REBP region. The model includes the corresponding separation rate among control workers (cohorts
born between 1933 and 1943 but ineligible due to location in the control regions) as the main regressor along
with its transformations according to Equation (9).




  42We have also explored strategies to account for measurement error using methodology for nonlinear
models developed in Li and Vuong (1998), Li (2002) and Schennach (2004), surveyed in Schennach (2012).
These lead to qualitatively and quantitatively similar results.


                                                     71
Figure A.1: Post-Repeal Separation Rates of REBP Survivors and non-REBP Survivors at
the Industry-Occupation Level
                                      (a) Separations by 1995                                                                    (b) Separations by 1996
                             .5                                                                                         .5
 Post-REBP Separation Rate




                                                                                            Post-REBP Separation Rate
                             .4                                                                                         .4
    (Treatment Region)




                                                                                               (Treatment Region)
                             .3                                                                                         .3


                             .2                                                                                         .2


                             .1                                                                                         .1


                             0                                                                                          0
                                  0     .1              .2            .3         .4                                          0            .2                  .4            .6
                                             Post-REBP Separation Rate                                                                  Post-REBP Separation Rate
                                                  (Control Region)                                                                           (Control Region)

                                         Formerly Treated Cohorts ('38 to '43)                                                      Formerly Treated Cohorts ('38 to '43)
                                         Younger Control Cohorts ('43 to '48)                                                       Younger Control Cohorts ('43 to '48)




                                      (c) Separations by 1997                                                                    (d) Separations by 1998
                             .6                                                                                         .8
 Post-REBP Separation Rate




                                                                                            Post-REBP Separation Rate




                             .5
                                                                                                                        .6
    (Treatment Region)




                                                                                               (Treatment Region)




                             .4

                                                                                                                        .4
                             .3


                             .2                                                                                         .2


                             .1
                                                                                                                        0
                                  0     .2               .4            .6             .8                                     0     .2               .4            .6        .8
                                             Post-REBP Separation Rate                                                                  Post-REBP Separation Rate
                                                  (Control Region)                                                                           (Control Region)

                                         Formerly Treated Cohorts ('38 to '43)                                                      Formerly Treated Cohorts ('38 to '43)
                                         Younger Control Cohorts ('43 to '48)                                                       Younger Control Cohorts ('43 to '48)




Note: The figures plot binned scatter plots of the post-repeal separation rates at the industry-by-occupation
cell level among survivors in the REBP regions against those in the same cell in the non-REBP regions. The
blue dots indicate the relationship for cohorts born between 1938 and 1943, i.e. those who were eligible
for REBP before its repeal. As a placebo, we also show the relationship for slightly younger cohorts, born
between 1943 and 1948 and thus never eligible for REBP. Observations are weighted by the number of
survivors in the respective control-region cell. Industries are categorized at the four-digit level.




                                                                                           72
F     The Role of Severance Payments
Here, we assess the role of severance pay in our analysis. We first analyze the case of
flexible wages. With flexible wages, we show that our original takeaway for the Coasean
case remains completely unchanged, following the neutrality results in Lazear (1986,
1990). We then reiterate that severance payment is no longer neutral with wage rigidity,
as in Garibaldi and Violante (2005). Here, we clarify that the incremental consequence
of severance pay over our non-Coasean model in Section 7 is simply to shift the baseline
unilateral surplus distributions, but the intuitions of the fixed-wage setting (and hence its
empirical implications) remain analogous.

F.1   Theoretical Assessment
We modify our basic setup in (1) and (2) to include severance pay s paid upon any
separation, regardless of whether this is a quit or a layoff.
   The severance payment affects the outside value. The neutrality of the severance
payment emerges already in the formulation of joint job surplus. To see this, we add the
severance payment s into the definition of the values analogously to the wage payment w,
whereby the values are defined gross of wages and severance payment now:

                                 S W  VIn
                                        W
                                           + w − [VOut
                                                   W
                                                       + s]                               (A25)
                                  S 
                                    F      F
                                          VIn   −w−     F
                                                      [VOut   − s]                        (A26)

Joint surplus S  VInW
                       + VInF    W
                              − VOut      F
                                     − VOut   is independent of severance payment s. Hence,
separation decisions in bilaterally efficient bargaining settings remain efficient, and specifi-
cally neutralize the severance payments. That is, separations in a setting with and without
severance pay mandates are identical. This neutrality result is well-known (see, e.g.,
Lazear, 1986, 1990). We do not discuss dynamic or specific frictions that break the neu-
trality here (except for fixed wages below, which is our leading friction in the main part
of the paper). We also do not derive strategic forms of the bargaining game, and do not
differentiate quits and layoffs here, exactly because in this benchmark setting there is no
notion of a one-sided separation.

Fixed Wages We now introduce wage rigidity in the form of fixed wages, as in Section 7.
Here, severance payment will have an effect on separations, as in Garibaldi and Violante
(2005).
    We consider two variants. First, severance is paid no matter who initiates the separa-
tion. The participation constraints then become:
                                         W
                                        VIn + w ≥ VOut
                                                   W
                                                       +s                                 (A27)
                                         F         F
                                        VIn − w ≥ VOut −s                                 (A28)

As the fixed-wage setting accommodates distinctions between quits and layoffs, we now
model also a setting in which severance payments are due only upon a layoff, but not


                                                 73
upon a quit (in Austria, severance payments are also due upon mutual separations, but
this case does not have a clear mapping into our non-Coasean setting):
                                     W
                                    VIn + w ≥ VOut
                                               W
                                                                                      (A29)
                                     F            F
                                    VIn   −w ≥   VOut   −s                            (A30)

In both cases, the presence of a severance payment mandate therefore leaves the intuitions
of our non-Coasean model in Section 7 intact, except that the severance payment may
shift the surplus distributions. That is, one could redefine the firms’ outside option
      F
as ṼOut  VOutF
                   − s and apply the subsequent logic of our model with rigid wages.
Importantly, the formation of matches could be affected if wages are completely rigid.
However, our analysis takes a given cross-section of existing employment relationship
and takes the initial formation process as given in the past.

Dynamics: Increasing Severance Payment by Staying, and Unconditional Severance
Payment Upon Retirement We close with two important institutional features of Aus-
trian severance pay. First, severance payments are an increasing step function of tenure.
Second, and particularly relevant for our sample, severance payment is due upon retire-
ment irrespective of the type of separation.
    To assess the potential dynamic effects within a Coasean framework, it is useful to ask:
how would the step function of severance payments affect the path of flexible (Coasean)
wages? This perspective provides a tangible assessment of the severance payments in
employment relationships. But also gives a useful benchmark whether Austrian wage
setting institutions can plausibly be flexible. In practice, basic bargaining theory implies
that the required wage path need not be tilted noticeably.
    We now think of the severance pay s  s B − s A as the incremental one when crossing
the next tenure step. We have pre-step workers in group A and those across the step in
group B. The bargaining and surplus implications for the B workers are described above
already: s does not affect the joint surplus (and hence not (efficient) separations either),
and only boosts workers’ outside option (at the expense of that of the firm).
    To now understand how this feature affects wage setting in group A, we must assume
a wage setting protocol within the class of bilaterally efficient models. We also must
explicitly introduce dynamics with continuation values. Throughout, we will choose
those assumptions that are most extreme in that they yield the maximal reduction of A
wages from s.
    First, we assume that there is no separation risk between A and B, and moreover work-
ers do not discount the future. This assumption maximizes the effect of the continuation
value onto w A , the wage of group A. It also allows us to think of a simple two-period
model, consisting of the duration as worker type A as the first period and thereafter
starting as type B.
    Second, we assume Nash bargaining with worker bargaining power φ. As will become
clear below, this assumption will lead to a one-to-one effect of the severance payment onto
the (present value of) wages paid out to A workers, w A .
    We start by defining the value of employment for the A worker (so the index is WA for


                                            74
worker of type A):
                            WA
                          VIn  + wA  V
                                      eWA + w
                                       In   eA + [VIn
                                                    WB
                                                       + w B ],                          (A31)

where ex denotes a present value minus the continuation value after upgrading from A to
            eWA now denotes the value of the worker, gross of the wage, while of type A,
B. That is, VIn
for that period, and similarly w
                               eA now denoting the present value of wages paid over the
course of this tenure window (recall the absence of separations and discounting).
    Assuming Nash wage bargaining in jobs of type A with worker bargaining power φ A ,
the wage rule is:

                        eA  φ A SA + [VOut
                        w               WA      WA
                                            − VIn  ]                                     (A32)
                             φ A SA + [VOut
                                         WA     eWA + [V W B + w B ]],
                                             − [VIn     In                               (A33)

where SA is the joint surplus in jobs of type A.
    The expression reveals two insights. First, s does not affect joint surplus at step A nor
B (as we have shown above). Second, the expression makes clear that severance pay s
                                                                                WB
affects wages of the pre-step worker A by affecting the continuation value VIn     . Through
this channel, it can affect wage setting while in A. The effect is maximal as we assumed
away discounting and separations.
    Second, to quantify the effect of the severance payment on the job value and hence
wages w A , we specify the bargaining protocol for period B. We again assume Nash
bargaining, which we show yields the maximal, i.e. one-to-one, wage effect, irrespectively
of the bargaining power.
    That is, in period B, Nash wages are set such that
                                WB
                              VIn  + w B  φ B SB + [VOut
                                                      WB
                                                          + s].                          (A34)

Here, the joint surplus SB is not affected by the severance payment, as discussed above. Yet,
the worker’s outside option is affected. Since Nash bargaining has the net-of-wage inside
value equal the outside option plus a share of the joint surplus, and since the joint surplus
pie size is unaffected, this particular bargaining protocol implies the largest increase in the
worker’s continuation value from A into B: a one-to-one pass-through. Importantly, there
are many other bilaterally efficient bargaining assumptions that can feature smaller pass-
through or nearly full neutrality, such as alternating offer bargaining (Hall and Milgrom,
2008) or fixed wages with renegotiation only if a participation constraint is hit (MacLeod
and Malcomson, 1993). Hence, our Nash assumption for wages w B yields the largest, i.e.
one-to-one, effect of the severance payment into the continuation value.
   Using backward induction, we now replace the continuation value of A workers in
Equation (A33):

                     eA  φ A SA + [VOut
                     w               WA     eWA + φ B SB + [V W B + s]],
                                         − [VIn              Out                         (A35)

That is, pre-step wages w
                        eA fall in s one to one. Hence, in this case of the upper bound
of the effect magnitude, in period A the worker and firm bargain away the boost from


                                              75
the severance payment, having the worker pay for it in advance. They anticipate that s
will lead the worker to extract higher wages tomorrow (in period B), but since she can
do so only upon continuing, this boost is part of her inside value today (in period A). It
therefore gets neutralized in period-A wages entirely. This result is simply a variant of
the neutrality result in Lazear (1986, 1990); Garibaldi and Violante (2005) adapted to our
setting.

Calibrating the Upper Bound on Wage Effects Recall that w          eA represents the present
value of period A wages. A realistic jump of s in our sample is of 3 months when the
worker adds 5 years of tenure, the usual step size for higher-tenured workers. Here, we
would therefore amortize the 3 month wages over 5x12  60 monthly wage payments, for
example with a decrease of monthly wages by 3/60  5% – compared to a benchmark of
a counterfactual economy without that tenure step. Such wage effects can be smoothed
out or alternatively be implemented with a tilt in the tenure gradient, as any present-
value-preserving schedule implementing this wage adjustment would do. Institutionally,
collective bargaining (typically occurring between employers and unions in industry-
by-occupation-by-region cells and setting wages for experience and tenure groups) may
incorporate such severance payment offsets as the severance pay-tenure schedule is widely
known in advance.
    Therefore, the reality of severance payments in Austrian setting is far from subject to
the bonding critique of Lazear (1986, 1990), whereby wages would have to be dramatically
lower, even turn negative, to neutralize the institution.
    We close by reiterating two statements. First, wage gradients separately would not
be indicative of Coasean and non-Coasean bilateral interactions, as the aforementioned
alternative protocols (MacLeod and Malcomson, 1993; Hall and Milgrom, 2008) achieve
bilateral efficiency despite wages being largely neutral to the kind of outside option boosts
severance payments provides. Second, the ballparked wage adjustment are overestimates
as we assume (i) no discounting, (ii) no separations between A and B, and (iii) implement
the Nash wage protocol, whereby the outside option boost adds one to one into the
continuation value in B as well as into the wage in A. Other bargaining protocols will
yield smaller pass-through.

Extensions: Separations and Retirement Payouts Importantly, s could in principle affect
the continuation value from A into B either through the improved payoff while employed,
but also through the higher payoff in case of a separation from B. One way to think about
this setup is that, e.g., due to Markov process k(.|.) in the job characteristics, separations
may occur (or simply due to an ad-hoc "exogenous" separation). In case of separation
while in B, the B worker’s actual continuation value, i.e. the same the outside option
in Nash bargaining, will be augmented by the severance payment s. Therefore, in the
separation states of the continuation term from A to such a "risky" B, the continuation
value continues to be affected one to one. In the other states without a separation, while
in B, the worker obtains the employment value of B through bargaining, which in our
setting also yields a one to one boost from s due to bargaining. Therefore, permitting
separations while in B turns out to leave the one-to-one effect on the contination value


                                             76
intact. Hence, the bargaining of period-A wages inherits the same unit pass-through.
(And again, separation before entering B will lead to attenuation.)
    Interestingly, incorporating the institutional feature that s gets paid unconditionally at
retirement, does not change the insights. Yet, different mechanisms are at work, namely
solely through the direct effect of increased inside continuation value (rather than increase
in outside option which leads to increased wages). This consideration may be particularly
relevant to our sample of older workers. For example, Manoli and Weber (2016) present
compelling intertemporal substitution evidence for retirement delays across the next step
of tenure categories, which however operate at very short time windows. This evidence
for the dynamic non-neutrality of severance payments is consistent with, for example,
wage rigidity (by which workers for whom retiring right above the severance payment
step could simply bargain for higher wages and retire at the otherwise optimal date). The
authors interpret the evidence as Frischian labor supply behavior, due to the (reasonable)
assumption that wages are unlikely to move at such narrow windows. However, the
evidence is also consistent with the expected lump-sum payment being smoothed out
over the tenure steps before the increase.

F.2   Empirical Evaluation
Empirical Tenure and Severance Pay Distribution in our Sample Appendix Table A.2
presents summary statistics (mean and range) of tenure and tenure-implied severance
payment in monthly salaries of our sample of 1988 job holders, as well as the share meeting
the experience requirement. We compute these values both for 1988 – our lower bound and
the number relevant for REBP separations – and extrapolating tenure to 1993 assuming
no separation – which is the baseline for the post-repeal context and the upper bound for
the REBP sample. These baseline values are our references because we cannot credibly
condition on tenure at the point of separation, which is endogenous to the treatment.
Finally, note that in 1988, tenure is left-censored at about 16 years since the ASSD begins
in 1972. (The maximum tenure is 16.38 as the ASSD begins on January 1, 1972, and our
pre-REBP 1988 cutoff date is May 15.) Foreshadowing our empirical analysis, we have
split up the 1988 job holders into four quartiles by tenure.
    The table clarifies that our sample has wide dispersion in tenure and implied severance
payments, permitting us to study how the effects of REBP and its aftermath may be
mediated by severance payments.

Strategy: Heterogeneity Analysis Our method splits up the sample into quartiles by
tenure and estimates REBP treatment effects and post-repeal separation rates (and also
constructs baseline control group separation rates), as in our heterogeneity analysis by
wage rigidity in Section 8. Appendix Figure A.2 presents these results by tenure quartile
and the various post-repeal horizons. Appendix Figure A.3 does so for the respective
severance payments, where instead of sorting workers by quartiles, we sort workers into
bins by the discrete set of policy-mandated severance steps. Again, we do so along
baseline 1988 levels and extrapolated 1993 tenure, following the measures summarized in
Appendix Table A.2.


                                             77
Results We find that the REBP treatment effect is present in all categories. Interestingly,
the effect is larger among higher-tenure workers, and, hence, those with more months of
severance payment. This pattern supports the causal effect of REBP on separations for
the workers that even upon unilateral quits may be at risk of losing severance payments
(although the separations may well be mutual in practice). Hence, the degree of severance
pay does not appear to play a dominant role in mediating the incremental separation
dynamics. The fact that the gradient slopes upward suggests that other factors, such as
age composition and, relatedly, the ease of transitioning into retirement post-repeal, may
dominate the sorting (although we do not dissect these possibilities here).




                                            78
            Table A.2: Tenure Quartiles and Underlying Years of Tenure, Monthly Salaries of Severance Pay, and Experience

       Tenure       Mean Years          Range of Years              Mean                 Range of                Mean              Share Meeting
       Quartile     of Tenure             of Tenure             Severance Pay          Severance Pay           Experience      Experience Requirement
       1988 (actual)
          1             1.60            0.003      4.01               0.34             0          2               19.10                    90%
          2             7.30             4.01      10.79              2.95             2          4               20.93                     97%
          3             14.11           10.79      16.36              4.76             4          6               22.37                    100%
          4             16.37           16.36      16.38                6              6          6               24.21                    100%

       1993 (extrapolated if no separation)
          1            6.85           5.25          9.26                3              3          3               24.35                     96%
          2           12.55           9.26         16.04              4.14             3          6               26.19                    100%
          3           19.36          16.04         21.61              7.24             6          9               27.62                    100%
          4           21.63          21.61         21.63                9              9          9               29.46                    100%
     Note: The table reports two calculations of years of tenure, monthly salaries of severance pay, and experience for job holders in 1988. In the first panel,
79




     we compute the mean and range of each variable for job holders in 1988. In the second panel, we compute the mean and range of years of tenure
     and months of severance pay assuming each job holder in 1988 remains in their job until August 1993. We also show the mean experience (in years)
     and the share of workers in each quartile that satisfy the REBP experience requirement (at least 9 years during the past 15 years). Years of tenure are
     left-censored since the ASSD database begins on 1972. Thus, monthly salaries of severance pay for quartile 4 should be interpreted as lower bounds
     of actual monthly salaries of severance payment for both panels. All numbers expressed with no decimals reflect integers.
                                                          Figure A.2: Results by Quartiles of Tenure
                              (a) Post-Repeal Resilience Through 1995                                                              (b) Post-Repeal Resilience Through 1996

                        .6                                                                                                   .6
Effect on Separations




                                                                                                     Effect on Separations
                        .4                                                                                                   .4

                        .2                                                                                                   .2

                         0                                                                                                    0

                        -.2                                                                                                  -.2
                              1                    2                         3               4                                     1                    2                         3               4
                                                       Quartiles of Tenure                                                                                  Quartiles of Tenure

                                  Control Mean: Separation Level During Policy Period                                                  Control Mean: Separation Level During Policy Period
                                  Initial Treatment DiD Effect on Separations During Policy Period                                     Initial Treatment DiD Effect on Separations During Policy Period
                                  DiD Effect on Post-Repeal Separations: Data                                                          DiD Effect on Post-Repeal Separations: Data
                                  Coasean Benchmark for Post-Repeal Separations DiD Effect                                             Coasean Benchmark for Post-Repeal Separations DiD Effect




                              (c) Post-Repeal Resilience Through 1997                                                              (d) Post-Repeal Resilience Through 1998

                        .6                                                                                                   .6
Effect on Separations




                        .4                                                                           Effect on Separations   .4

                        .2                                                                                                   .2

                         0                                                                                                    0

                        -.2                                                                                                  -.2
                              1                    2                         3               4                                     1                    2                         3               4
                                                       Quartiles of Tenure                                                                                  Quartiles of Tenure

                                  Control Mean: Separation Level During Policy Period                                                  Control Mean: Separation Level During Policy Period
                                  Initial Treatment DiD Effect on Separations During Policy Period                                     Initial Treatment DiD Effect on Separations During Policy Period
                                  DiD Effect on Post-Repeal Separations: Data                                                          DiD Effect on Post-Repeal Separations: Data
                                  Coasean Benchmark for Post-Repeal Separations DiD Effect                                             Coasean Benchmark for Post-Repeal Separations DiD Effect




                                                                                          80
                              Figure A.3: Results by Months of Severance Pay
                                         (a) Calcuation Based on 1988 Tenure


                        .6

Effect on Separations
                        .4

                        .2

                         0

                        -.2
                               0                      2                      4                6
                                                      Months of Severance Pay

                                   Control Mean: Separation Level During Policy Period
                                   Initial Treatment DiD Effect on Separations During Policy Period
                                   DiD Effect on Post-Repeal Separations: Data
                                   Coasean Benchmark for Post-Repeal Separations DiD Effect



                              (b) Calcuation Based on 1988 Tenure Extrapolated to 1993


                        .6
Effect on Separations




                        .4

                        .2

                         0

                        -.2
                              2                4                  6                  8       10
                                                   Months of Severance Pay in 1993

                                   Control Mean: Separation Level During Policy Period
                                   Initial Treatment DiD Effect on Separations During Policy Period
                                   DiD Effect on Post-Repeal Separations: Data
                                   Coasean Benchmark for Post-Repeal Separations DiD Effect




                                                            81
G   Additional Tables




                        82
     Table A.3: Initial Treatment Effect: Difference-in-Differences Effects on Separations Between Age 50 and 55 Among Job
     Holders at Age 50

                                                  (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                               Separation          Separation    Nonemployment Unemp. (Benefits) Cont. Empl.
                                                              Into Nonemployment   (Quarters)     (Quarters)      (Quarters)

        REBP Region × Treated Cohort             0.124***             0.098**                  1.027**                 0.745             -1.147***
                                                  (0.026)             (0.040)                  (0.506)                (0.560)             (0.328)

        REBP Region                               -0.035              0.022**                   0.129                  0.129               0.559
                                                 (0.031)              (0.010)                  (0.302)                (0.238)             (0.527)

        Treated Cohort                          -0.070***             -0.006**                  -0.381                 -0.249             1.174**
                                                 (0.015)               (0.002)                 (0.312)                (0.181)             (0.581)
83




        Constant                                 0.424***             0.130***                 2.299***               1.117*             14.605***
                                                  (0.080)              (0.021)                  (0.822)               (0.603)             (1.638)

        Observations                             378,693              378,693                  378,693                378,693             378,693
        Adjusted R 2                              0.006                0.014                    0.008                  0.011               0.005
        No of Clusters                             100                  100                      100                    100                 100

     Note: The table reports results of the econometric specification in (8). REBP captures the effect of REBP-eligibility on the outcomes listed in
     columns (1) through (5) on a sample of workers employed in the quarter before turning 50. Separation denotes an indicator function that is
     1 if a worker is not employed by their employer at age 49.75 by the quarter before they turn 55. Separation into Nonemployment denotes an
     indicator for Separation from the initial employer interacted with an indicator for not taking up employment with another employer by the quarter
     before turning 55. Nonemployment (Quarters), Unemployment (Benefits) (Quarters), and Continuous Employment (Quarters) denote the quarters of
     nonemployment, unemployment benefits, and continuous employment with the initial employer between age 50 and age 55. Standard errors
     clustered at the administrative region level are reported in parentheses. Levels of significance: ∗ 10%, ∗∗ 5%, and ∗∗∗ 1%.
                        Table A.4: Resilience Test: Post-Repeal Separations (1994-95) Among Program Survivors

                                                 (1)                  (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)
                                              Separation           Separation    Nonemployment   Unemp. (Benefits)   Cont. Empl.
                                                              Into Nonemployment   (Quarters)       (Quarters)        (Quarters)

       REBP Region × Treated Cohort              0.008*             0.004            0.002             -0.022           -0.016
                                                 (0.005)           (0.002)          (0.008)           (0.014)          (0.010)

       REBP Region                               -0.012            -0.001            -0.008            0.002           0.058**
                                                 (0.011)           (0.007)          (0.018)           (0.013)          (0.026)
84




       Treated Cohort                           0.072***           0.083***         0.198***          0.048**         -0.181***
                                                 (0.005)            (0.001)          (0.006)          (0.021)          (0.018)

       Constant                                 0.093***           0.044**          0.113**            0.044           4.744***
                                                 (0.029)           (0.019)          (0.047)           (0.036)          (0.069)

       Observations                             207,785            207,785          207,785           207,785          207,785
       Adjusted R 2                              0.011              0.020            0.017             0.003            0.009
       No of Clusters                              99                 99               99                99               99

     Note: The table replicates Table 3 for the 1994-95 horizon.
                        Table A.5: Resilience Test: Post-Repeal Separations (1994-97) Among Program Survivors

                                                 (1)                  (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)
                                              Separation           Separation    Nonemployment   Unemp. (Benefits)   Cont. Empl.
                                                              Into Nonemployment   (Quarters)       (Quarters)        (Quarters)

       REBP Region × Treated Cohort             0.022**            0.019***          0.076             -0.122          -0.120*
                                                (0.010)             (0.007)         (0.055)           (0.082)          (0.069)

       REBP Region                               -0.015             0.005            -0.005            0.010            0.172
                                                 (0.026)           (0.013)          (0.113)           (0.083)          (0.184)
85




       Treated Cohort                           0.200***           0.240***         1.555***          0.227*          -1.319***
                                                 (0.014)            (0.005)          (0.014)          (0.123)          (0.119)

       Constant                                 0.220***           0.090**          0.638**            0.269          11.297***
                                                 (0.069)           (0.036)          (0.284)           (0.209)          (0.509)

       Observations                             207,785            207,785          207,785           207,785          207,785
       Adjusted R 2                              0.045              0.079            0.062             0.006            0.029
       No of Clusters                              99                 99               99                99               99

     Note: The table replicates Table 3 for the 1994-97 horizon.
                        Table A.6: Resilience Test: Post-Repeal Separations (1994-98) Among Program Survivors

                                                 (1)                  (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)
                                              Separation           Separation    Nonemployment   Unemp. (Benefits)   Cont. Empl.
                                                              Into Nonemployment   (Quarters)       (Quarters)        (Quarters)

       REBP Region × Treated Cohort             0.026**            0.018*            0.145             -0.170          -0.224**
                                                (0.011)            (0.009)          (0.096)           (0.114)          (0.110)

       REBP Region                               -0.022             0.008            -0.001            0.015            0.262
                                                 (0.029)           (0.014)          (0.184)           (0.133)          (0.299)
86




       Treated Cohort                           0.241***           0.299***         2.651***          0.282*          -2.187***
                                                 (0.015)            (0.011)         (0.039)           (0.169)          (0.194)

       Constant                                 0.293***           0.122***         1.053**            0.434          14.154***
                                                 (0.080)            (0.038)         (0.461)           (0.334)          (0.837)

       Observations                             207,785            207,785          207,785           207,785          207,785
       Adjusted R 2                              0.059              0.104            0.085             0.005            0.040
       No of Clusters                              99                 99               99                99               99

     Note: The table replicates Table 3 for the 1994-98 horizon.
     Table A.7: Robustness to Retirement Dynamics (Dropping Cohorts Born Before 1938) for Resilience Test: Post-Repeal
     Separations (1994-96) Among Program Survivors

                                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)                             (4)                   (5)
                                              Separation          Separation    Nonemployment                  Unemp. (Benefits)       Cont. Empl.
                                                             Into Nonemployment   (Quarters)                      (Quarters)            (Quarters)

       REBP Region × Treated Cohort              0.011*               0.012**                 0.062***                 -0.018            -0.089***
                                                 (0.006)              (0.005)                 (0.015)                 (0.019)             (0.025)

       REBP Region                               -0.003                0.008                    -0.007                 0.005               0.116
                                                 (0.019)              (0.011)                  (0.056)                (0.041)             (0.088)

       Treated Cohort                           0.056***             0.073***                 0.288***                0.065*             -0.227***
                                                 (0.004)              (0.005)                 (0.006)                 (0.034)             (0.037)
87




       Constant                                 0.157***              0.068**                  0.324**                 0.136              8.166***
                                                 (0.051)              (0.030)                  (0.142)                (0.107)             (0.241)

       Observations                             178,590               178,590                  178,590                178,590             178,590
       Adjusted R 2                              0.006                 0.015                    0.011                  0.002               0.003
       No of Clusters                              99                    99                       99                     99                  99

      Note: The table reports results of the specification in (8) while dropping all workers who reached retirement age by 1998. The coefficient on REBP
      Region × Treated Cohort captures the effect of REBP-eligeibility on the outcomes listed in columns (1) through (5) on a sample of workers employed
      at the same establishment in May 1988 and February 1994. The regression specification includes region and cohort effects. Separation denotes an
      indicator function that is 1 if a worker is not employed by their employer from February 1994 (and May 1988) in February 1996. Separation into
      Nonemployment denotes an indicator for Separation from the initial employer interacted with an indicator for not being employed in February 1996.
      Employment Indicator denotes whether a worker is employed in February 1996. Employment (Quarters) , Unemployment (Quarters) and Continuous
      Employment (Quarters) denote the quarters of employment, unemployment insurance/assistance receipt, and continuous employment with the
      initial employer between February 1994 and 1996. Standard errors clustered at the administrative region level are reported in parentheses. Levels
      of significance: ∗ 10%, ∗∗ 5%, and ∗∗∗ 1%.
                    Table A.8: Complier Analysis by Predicted Separations


        Type                                                       Mean        SE           CI
        Compliers                                                   0.67     0.098 [0.48 , 0.87]
        Always-Separators                                           0.49     0.038 [0.41 , 0.56]
        Non-Separators                                              0.33     0.078 [0.17 , 0.48]
        Control Group = Compliers + Non-Separators                  0.37     0.080 [0.22 , 0.53]
        All                                                         0.44     0.056 [0.33 , 0.55]


Note: This table reports characteristics of compliers, always-separators, and non-separators using predicted
separations as complier attributes. The prediction is estimated as follows: for all workers employed in 1982,
we regress an indicator for separating from the 1982 job by 1987 on a rich set of covariates measured in
1982: age, industry-occupation fixed effects interacted third degree polynomials in tenure and experience,
indicators for deciles for income and local unemployment rates, and indicators for nonemployment or
nonemployment with UI spells between 1972 and 1982. Compliers are those workers who are employed in
1988 and whose job would have survived in the absence of the REBP reform, always-separators are those
matches that separate even in the control group (i.e. absent REBP), and non-separators are the matches
that survive even in the treatment group (i.e. despite REBP). For each of the variables and groups, the table
reports means as well as standard errors (in parentheses) based on 100 bootstrap replications blocked at the
administrative region level.




                                                     88
               Table A.9: Summary Statistics of Wage Rigidity Proxies

Within-Firm SD of ...        Log Wage     Residuals of      ∆ Log Wage      Residuals of
                                           Log Wage                         ∆ Log Wage
Q1
Mean                            0.13             0.11          11.53           10.18
Range                          0, 0.17          0, 0.14       0, 16.32        0, 14.21
Q2
Mean                            0.19              0.15         19.28           16.40
Range                        0.17, 0.21        0.14, 0.17   16.32, 22.04    14.21, 18.38
Q3
Mean                            0.24              0.18         25.02           20.80
Range                        0.21, 0.28        0.17, 0.20   22.04, 27.79    18.38, 23.66
Q4
Mean                            0.42              0.27          40.09           31.50
Range                        0.28, 2.30        0.20, 1.33   27.79, 126.92   23.67, 135.74

         Correlation [Rank Correlation] Between Within-Firm SD of ...

  Log Wage                       1         0.88 [0.77]       0.34 [0.33]     0.35 [0.35]
  Residuals of Log Wage                         1            0.40 [0.39]     0.43 [0.43]
  ∆ Log Wage                                                      1          0.92 [0.85]
  Residuals of ∆ Log Wage                                                         1




                                          89
H       Additional Figures

                  Figure A.4: Industry Heterogeneity of Separation Behavior

                            Mining
              Household Activities
                    Manufacturing
                        Hospitality
                 Cleaning services
                       Agriculture
             Public Administration
                       Healthcare
                      Construction
                           Utilities
               Wholesale & Retail
                         Transport
                          Finance
                        Education
              Arts & entertainment

                                       -.4   -.2    0      .2    .4     .6
                                                   Separations

                             Control Mean: Separation Level During Policy Period
                             Initial Treatment DiD Effect on Separations During Policy Period
                             DiD Effect on Post-Repeal Separations: Data
                             Coasean Benchmark for Post-Repeal Separations DiD Effect
                             (Or Non-Coasean Benchmark with Worker Shocks Only)

Note: The figure reports several separation outcomes, repeating our analysis within each industry cell. The
coefficients in blue show the separation behavior for survivors between 1994 and 1996.




                                                    90
Figure A.5: No Evidence for Aggregate Spillovers: Separations during REBP and after
REBP with Even Younger Control Cohorts
       (a) Separations During REBP (1988 to 1993)                                                    (b) During REBP: Difference T vs. C
  1                                                         New Additional                .3                                         C Group
                                              C Group                                                          T Group
                      T Group                 (Main         Young Cohorts                                                            (Main        New Additional
                      (Main Paper)                                                                             (Main Paper)          Paper)
                                              Paper)        to Test for Spillovers                                                                Young Cohorts
  .8                                                                                                                                              to Test for Spillovers


  .6                                                                                      .2


  .4

                                                                                          .1
  .2


  0
  1928q3    1933q3        1938q3       1943q3         1948q3      1953q3        1958q3    0
                                   Quarter of Birth

              Separations from 1988 Employer, Non-REBP Region                             1928q3      1933q3     1938q3       1943q3         1948q3     1953q3        1958q3
              Separations from 1988 Employer, REBP Region                                                                 Quarter of Birth




       (c) Post-Repeal Separations (1994 to 1996)                                                    (d) Post-Repeal: Difference T vs. C
  1
                                       C Group
           T Group                     (Main
           (Main Paper)                                New Additional                                                          C Group            New Additional
                                       Paper)                                             .2          T Group                                     Young Cohorts
  .8                                                   Young Cohorts                                                           (Main
                                                       to Test for Spillovers                         (Main Paper)             Paper)             to Test for Spillovers

  .6


  .4
                                                                                           0
  .2


  0
  1933q3      1938q3          1943q3            1948q3          1953q3          1958q3
                                   Quarter of Birth
                                                                                          -.2
                     Separations after Q1-94, Control Region                                1933q3      1938q3        1943q3           1948q3         1953q3          1958q3
                     Separations after Q1-94, Treatment Region                                                            Quarter of Birth




Note: Panel (a) shows the share of workers who separated from their 1988q2-employer (right before the
reform) by 1993q3 (when reform had just ended) for all workers born between 1928 and 1958. It plots rates
by month of birth and within the REBP (red, short dashes) and non-REBP (blue, solid) regions. Panel (b)
shows the difference between the REBP and the control region by cohort. Panels (c) and (d) are based on
workers whose matches with their 1988q2-employer survived until 1994q1. Among these survivors, Panel
(a) shows the share of workers who separated from their initial employer by 1996 for all workers born
between 1933 and 1958. Panel (c) plots rates by month of birth and within the REBP (red, short dashes) and
non-REBP (blue, solid) regions. Panel (d) shows the difference between the REBP and the control region by
cohort.




                                                                                     91
                                                                                Figure A.6: Initial Treatment Effect: Outcomes by Age

                                                                                 (a) Level                                                                                                                              (b) Difference

                                                        5                                                                                                                                            3
 Quarters Nonemployed Between Age 50 and 55




                                                                                                                                              Quarters Nonemployed Between Age 50 and 55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DiD Estimate: 1.461 (SE 0.378)




                                                                                                                                                     Differences (Treatment - Control)
                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                       Treatment Region
                                                        3

                                                                                                                                                                                                     1

                                                        2



                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                        1
                                                                                          Control Region



                                                        0                                                                                                                                            -1

                                                        July 1928   July 1933         July 1938            July 1943              July 1948                                                           July 1928   July 1933      July 1938        July 1943         July 1948
                                                                                   Month of Birth                                                                                                                             Month of Birth




                                                                                 (c) Level                                                                                                                              (d) Difference
 Quarters Unemployed (Benefits) Between Age 50 and 55




                                                        5                                                                                     Quarters Unemployed (Benefits) Between Age 50 and 55   3
                                                                                                                                                         Differences (Treatment - Control)


                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DiD Estimate: 0.951 (SE 0.531)


                                                        3

                                                                                                                                                                                                     1

                                                        2
                                                                                                                       Control Region


                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                        1




                                                        0
                                                                       Treatment Region                                                                                                              -1

                                                        July 1928   July 1933         July 1938            July 1943              July 1948                                                           July 1928   July 1933      July 1938        July 1943         July 1948
                                                                                   Month of Birth                                                                                                                             Month of Birth




Note: Panels (a) and (c) show the average number of quarters that the workers are nonemployed and
unemployed (UI/UA receipt), respectively, until the quarter before they turn 55, among those employed
in the quarter before they turn 50. Both plot rates by month of birth and within the treatment (red, short
dashes) and control (blue, solid) regions. Panels (b) and (d) show the difference between the REBP and the
control region by cohort. Cohorts born after 1943 were not covered by the policy as they turned 50 after the
program was repealed 1993.




                                                                                                                                        92
                                                                                Figure A.7: Difference by Industry Growth and Establishment-Level “Hockey-Sticks”


                                                                                                                                                        Difference in Separation by Industry Growth
                                                                                       (a) Through 1995                                                                                                                                                              (b) Through 1997                                                                                                                                                          (c) Through 1998
                                                               .2                                                                                                                                                                           .2                                                                                                                                                                           .2
   Difference: Post-Repeal Separation Rate (1994-95):




                                                                                                                                                                                Difference: Post-Repeal Separation Rate (1994-97):




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Difference: Post-Repeal Separation Rate (1994-98):
                                                               .1                                                                                                                                                                           .1                                                                                                                                                                           .1
           Former Treatment - Former Control




                                                                                                                                                                                        Former Treatment - Former Control




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Former Treatment - Former Control
                                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                                                                                        0


                                                          -.1                                                                                                                                                                          -.1                                                                                                                                                                          -.1


                                                          -.2                                                                                                                                                                          -.2                                                                                                                                                                          -.2
                                                                                                                                   1st Tercile (Lowest Industry Growth)                                                                                                                                         1st Tercile (Lowest Industry Growth)                                                                                                                                      1st Tercile (Lowest Industry Growth)
                                                                                                                                   2nd Tercile                                                                                                                                                                  2nd Tercile                                                                                                                                                               2nd Tercile
                                                          -.3                                                                      3rd Tercile (Highest Industry Growth)                                                               -.3                                                                      3rd Tercile (Highest Industry Growth)                                                               -.3                                                                   3rd Tercile (Highest Industry Growth)

                                                                   1933q3                            1938q3                        1943q3                           1948q3                                                                      1933q3                           1938q3                         1943q3                           1948q3                                                                   1933q3                          1938q3                          1943q3                           1948q3
                                                                                                              Quarter of Birth                                                                                                                                                            Quarter of Birth                                                                                                                                                          Quarter of Birth




                                                                                                                                                         Survivor Separations by Cohort and Region
                                                                                       (d) Through 1995                                                                                                                                                              (e) Through 1997                                                                                                                                                          (f) Through 1998
           Post-Repeal Separation Rate (1994-95)




                                                                                                                                                                                        Post-Repeal Separation Rate (1994-97)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Post-Repeal Separation Rate (1994-98)
                                                        .6                                                                                                                                                                           .5                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                 Among Stayers since 1988




                                                                                                                                                                                              Among Stayers since 1988




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Among Stayers since 1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4                                                                                                                                                                           .5

                                                        .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .3                                                                                                                                                                           .4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                                                        .2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .1                                                                                                                                                                           .2



                                                               0                                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                                                                                     .1

                                                                   -30          -25   -20     -15      -10    -5       0      5       10       15       20     25          30                                                                   -30          -25   -20     -15    -10      -5      0       5       10       15      20      25          30                                                                -30          -25   -20    -15     -10      -5      0       5          10    15      20      25          30
                                                                                        Establishment-Level Employment Growth (1994-95)                                                                                                                              Establishment-Level Employment Growth (1994-97)                                                                                                                           Establishment-Level Employment Growth (1994-98)

                                                                                      Former Treatment Group: Eligible, Old Cohorts in Treatment Regions                                                                                                           Former Treatment Group: Eligible, Old Cohorts in Treatment Regions                                                                                                        Former Treatment Group: Eligible, Old Cohorts in Treatment Regions
                                                                                      Former Control Group: Old Cohorts in Control Regions                                                                                                                         Former Control Group: Old Cohorts in Control Regions                                                                                                                      Former Control Group: Old Cohorts in Control Regions
                                                                                      Former Control Group: Young Cohort in Treatment Regions                                                                                                                      Former Control Group: Young Cohort in Treatment Regions                                                                                                                   Former Control Group: Young Cohort in Treatment Regions
                                                                                      Former Control Group: Young Cohorts in Control Regions                                                                                                                       Former Control Group: Young Cohorts in Control Regions                                                                                                                    Former Control Group: Young Cohorts in Control Regions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Birth Cohort-Specific Slopes
                                                                                       (g) Through 1995                                                                                                                                                             (h) Through 1997                                                                                                                                                           (i) Through 1998
                                                                       -.4                                                                                                                                                                          -.4                                                                                                                                                                       -.4
           Cohort-Specific Sensitivities of Separation Share




                                                                                                                                                                                        Cohort-Specific Sensitivities of Separation Share




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cohort-Specific Sensitivities of Separation Share
            to Negative Establishment Growth (1994-95)




                                                                                                                                                                                         to Negative Establishment Growth (1994-97)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to Negative Establishment Growth (1994-98)




                                                                       -.5                                                                                                                                                                          -.5                                                                                                                                                                       -.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Treatment Region
                 Among 1988-94 Program Survivors




                                                                                                                                                                                              Among 1988-94 Program Survivors




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Among 1988-94 Program Survivors




                                                                       -.6                                                                                                                                                                          -.6                                                                                                                                                                       -.6


                                                                       -.7                                                                                                                                                                          -.7                                                                                                                                                                       -.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Control Region
                                                                       -.8                                                                                                                                                                          -.8                                                                                                                                                                       -.8
                                                                                                    Control Region                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Control Region
                                                                       -.9                                                                                                                                                                          -.9                                                                                                                                                                       -.9


                                                                       -1                                                                                                                                                                           -1                                                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Treatment Region
                                                                   -1.1
                                                                                                    Treatment Region                                                                                                                            -1.1                                                                                                                                                                      -1.1


                                                                   -1.2                                                                                                                                                                         -1.2                                                                                                                                                                      -1.2
                                                                             1935      1937            1939          1941          1943          1945          1947                                                                                       1937           1939           1941            1943              1945             1947                                                                                     1938           1940             1942                 1944              1946               1948
                                                                                                                   Year of Birth                                                                                                                                                                Year of Birth                                                                                                                                                             Year of Birth




Note: This figure replicates Figure 9 Panels (a), (c) and (d) for the post-repeal separation horizons through 1995, 1997 and
1998.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         93
Figure A.8: No Evidence for Employer-Level Spillovers: Differences in Post-Repeal Sepa-
rations by Firm and Industry Exposure to REBP (Share of Program-Eligible (Old) Workers)
                 (a) Firm-Level Exposure to REBP                                                         (b) Industry-Level Exposure to REBP

                                                          New Additional                                                                            New Additional
  .2                                          C Group     Young Cohorts                     .2                                          C Group     Young Cohorts
                       T Group                (Main                                                              T Group                (Main
                       (Main Paper)                       to Test for Spillovers                                 (Main Paper)                       to Test for Spillovers
                                              Paper)                                                                                    Paper)




   0                                                                                         0




  -.2                                                                                       -.2
        1930                    1940                      1950                       1960         1930                    1940                      1950                       1960
                                          Year of Birth                                                                             Year of Birth

               Diff. in Separations after Q1-94, REBP vs. Control, Lowest Quartile                       Diff. in Separations after Q1-94, REBP vs. Control, Lowest Quartile
               Highest Quartile                                                                          Highest Quartile




Note: The figures extends Appendix Figure A.5 (d) by splitting the sample based on firm- or industry-level
of exposure to the treatment. Specifically, each line corresponds to the difference in post-repeal separation
rates (1994 to 1996) between the treated and control group. The solid blue line denotes firms or industries in
the lowest quartile of exposure to treatment; the dashed black line denotes the ones in the highest quartile
of exposure. Exposure at the firm or industry level is calculated as the share of workers in program-eligible
cohorts (1933-43) in the year before the reform (1987).




                                                                                       94
                                           Figure A.9: Separations by Wage Rigidity Measures (Other Horizons)

                                  More Rigid (1) By 1995        Less Rigid         More Rigid       (2) By 1997       Less Rigid         More Rigid       (3) By 1998       Less Rigid
                           .4                                                 .4                                                    .4
             (a) By SD of .2                                                  .2                                                    .2
              Log Wage      0                                                  0                                                     0
                          -.2                                                -.2                                                   -.2


                            .4                                               .4                                                    .4
             (b) By SD of   .2                                               .2                                                    .2
             Residuals of
              Log Wage       0                                                0                                                     0
                            -.2                                              -.2                                                   -.2



                             .4                                              .4                                                    .4

             (c) By SD of    .2                                              .2                                                    .2
             ∆ Log Wage      0                                                0                                                     0
                            -.2                                              -.2                                                   -.2
95




                             .4                                               .4                                                    .4
             (d) By SD of    .2                                               .2                                                    .2
             Residuals of
             ∆ Log Wage      0                                                 0                                                     0
                            -.2                                              -.2                                                   -.2
                                  1         2               3            4         1            2                 3            4         1            2                 3            4
                                                Quartiles                                             Quartiles                                             Quartiles



                    Control Mean: Separation Level During Policy Period                                  Initial Treatment DiD Effect on Separations During Policy Period
                                                                                                         Coasean Benchmark for Post-Repeal Separations DiD Effect
                    DiD Effect on Post-Repeal Separations: Data
                                                                                                         (Or Non-Coasean Benchmark with Worker Shocks Only)


     Note: The figure replicates Figure 10 for other post-repeal horizons.
Online Appendix References
Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber. 2007. “Cash-on-Hand and Competing Models
  of Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 122 (4):1511–1560.

Garibaldi, Pietro and Giovanni Violante. 2005. “The Employment Effects of Severance
 Payments with Wage Rigidities.” The Economic Journal 115 (506):799–832.

Hall, Robert and Paul Milgrom. 2008. “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the
 Wage Bargain.” American Economic Review 98 (4):1653–74.

Lazear, Edward. 1986. “Employment-at-Will, Job Security, and Work Incentives.” In
  Employment, Unemployment and Labor Utilization, edited by R. Hart. Unwin Hyman.

———. 1990. “Job Security Provisions and Employment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
 105 (3):699–726.

Li, Tong. 2002. “Robust and Consistent Estimation of Nonlinear Errors-in-Variables Mod-
  els.” Journal of Econometrics 110 (1):1–26.

Li, Tong and Quang Vuong. 1998. “Nonparametric Estimation of the Measurement Error
  Model Using Multiple Indicators.” Journal of Multivariate Analysis 65 (2):139–165.

MacLeod, Bentley and James Malcomson. 1993. “Investments, Holdup, and the Form of
 Market Contracts.” American Economic Review 83 (4):811–837.

Manoli, Day and Andrea Weber. 2016. “Nonparametric Evidence on the Effects of Finan-
 cial Incentives on Retirement Decisions.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
 8 (4):160–182.

OECD. 1990. Economic Surveys: Austria 1988/1989. OECD Publishing.

Schennach, Susanne. 2004. “Estimation of Nonlinear Models with Measurement Error.”
  Econometrica 72 (1):33–75.

Schennach, Susanne M. 2012. “Measurement Error in Nonlinear Models: A Review.” In
  Advances in Economics and Econometrics, vol. 3, chap. 8. Econometric Society.

Zweimüller, Josef, Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, Rafael Lalive, Andreas Kuhn, Jean-Philippe
 Wuellrich, Oliver Ruf, and Simon Buchi. 2009. “Austrian Social Security Database.”
 Austrian Center for Labor Economics and the Analysis of the Welfare State Working Paper No.
 0903.

                                            96
