                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE CONTRIBUTION OF A MONETARY HISTORY
                      OF THE UNITED STATES: 1867 TO 1960
                              TO MONETARY HISTORY




                                Michael 0. Bordo




                             Working Paper No. 2549




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1988



A paper prepared for an NBER Conference Money in Historical Perspective, held
in honor of Anna 1. Schwartz, Mew York City, October 6, 1987. The research reported
here is part of the NBERs research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2549
                                                April 1988




                      The Contribution of A Monetary History
                        of the United States; 1867 to 1960
                               to Monetary History




                                     ABSTRACT




        Thispaper assesses the role of Friedman and Schwartz's A Monetary
           the United Slates: 1867 to 1960 as a progenitor of research in
monetary history. The paper critically surveys the literature on three major
themes in the book: monetary disturbances; the domestic monetary framework
and monetary policy: and monetary standards.
      The book's unique portrayal of the historical circumstances of monetary
disturbances and of alternative institutional arrangements serves as the closest
thing to a laboratory experiment for the monetary economist. Historical study
has become an important tool of modern macroeconomic research.




Michael D. Bordo
Graduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
     The Contribution of            History of the United Slates: 1867-1960
                           A Monetary
                              to Monetary History
        The long—awaited monetary history of the United States by Friedman and
Schwartz is in every sense of the term a monumental scholarly accomphshnient
    the volume sets,.., a new standard for the writing of monetary history, one
that requires the explanation of historical developments in terms of monetary
theory and Ihe application of them to the techniques of quantitative Economic
analysis     One can safely predict that it will be the classic reference on its
subject  for many years to come." (H.C. Johnson 1965, p. 388).

     "The hook is clearly destined to become a classic, perhaps one of the few
emerging in that role rather than growing into it." (A. Meltzer, 1965, p. 404).

       'The transcendent virtue of the History is its unerring vision in seeking
out important problems and its clear delineation of areas needing further
research.     The book offers an almost inexhaustible supply of worthwhile
conjectures. I have no doubt that it, ..., will be the focus of a major share of
scholarly research on money and income during the coming decade. For this, if
for no other reason, the book must be counted a monumental contribution to
positivE' economics.' CR, W. dower, 1961, p. 380).

      "This is one of those rare books that leave their mark on all future
rcsearch on the subject.' (3. Tobin, 1965, p. 485).
1.    INTRODUCTION

       Four eminent scholars from different schools of thought all believed o. cc
twenty years ago that A Monetary History of the United States: 1867-1960, by
Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz, published in 1963, was destined to be a
classic. Their judgment was sound.
       Table I presents a chronological breakdown of citations to the book in the
professional journals. The citation analysis is based on two sources; the Social
Science Citation Index which covers the period 1969 to 1987; a sample of 10
leading journals in monetary economics and economic history from 1964 to 1987.
The second sample is included in the SSCI, but separating it out has value
because it covers the entire period since the book was published and because it
allows us to examine the incidence of citations in journals from different lields.
      As   can clearly be seen from the table, the oumbor of citations has been
iocreasing, although irregularly, since 1965. This is clearly the hallmark of a
classic since the citation rats for most articles and books in science generally
peaks within three years and then gradually tapers off.2
       Also of interest is the pattern of citations revealed by an examination of
the articles in the sample of 10 journals In the first 10 years aftsr publication,
the majority of articles citing    ogtar      Her   wore in monetary economics, of
which a considerable number concentrated on issues raised by the debate
between modern quantity theorists and Keynesians, By contrast, in the last
decade, the mojority of articles, even those in mainstream economics journals,
have concentrated on the interpretation of historical episodes in A Monstasx
ffjgo. This recent interest in monetary history is the focus of this paper.
       LJ4onstxilhIsiiirx is a treatise both in economics and in economic: history.
In the former role, the book uses history to expound the modern quantity theory
of money. In its latter role, the book reinterprets U.S. monetary history in
 terms of the relationship between the quantity of money and the rest of the
economy.      The former treatment represents a major component of modern
 quantity theory research of the 1950's, GO's, and 70's; the latter treatment has in
itself led to a revolution in monetary history as economic historians and
 economists expand upon and criticize Friedman and Schwartz's trestment of
 diverse episodes of U.S. monetary history. This paper focuses on the second
 legacy of A MonetaçjHstory — its role as a progenitor of research in monetary
 history. Specifically the paper surveys the Iitsrature on three major themes in
 A Monetary History: monetary disturbances (Section 3); the domestic monetary
 framework and monetary policy (Section 4); monetary standards (Section 5).
       As bsckground to the survey in Section 2, 1 briefly summarize the
 contribution of the book to modern quantity theory research and provide a brief
 overview of its interpretation of U.S. monetsry history. Finally the paper
 concludes with an evaluation of A Monetary History's contribution to monetary
 history.
2.    BACHGBOUND
      2.1  A Monetary History and the Modern Quantity Theory
      In the 1950's, Milton Friedman and Anns Schwartz began their collaboration
on the NBFII's highly accisimed money and business cycles project.               This
collsborstion, over  a  period   of thirty  years,   resulted in three  volumes    (A

Monetary History of  the United  Statea 1867—1960  (l963a), Monetsry Statistics of

                                          2
                                                        TABLE        1


 Citations   to A MonetaryHistory of the United Stat.z                            1867-1960"

 a)

 Year

 1964
        10 Major

             JPE
                    Journals 1964_1986;1
                       A!R

                           1
                               JMV   JNCB      RESTAT            J
                                              b) Social Science Citation Index 1969-1986



                                                                     1
                                                                          EEH      JF

                                                                                       1
                                                                                           EJ      QJE     TOTAL

                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                     SSCI



 1965           3          2                                                                   1                 0
 1966           4          1                        1                                  2                         8
 1967           4          2                                                           1                         7

 1968           6                                                                                                6
 1969           3       2                 3                       1           1                              10        13
 1970           2          1              1                                            1               1         6     19
 1971        2                        4.                         3        1            1                     11        14
 1972        2          2             5                          1        1         3                        14        13
 1973        1          1             1                          4                  2                            9     10
1974                    2             1                          1        1         1              1             7    20
1975         1          2             3                          1        1                2                 10       19
1976         3         2        3     1                          3                  1                       13        33
1977                    1       1     4                          2        1        1                        10        33
1978                   1        3     3         1                1        2        2                        13.30
1979                            4     1         1                                          1                7   9
1980         1         2        1     3                          2        1                                 10        28
1981                                  3                     '3            1                1                 S        40
1982         2                  4     3                          2        1                                 12        30
1983         2         2        4                                1        3        1                        13        38
1984         3         3        1     1                          6                                          1.        35
1985         3         2        4     3                          3       4                 1                20        35
1986         3         1        2     3                                  2         1                        12        47

Total      45         30       29    43         3           35           20       18       &       2       229       478




                                                        a
                                                I
*   J
**JMCB
      began publication in
                              Notes to 'Table
                          1975.
      began publication in 1969
 The journals are:    Journal of Political Economy (JPE); American Economic
 Review (AER); Journal of Monetary Economics (JME); Journal of Money, Credit
 and Ranking (JMCB); Review of Economics and Statistics (RECSTAT); Journal of
 Economic History (JEH); Explorations in Economic History (EEH); Journal of
 Finance (JF); Economic Journal (EJ); Quarterly Journal of Economics (QJE).
 the United States (1970), Monetary Trends in the United States and the United
 Kingdom, 1875—1975, (1982)), in addition to Phillip Cagan's Determinants and
 Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money, 1875—1960 (1965), several journal
articles including 'Money and Business Cycles" (1963b).
       The theoretical background of the project is the modern quantity theory
of money (Friedman, 1956). Based on the interaction of a stable demand for
money with an independently determined money supply, the key proposition of
the modern quantity theory is that a change in the rate of growth of money will
produce a corresponding but lagged change in the rate of growth of nominal
income. In the short run changes in money growth lead to changes in real
output. In the long run, monetary change will be fully reflected in changes in
the price level.
       Long—run historical evidence for the modern quantity theory of money is
provided in A Monetary History of the United States: 1867—1960, short—run
cyclical evidence in "Money and Business Cycles" and long run econometric
evidence in Monetary Trends.
       A Monetary History of the United States 1867—1960 (1963a) is a study of
the quantity of money and its influence on economic activity in the U.S. economy
over nearly a one—hundred—year span, marked by drastic changes in monetary
arrangements and in the structure of the economy.
       The principal finding is that changes in the behavior of money are closely
associated with the rate of change of nominal income, real income and the price
level. Secularly a close relationship between the growth of money and nominal
income, independent of the growth of real income is found. Cyclically a close
relationship is isolated between the rate of change of money and of subsequent
changes in nominal income.
       The authors also find a number of remarkably stable relationships between
money and other economic variables. These include: (a) that velocity exhibits a
steady secular decline of a little over one percent per annum until after World
War II; (b) that the relationship between U.S. prices and prices in other
countries, adjusted for the exchange rate, changed little over the period,
evidence of the strength of the purchasing—power-paritytheory.
       However, of most interest are the findings from history that the money—
income relationship is invariant to changes in monetary arrangements and
banking structure. These changes are captured in the arithmetic of the
proximate determinants of the money supply. Over the long run, high—powered


                                       5
      2.2    Overview of Friedman and Schwartz's Interpretation of U.S. Monetary
             l867—1960
        As  a backdrop to the literature survey to follow, we briefly sketch some
of the salient points of the authors' reinterpretation of the monetary history of
the United States from shortly after the Civil War to after World War II.
      The book begins in 1867 during the greenback episode that ended on
January 1, 1879. During that period, when the U.S. was on a flexible exchange
rate with the rest of the gold standard world, the principal concern was to
resume specie payments at the previous parity.           Friedman and Schwartz
demonstrate, based on earlier work by Kindahi (1961) that, despite active public
debate over the pace and methods to achieve the required deflation, resumption
was achieved by the economy growing up to a constant money stock rather than
as a consequence of any explicit government policies.
       The succeeding seventeen years, after the U.S. successfully returned to
gold, were  characterized by deflation, monetary instability, and political agitation
over the monetary standard. The advocates of silver wanted injections of silver
to offset the ravages of the worldwide gold deflation. Instead of inflation,
Friedman and Schwartz demonstrate, the silver movement produced more deflation
than would otherwise have been the case, as capital and gold fled the U.S. in
fear of its abandonment of the gold standard. Fear of deflation and silver
agitation diminished, once new gold supplies from South Africa and Alaska
swelled the world monetary gold stock. The gold discoveries, the authors argue,
were no accident but under a commodity standard were induced with long lags
by secular deflation.
       The national banking system from 1863 to 1914 was characterized by
periodic banking panics. The panics of 1893 and especially 1907 precipitated a
movement for banking reform — to establish an agency to satisfy the public's
demand for high—powered money in times of distrust of bank solvency. Friedman
and Schwartz argue that the Aldrich Vreeland Act of 1908, which was successful
in preventing a panic in 1914, and the occasional resort by clearing houses tc
restrictions of convertibility of deposits into currency under the National
Banking System, proved superior to the actions of the agency designed tc
prevent panics — the Federal Reserve System established in 1914. It failed to
act as a lender of last resort, Had the clearing houses during the panics of thE
early 1930's restricted convertibility, as they would have done in the absence ol



                                          8
 the Fed, the massive bank failures and monetary collapse of 1929-33 would have
  been averted.
         The newly established Fed, after a serious blunder in 1920—21, when it
  delayed too long to stem the post-World War I commodity price boom and then
  raised the discount rate too sharply, subsequently developed the tools to
  provide monetary stability in the 1920's. The authors argue that had the
 architect of Fed policy in the 1920's, Benjamin Strong, lived beyond 1928 the
  disaster of 1929—33 would have been avoided. They attribute to a vacuum of
 leadership after Strong's death, the failure of the Fed to curtail the banking
 panics and its passive acceptance of a one—third decline in the money supply.
 Power shifted from the New York Federal Reserve Bank,     n   agency tuned to the
 needs of the money market and adept at the operation of policy, to the Board
 and the other reserve banks, neither of which had the experience or
 understanding of monetary policy required to deal with the crisis.
        The New Deal introduced legislation which radically altered monetary
 arrangements in the U.S.       Of key importance, according to Friedman and
 Schwartz,  was  the adoption federal deposit insurance in 1934. By eliminating at
 the outset, loss of confidence by the public in convertibility of its deposits into
currency, it solved the problem of banking panics, which the Fed had failed to
 prevent.
        In addition, prohibition of private gold holdings, the gold purchase
program, and revaluation of the price of gold, converted the U.S. from the gold
exchange standard to a managed fiduciary standard with gold relegated to the
status of a price—supported commodity. Legislation allowing the Fed to alter
reserve requirements led to a disastrous monetary contraction in 1937—38 after
the Fed doubled reserve requirements in a mistaken attempt to soak up excess
reserves to restrict future credit expansion. According to Friedman and
Schwartz, the banks held reserves in excess of requirements because their
demand for liquidity had increased given their traumatic experience of the
panics of the early 1930's. The increase in required reserves just locked up
their precautionary balances, forcing the banks to reduce earning assets to
restore their reserve holdings to the desired level.
       During the next two decades, monetary policy was subordinated to fiscal
policy and the Fed played a role subservient to the Treasury. This passive
policy cu1minated in the bond—price—support program of World War II. By
pegging the interest rate on short term treasury bills at 3/8 and pledging to


                                        9
maintain the rate on long—term securities at 2 1/2%, the Fed was converted into
an engine of inflation" providing whatever high—powered money was required to
maintain the fixed pattern of interest rates.
     The threat of renewed inflation during the Korean War led to the Accord
of March 1951 and the restoration of monetary independence to the Fed, The
remaining years of the study according to the authors were characterized by
remarkable monetary stability — a stability which in hindsight was quite unique.
3.   MON IiTARY DISTURBAi4CES
     The   94—year  span covered by A Monetary History was characterized by a
wide variety of monetary disturbances.       Of the 24 NHER designated cyclical
downturns,   6  are  designated severe,  each  of which Friedman and Schwartz
document was preceded by a sharp downturn in the money supply. Two of the
monetary contractions were the result of monetary policy actions — 1919—21 and
1937—38 and the others including the Great Contraction of 1929—33 were marked

by banking panics. In addition to monetary disturbances that produced declines
in economic activity, the book documents one period of sustained inflation —
1897—1914 — a consequence of the gold discoveries, and two world war periods
of fiat—induced inflation.3
       A key theme in A Monetary History and the subsequent literature is the
role of monetary institutions and monetary policy in producing monetary and
economic contraction. In consequence, the survey of the literature on monetary
disturbances focuses on two issues: banking panics and the Great Contraction.
       3.1    Banking Panics
       3.1.1 Banking Panics and Monetary Instability
       Friedman and Schwartz devote considerable attention to the role of
banking panics in producing monetary and economic instability in the United
States.
       Bernanke (1983), contrary to Friedman and Schwartz, argued that banking
panics have direct effects on economic activity over and above their effects on
the money supply. To the extent that banking panics produce losses in the
financial sector of the economy, the cost of financial intermediation is increased
and the efficiency of resource allocation reduced.
       Bernanke tested his hypothesis that the banking panics of 1930—33
increased the cost of financial intermediation, reducing output over and above
the effects due to monetary contraction, by incorporating several measures of
that cost — real deposits of failing banks, liabilities of failing banks, and the
spread between the Baa and the Treasury bond rate — into a Barro—Lucas type
regression equation (which explains changes in output by unexpected money
growth, unexpected changes in the price level, and lagged output). The
statistically significant results that he obtained for the equation lend support to
his hypothesis.
        However, according to Vaubel (1984), Bernanke's results may imply that
bank failures led to a risk—induced rise in the demand for money or else were
associated with an anticipated decline in output,         If the cost of financial
intermediation reduced income, it could only have done so because the monetary
authorities allowed a large risk premium to develop. The risk premium was not
the inevitable consequence of bank failures but rather reflected the public's
uncertainty about how the authorities would react.
        Brunner and Meltzer (1988) do not accept Bernanke's treatment of the
debt crisis as a separate and independent exogenous shock. They view the debt
crisis as an induced response to the major deflation of asset and output price
levels consequent upon the failure of the Fed to act as a lender of last resort,
in a system with many holders of nominally fixed debt. Major shocks to the
banking system affect both the money supply and bank credit multipliers
simultaneously.
        Bernanke's interpretation of his results, moreover, suggests that financial
intermediation skills were irretrievably lost as a result of bank failures. Those
skills, however, continued to be available once the banking situation stabilized.
        Also contrary to Friedman and Schwartz on the role of banking panics in
producing monetary and real contraction, Delong and Summers (1985) provide
evidence that removing panics and the quarters immediately surrounding them
from the data reduces the variance of income 1896—1914 by only 20% as against a
40% reduction in the variance of monetary growth. They therefore conclude that
monetary shocks are an inadequate explanation of shocks to real output.
According to them, severe economic contractions before World War II were
produced by deflationary real shocks that raised the real interest rate in the
face of sticky nominal rates.4 Such an interpretation however, is inconsistent
with evidence of a high degree of international capital mobility during this
period.5 High real interest rates should have attracted capital inflows that
would halt severe economic contractions.




                                        11
         3.1.2   jpnalExectations
      in recent work by Garber (1981), Gerber and Flood (1982), and Blanchard
and Watson (1982) bank panics are viewed as rational — based on the rational
expectations hypothesis that rational agents will not systematically make forecast
errors.
         Bank panics    are the contagious effects of "runs." According to Garber
(1981)
         "a run is defined as a speculative attack on an asset price fixing
         scheme which causes a discontinuous asset shift in private agents
         portfolios. The run occurs because of agents' beliefs that the nature
         of the price fixing regime will change, thereby causing a discontinuous
         shift in asset rates of return."
      in the case of a bank run, the price under attack is the price of deposits
fixed in terms of currency. In a world of perfect foresight, the required asset
exchange will be carefully arranged in an orderly manner far in advance of the
event, as, for example, in the case of a run on a banking system insured by a
central bank as lender of last resort. In that case the run will end through the
sudden acquisition of bank assets by the central bank.
      A "panic" characterizes a run whose timing was not perfectly foreseen. In
auch a case there may be discontinuous shifts in asset prices and unanticipated
capital gains or losses on some assets.
      According to Diamond and Dybvig (1982), in a world of asymmetric
information, banks are able to transform illiquid financial assets into liquid ones
by offering liabilities with a different, smoother pattern of returns over time.
Banks provide efficient risk sharing which the private market cannot provide.
However, the illiquidity of bank assets also subjects banks to the vulnerability
of runs. A run can be triggered by any random event because rational
depositors not wishing to be last in line will rush to convert deposits into
currency.
                    developed a model in the Diamond and Dybvig mold which
         Waldo (1985)
explains two empirical regularities associated with banking runs observed by
Friedman and Schwartz: a rise in short—term interest rates and a fall in the
deposit—currency ratio in anticipation of a possible run. The rise in short—term
interest rates occurs because banks attempt to meet withdrawals by selling
long—term securities before maturity.      Yields on short—term assets rise in
concert. The fall in the deposit—currencyratio in anticipation of a possible run

                                           12
occurs because, in the event of a run, the banks' losses on the premature sale
 of their long—term securities eventually force them to default on some of their
 deposits. Savers shift from deposits to currency in anticipation of possible runs
 to partially protect themselves against this risk.
       Smith (1987) also constructed a model of nationwide banking panics in the
 Diamond-Dybvig vein, which captures many features of the National Banking
 System.     Key features of the model are the assumptions of:      geographically
 dispersed unit banking: nationwide linkages of unit banks through the inverted
pyramid of reserves held in reserve city and central reserve city banks; and
interest payments on deposits and loans not state contingent.
       Based on these assumptions, Smith demonstrated how exogenous shocks
that caused unit banks to withdraw interbank deposits could produce panics.
According to Smith, the key reason for a nationwide panic was the holding of
 bankers balances with a central reserve agent. The absence of this feature, he
argued, explains why nationwide banking panics didn't occur in the free banking
era. Moreover, following Friedman and Schwartz, Smith argued that the added
severity of the panics of 1930—33 can be explained by the existence of the Fed.
 Banks did not consider suspending convertibility of deposits into currency as
they had done under the National Banking era.
       Smith's interpretation of history differs from the record in two important
respects: there were paniC8 in 1819, 1837, 1839, 1847, and 1857 and interbank
balances were a feature of the pro Civil War banking system; his model implies
that nationwide branch banking systems will not be subject to panics, the
experience of Austria, Germany and other central European countries in 1931 to
the contrary.
       In a slightly different vein but on rational expectations lines, Gorton
(1984b) argued that banking panics are not unique events, as argued by
Friedman and Schwartz, but represent a rational response by depositors who
wish to smooth their consumption flows over time. Rational depositors plan to
dissave in periods of expected low consumption such as at business cycle
troughs. The likelihood of suspensions of convertibility also would be highest in
mid contraction, so depositors will rush to convert their deposits to currency
when they expect a trough to occur.
       To provide evidence that rational depositors will increase the currency—
deposit ratio (precipitate a banking panic) when they expect a business cycle
trough to occur, Gorton (1984b) regressed the currency—depositratio during the


                                       13
 national banking era (1873—1914) on measures of the expected return on deposits,
 the variance of that return, and a variable acting as a signal of the covariance
of consumption and capital losses on deposits — the unexpected shock component
 of failed business liabilities. His finding of a significant and positive coefficient
 on the failed liabilities variable was consistent with his hypothesis Moreover,
findings that panics coincided with dates of the largest values of the shocks in
 the liabilities of failed businesses, and that the shocks came after business cycle
peaks and before troughs in all panics except 1895, led him to conclude that the
 failed business liability shock was a cause of panics. Friedman and Schwartz's
hypothesis was that panics were due to unanticipated failures of financial
institutions, often holding assets of failed nonfinancial firms.
        A problem with Gorton's approach is that if depositors could predict a
 panic, should there have been panics? If depositors could predict panics, why
couldn't banks, equally vulnerable during panics predict them? In addition,
panics did not necessarily occur in all situations that were otherwise equivalent.
In some, predictable signals to market participants of institutional readiness to
provide additional funds promptly nipped an incipient panic in the bud, as in
1884, (Schwartz, 1986). In others, no such signals were forthcoming and panic
erupted. Finally, Gorton's approach implies that a panic may be optimal for
private arrangements but it will not necessarily be socially optimal.
        3.1.3 Restrictions of Convertibility
        Friedman and Schwartz, p. 698 and elsewhere, argue that restrictions of
convertibility of deposits into currency by the banking system during the
national banking era had therapeutic effects in alleviating a banking panic and
facilitating speedy recovery. Had such an option been available to the banks in
the early 1930's, the banking panics would have ended before producing the
maFsive fall in the money supply.
        Dewald (1972) disputed Friedman and Schwartz's interpretation, instead
following Sprague (1910), who opposed restriction because of the high costs
imposed on the payments system. According to Dewald, the New York banks
could have reduced their reserves to handle withdrawals in emergencies such as
the panics of 1893 and 1907 even if it meant violating reserve requirements.
Furthermore, he alleged that Friedman and Schwartz's advocacy of restriction in
1907 and suspension during the Great Contraction in 1930 rather than 1933
contradicts their approval on page 698 of the issue in 1914 of emergency
currency under the Aldrich Vreeland Act.


                                         14
      In reply, Schwartz (1972> doubted that the New York banks would have
been willing to run their reserves below the legal limit without a change in the
law. Moreover, even if the New York banks had been willing to run deficits,
what mattered was their own preference for liquidity in a panic. For Friedman
and Schwartz (1963) suspension was a second best solution if no institutions
existed to increase high—powered money.' In 1914, Aldrich Vreeland currency
was available. In the 1930's, the Fed could have created high—powered money
but didn't do so; therefore early restriction was preferable to deflation.
       According to Gorton (1985b), in a world of rational expectations but limited
information, restriction of convertibility represented an optimal arrangement
between banks and customers to ailay an incipient panic.                With limited
information bank customers monitor a noisy signal of banks' investments, e.g.,
the failures of important nonfinancial firms or the liabilities of failed companies.
A panic is then a rational response to movements in this indicator because
depositors fear capital losses on their deposits. Restriction is a way in which
banks indicate to customers that their investments are sound.
       3,1.4 Clearinghouses
       Friedman and Schwartz (Chapters 3 and 4) discussed the private market
lender of last resort role of the New York Clearing House and other clearing
house associations in issuing clearing house loan certificates during panics.
Timberlake (1984) and Gorton (1984a) described how the New York Clearing House
evolved ways to restore confidence in bank deposits during financial crises.
Issuance of clearing house loan certificates in 1873, based on the discounted
collateral of member banks' earning assets, released the greenbacks that
otherwise would have been tied up in inlerbank settlements to satisfy depositors'
demands. Later in the crises of 1893 and 1907 clearing house currency was
issued in exchange for loan certificates.        The system provided depositors
insurance that individual   bank  failures would not impose a liquidity squeeze on
other banks.
       For Gorton (1985a) the development of the clearing house on the lines of
Coase (1937> was a response to the idiosyncratic/agent specific nature of demand
deposits. Unliko bank notes, these instruments do not possess the information
 qualities requisite to developing a market. During a panic, according to Gorton,
the clearing house association by quickly organizing all member banks into one
firm, established a coinsurance scheme that made it difficult for the public to
focus on the weakness of an individual member. The clearing house could also


                                         15
allay the panic by issuing loan certificates which acted as a close substitute for
high-powered money.
       In sum, Friedman and Schwartz's treatment of banking panics has spawned
interesting theoretical research. A key integrating element in these papers is
the assumption of asymmetric information — an assumption implicit in Friedman
and Schwartz's treatment. A second element is the importance of real world
institutional features — the absence of a lender of last resort, unit banking, the
inverted pyramid of credit and restrictions on the interest that banks can pay
on deposits and charge on loans — all features stressed in
The third element that emerges from this approach is the asserted predictability
of panics in sharp contrast to Friedman and Schwartz's view of them as unique
events.
       3.2 The Great Contraction 1929—33
       The Great Contraction of 1929—33, characterized by a one—third decline in
the stock of money, prices and output, was the most severe and prolonged
contraction in U.S. history.     It quickly became worldwide in scope. For
Friedman and Schwartz (Chapter 7) monetary forces were paramount in
explaining it, The key ingredient of the monetary collapse was a series of
banking crises which led to the closing of one—third of the nation's banks. In
terms of the proximate determinants of the money supply, the decline in M was
produced by declines in the deposit—currency and deposit—reserveratios.
       Friedman and Schwartz highlighted several episodes during 1929-33:
       a) The stock market crash of October 1929 and the year succeeding it.
Concern with stock market speculation combined with a conflict between the New
York Fed and the Federal Reserve Board (see Section 4 below) had led to a rise
in the discount rate in 1928, too little to stem speculation, but sufficient to
reduce money growth below trend and induce deflation. The resultant sharp
decline in output from October 1929 to September 1930 marked the contraction as
a severe one.
       b) The first banking crisis from October 1930 to March 1931. A series of
bank failures in the south and midwest led to an attempt by the public to
convert their deposits into currency. This attempted conversion produced "a
contagion of fear" that spread through the correspondent banking system to the
whole country culminating in the collapse of the Bank of United States in
December 1930.



                                       16
       c) The second banking crisis March 1931 to June 1931. This crisis was
similar to the first banking crisis but, because of the weakened capital structure
of the banks, the effects were more severe.
       d) Britain's departure from the gold standard in September 1931. An
 external drain, to which the Fed reacted by raising the discount rate, ignored
Bagehot's rule to lend freely but at a penalty rate — thereby exacerbatingthe
 internal drain.
       e) Under congressional pressure the $1 billion open market purchase the
 Fed conducted from April to June 1932. The policy succeeded in offsetting the
effects of the fall in the money supply but was short—lived.
       f) The Banking Holiday of March 1933. The cumulation of previous
banking panics weakened the banking system. Internal drains plus rumors of
departure from the gold standard for the first time led to a domestic demand for
gold combined with an external drain, precipitating the nationwide banking
holiday.
       According to Friedman and Schwartz, the banking holiday was much worse
than restriction of payments under the National Banking System. Then only
some types of payments — those involving the conversion of deposits into
currency, were restricted. In the banking holiday, all payments were restricted,
throwing the economy into paralysis.
       The survey that follows examines the literature on the Great Contraction
that A Monetary History stimulated. That literature includes new interpretations
of the origins of the contraction: Peter Temin's (1976) critique of the monetary
approach and the subsequent debate, a reiteration of the position taken in A
Monetary History by Schwartz (1981), a reinterpretation of the banking holiday
of 1933, and recent studies of the recovery.
       3.2.1 Origins of the Great Contraction
       Hamilton (1987a) provided evidence consistent with Friedman and Schwartz
that the contraction started with tight monetary policy beginning in 1928. He
stressed two factors: policy to stem stock market speculation and a gold drain
in 1929 to France after she returned to the gold standard at a parity that
undervalued the franc.
       According to Meltzer (1976), expansionary monetary policy 1927—28 raised
U.S. prices relative to those of other gold standard countries (i.e., prices here
declined less than in other gold standard countries). This produced a current
account deficit, a gold outflow, and a decline in the money supply in 1928-29.


                                       17
       Field (1984a( contended that the increase in the volume of asset exchanges
associated with specuiation in the stock market markedly raised the transactions
demand for money in the 1920's. Using monthly data over the period 1919—29, he
found that the level of trading on the New York Stock Exchange, holding
constant income and interest rates, had significant effects on the demand for
narrow money (currency plus demand deposits). A dynamic simulation of the
model showed an upward shift of 17 percent in demand deposits in New York
City due to asset exchanges. Had the Fed been aware of the effects of this
upward shift in the demand for money in raising interest rates, according to
Field, it would not have engaged in as contractionary a policy to offset the
pecu1ative boom as it did, Because it ignored the effects of stock exchange
transactions on the demand for money the Fed tolerated high interest rates, with
devastating effects on the construction and automobile industries.           Both
industries turned   down  before the  stock  market crash, precipitating the Great
Depression, (Field, 1984b).
      3.2.2 The Temin Debate
      In A Monetary History of the United States, Friedman and Schwartz
attributed the massive decline in prices and real output in the U.S. 1929—33 to
an unprecedented decline in the quantity of money. The fall in the money
stock, attributable to a shift to currency from deposits, was largely caused by
bank failures in 1930—31 and 1933. Ternin (1976), however, countered that the
bank failures could not have caused the fall in the quantity of money since
there was no evidence of a rise in short—term interest rates 1929—31 (short—term
rates fell). In his view, a fall in income produced by a decline in autonomous
consumption expenditures led to a fall in the demand for money, which inter-
acting with an interest—elastic money supply function, produced the fall in the
money stock and in short-term interest rates.
      Against Friedman and Schwartz's money hypothesis, Temin propounded
first reverse causality. Because changes in the money supply affect interest
rates and income but money demand is also determined by interest rates and
income, it is possible that nonmonetary forces that reduced the level of income
could have reduced the demand for money, in turn causing a fall in the money
supply.
      Three sources provide evidence for the money hypothesis: Anderson and
Butkiewicz (1980), Schwartz (1981), and Evans (1985). Estimates of a structural
model for 1921—33, showed bank failures had a greater effect on money supply


                                        18
 (via their influence on the currency—deposit ratio) than on money demand
 (Anderson and Butkiewjcz).     Moreover, bank failures were explained not by
 income but by lagged bank failures (suggesting the Fed might have been at
 fault). Money Granger causes income but not the reverse based on monthly
 data 1919—39 (Schwartz).     According to estimated vector autoregressions also
 using monthly data demand deposits during the Great Depression were not
 related to past output, prices, and interest rates (determinants of money
 demand), but were related to bank reserves and a proxy for the marginal cost of
funds (determinants of money supply) (Evans).
        Two sources provide evidence for significant contemporaneous feedback
from income to money and a passive money supply: Gordon and Wilcox (1981)
and Boughton and Wicker (1979). According to Gordon and Wilcox, who used
 both quarterly and monthly data 1920—41, lagged money significantly caused
 income (GNP), legged income had no effect on money, but the correlation between
money and income was significant contemporaneously."°
        Evidence against Friedman and Schwartz's view that bank failures ware a
 key  cause of the unprecedented rise in the deposit currency ratio was that they
accounted for only about a third of the 1930—33 rise (Boughton and Wicker (1979)
in a regression using quarterly data 1921—36). Moreover, the substantial fraction
of the variation in the currency—depositratio due to interest rates and income
suggested to these critics that there must have been important feedback from
income to moxiey.'
        Temin's second argument against the money hypothesis was that bank
failures in 1930 could not have been the precipitating cause of the Great
Depression because they in turn were caused by a previous decline in economic
activity. First, contrary to Friedman and Schwartz, who attributed the initial
bank failures in U.S. agricultural regions to poor loans and investments in the
1920's, Temin concluded, based on a regression explaining bank failures across
states for the years 1929, 1930, and 1931, that previous bank suspensions were
not significant whereas a measure of agricultural income (cotton income) was.
Thus, according to Temin, a depression—induced decline in agricultural income
was a key cause of bank failures, not previous bad loans.
        Temin's view was not sustained by Wicker (1980), who demonstrated
forcefully that the banking panic in the autumn of 1930 was triggered by the
collapse of Caidwell and Company in Nashville, attributable to its 'weak and
precarious financial state on the eve of the depression" and not to the decline


                                       19
in agricultural income. The collapse of CaIdwelI quickly led to the suspension of
numerous Caidwell—related banks across the South. According to Wicker, the
collapse of the Caidwell financial empire represented an autonomous disturbance
to the currency—depositratio as postulated by Friedman and Schwartz which in
turn contributed to the spread of confusion and fear that produced the panic of
October 1930 to March l93l.1
       Temin's view that the 1930 bank failures were not explained by previous
bank failures was also not sustained. Significance tests by Stauffer (1981)
showed that the trend of state bank failure rates 1928—29 did carry aver into
1930. Moreover, for twelve states where cotton production was important, rank
correlations between measures of bank failures, farm income, and measures of
weakness of the banking system, suggested that the banking structure of the
rural states rather than income was the key determinant of bank failures.
       Finally, micro data on national banks, assembled by White (1984), explained
the bank failures of 1927, 1928, 1929, 1930 by the structure of the banking
system. The results of a logit model showed that the increase in the number of
bank failures didn't represent a radical departure from the 1920's. In the
1920's, many rural banks carried assets whose expected future value had
declined. The coincidence of tight money and the weakening of asset positions
due to deteriorating conditions in agriculture led to the failure of many small
unit banks in sparsely populated rural areas — a result consistent with both
Temin's and Friedman and Schwartz's positions. However, the key cause of bank
weakness, according to White, was the prohibition of branch banking in most of
these states. The case of Canada which experienced a similar decline in
agricultural income but had nationwide branch banking and no bank failures
makes the point.
       Temin also argued that the value of banks' portfolios reflected a
depression—induced increase in the riskiness of bonds (measured by the
differential between the Baa and Aaa corporate bond yields for a fixed sample of
bonds). Mayer's (1978a) criticism of this point was that, although the yield on
high grade bonds did not increase significantly between July and December 1930,
it was unlikely that banks held many risky Baa bonds on which yields did
increase by one percentage point. In sympathy with Temin, White (1984) found
that the portfolios of state banks in Vermont were susceptible to a decline in
value. Those banks held only small portions of U.S. government securities.



                                        20
       Temin was further challenged for holding that the money multiplier was
sufficien.tly interest—elastic that it would have fallen in response to a fall in
money demand. Mayer (1978a) found little evidence of response of the deposit—
reserve ratio to a fall in interest rates and only moderate evidence of a
response by the deposit—currency ratio, for semi—annual periods of low interest
rates 1913—1930, confirming Cagan's (1965) earlier evidence of interest inelasticity
of the money multiplier.'3    Second, Mayer argued that, as declining income
reduced the demand    for money, this would create an excess supply of money
which would have the effect, after some lag, of raising income and hence money
demand.'
      Temin's third argument against the money hypothesis was that the short—
term commercial paper rate which declined in 1930, should have risen. The rise
in other interest rates, he explained, by an increase in risk rather than a
scramble for liquidity. In his view, the fall in nominal interest rates could not
be masking a deflation—expectation—induced rise in ex ante real rates because
contemporary evidence suggests that expectations were sanguine until mid-'
1931.'
      Schwartz (1981) criticized Temin's (and other Keynesians') use of short—
term interest rates as a measure of the price of money. She showed that
monthly data for the inverse of the price level — a true measure of the price of
money according to monetarists — over the interwar period mirrored all
monetary events. She attributed the decline in the short—term commercial paper
rate in the face of bank panics to increased demand by banks for commercial
paper as collateral for borrowing to meet their need for reserves. However, for
Mayer (1978a) the evidence was unclear, even though the decline in short—term
rates likely reflected a shift into short—term securities for liquidity motives,
outweighing a shift from short-term securities to money. He concluded that the
monetary explanation was vulnerable on this issue.
      Gandolfi and Lothian (1979) found Temin's use of interest rates misleading
because of their procyclical pattern that tended to mask the liquidity effect of
monetary change. Moreover, they argued that the twelve percent decline of the
wholesale price index that occurred between August 1929 and August 1930 was
substantial enough to have created expectations of a continued decline in prices
in the short run.




                                         21
       For Meltzer (1976), Temin, like the Federal Reserve System during the
Great Depression, neglected the distinction between nominal and real interest
rates, misinterpretating the faIl in interest rates as indicating monetary ease.
       It should be pointed out that, had Ternin started his analysis in April 1928,
when the Federal Reserve sharply reduced the rate of monetary growth, instead
of in August 1929, he would have observed a rise in short—term interest rates
between March 1928 and September 1929.              Then as the lagged effects of
monetary change     affected prices and output  in 1929,  interest rates declined16
       Temin's   final argument against  the   money    hypothesis  was that the real
money supply didn't fall. Monetary forces,      it followed,  couldn't possibly explain
the massive decline in real income that occurred
       According to Gandolfi and Lothian (1979), Temin confused desired and
actual real cash balancea. They estimated a money demand function using annual
data over the periods 1900—29, 1900—41, that showed an increase in predicted real
balances 1929-31 and a fall 1931—33 by magnitudes similar to the movements in
actual real balances, They concluded that both the initial rise and the
subsequent decline were due to changes in the determinants of money demand,
evidence suggesting that movements in actual real balances are a poor measure
of the degree of monetary ease or restraint.
       In place of "the money hypothesis" Temin substituted a modified version of
 'the spending hypothesis." According to the original Keynesian version, a fall
in income and prices was produced by the multiplier effects of a fall in
autonomous spending (consumption and investment), supposedly caused by an
oversupply of housing and the stock market crash. In Temin's view, however,
though the crash reduced consumption through adverse effects on the
community's wealth, it was not crucial, He did not find evidence of a massive
decline in investment expenditures, but judged that an unexplained decline in
autonomous consumption expenditures was the likely cause of the decline in
economic activity 1929—31. The judgment was based on an unusually large
 negative residual for 1930 from a consumption function for the interwar period
 (1919—41). After 1930, following Kindleberger (1973), Temin regarded international
forces as dominant.
        Mayer (1978b) replicated Temin's consumption function regression excluding
 1919, a  transition year from war to peace, and found the 1930 residual was no
 longer negative.' Estimates of a consumption function he judged to be superior
 — the MPS model — over the period 1921—41, in both levels and first differences


                                          22
and including a dummy variable to account for the 1930 shift, according to
Mayer failed to establish Temin's hypothsis of an unusual downward shift in the
consumption function in 1930. Gandolfi and Lothian (1979) showed that the
change in the residual for 1930 was far from unique compared to all contractions
in the longer period, based on a permanent income consumption function for the
period 1889—1941.
       In sum, the Temin debate leaves monetary forces as the key cause of the
Great Depression. The evidence on causality is generally in favor of the money
hypothesis but the contemporaneous correlation between money and income also
allows scope for nonmonetary forces. The evidence does not sustain Temin's
view that the bank failures of 1930 were caused by the depression—induced
decline in agricultural income and depression—increased riskiness of bank
portfolios. However, the Stauffer and White studies that attribute the bank
failures to weak bank structure in agricultural regions are consistent with both
the Temin and Friedman and Schwartz accounts. Temin's contention that the
decline in short—term interest rates 1929—31 is inconsistent with the money
hypothesis has also been rejected but why short—term nominal rates declined has
not been definitively answered. Finally neither Temin's claim that the failure of
real balances to decline 1929-31 contradicts the money hypothesis nor his
suggestion of an unexplained decline in consumption as the source of contraction
has won acceptance.
       3.2.3 A Reappraisal by Anna Schwartz
       According to Schwartz (1981) the Great Depression was started by two
unexpected shocks of monetary origin, a contractionary monetary policy in 1928
initiated by the Federal Reserve to halt the stock market boom, and the stock
market crash of October 1929. Unexpected declines in aggregate demand would
lead employers to hire fewer workers at each real wage perceived by them and
workers to refuse offers of employment at lower nominal wages on the basis of
no change in expectations.       But eventually on the assumption of rational
expectations a new equilibrium would be reached as expectations were revised.
Other things equal the result would have been a severe contraction similar to
earlier contractions. But instead the consequence of inappropriate Fed policy
generated a further series of monetary shocks — most notable the banking
panics of 1930, 1931 and 1933 — which in turn led to further declines in output
and the demand for labor, and a shift in demand for securities to both short—
term instruments and high grade long—term securities.l&


                                       23
       3.2.4 $gnkinHolidaof1933
      Wigmore (1987) challenged the view eapnused by Friedman and Schwartz
that domestic factors were the primary cause of the banking holiday of March
1933 amd instead posited rumore of devaluation as the key factor. Though
Friedman and Schwartz diacosaed the role of rumors of devaluation as
responsible for converting the internal drain into a demand for gold they did
not view it as the primary cause of the panic. Wigmore argued that rumors of
devaluatioo appearing weeks before the bankimg holiday — events such as bills
in Congress proposing to devalue the dollar, statements by leading financial
figures and FDR's unwillingness to commit himself to the current exchange rate
— triggered the ron on the dollar. The run manifeated itself in both an
internal demand and a foreign demand for gold by individuals and central
banks. 19 Furthermore he argued that though the increase in currency was
three times the gold reserves lost by the New York Fed, the fact that gold
losses threatened to reduce its reserves below the legal limit while at the same
time it had a virtually onlinited ability to meet demands for domeatic currency
was crucial.
       Wigmore also attributed the calm which immediately followed the banking
holiday to the Roosevelt administration's international policies — the embargo on
gold ownership and export and restrictions on foreign exchange dealings. The
former cut off the domestic channels for a speculative run on the dollar, and the
60% devaluation of the dollar in the ensuing three months removed the source of
the speculative pressure.
      3.2.5 Tco3er
      The recovery from 1933 to 1937 was marked both by rapid money growth
(53%) and rapid inflation (50% for the WPI). Friedman and Schwartz (Chapter 9)
attributed the monetary expansion to an increase in the monetary gold stock, in
response to the devaluation of the dollar, the gold purchase program, and capital
flight from Europe. At the same time, they argued, rising prices and wages
represented in part a rare case of coat—push inflation, the consequence of NIRA
and other policies that encouraged unionization and monopolization.        These
policies, with the gold induced monetary expansion acting as an accommodating
force, encouraged inflation at the expense of real growth.
       In support of Friedman and Schwartz, Weinstein (1981) found that the New
Deal NIRA codes (1933-35), which encouraged the formation of labor unions and
the cartelization of industry, reduced output and raised unemployment more than

                                       24
otherwise would have been the case. First, by increasing wages relative to
prices, the codes increased unemployment by 2%. Second, by raising the price
level by an amount in response to the 14% increase in the money supply that
occurred 1933—35, the codes prevented output from rising 8% and unemployment
from declining by 3%. Third, the codes—induced rise in the price level, by
reducing the real value of financial assets, led to an additional 6—11% decline in
output.
       However, Mccloskey and Zecher (1984) denied that the inflation of 1933-34
could be attributed to a wage price—spiral induced by the New Deal NIRA codes
since the majority of the codes were enforced after the price level rose. Based
on an examination of weekly data, they contended that the key cause of the
price burst was the devaluation by the Roosevelt Administration,2G
       Friedman (1984) in rebuttal cited statements from A Monetary History (pp.
465—466) which atrributed considerable importance to the gold policy as a causal
factor in the inflation; emphasized that Friedman and Schwartz's concern was
with the entire period 1933-37; and demonstrated that McCloskey and Zecher's
factual evidence involved the inappropriate use of arithmetic scales in comparing
weekly movements in wholesale prices and the exchange rate — a logarithmic
scale would give a more accurate picture, and would portray narrower movements
in the wholesale price index than the exchange rate.
     The literature on the Great Depreassion spawned by A Monetary History
suggests varied explanations of the causes, duration, and severity of the Great
Depression. The upshot of the Temin debate and other literature on the period
is the primacy of monetary forces. However contemporaneous correlation between
money and income has been interpreted as evidence for significant feedback from
nonmonetary to monetary forces. In addition, nonmorietary forces, especially
institutional factors such as the regulations governing banking structure, emerge
as having considerable importance, and some authors such as Bernanke (1983)
(see Section 3.1.1 above) stress the disruption of the financial system as an
important independent cause.
       Evidence of the endogeneity of the money supply or of feedback from real
forces to the money supply begs the question of whether the Great Depression
had to happen. As Friedman and Schwartz pointed out, the Fed clearly could
have stopped the decline in the money supply and the depression with it. A
comparison of the Great Depression with previous and subsequent experience
suggests that monetary contraction was the 'sine qua non" that made the


                                       25
depression great. Other explanations do not detract from the importance of
monetary contraction which has been a crucial part of all severe cycles. Given
the importance of a decline in the money supply, other influences — including
the disruption of the financial system — became in most cases endogenous
rather than causal,
4.    THE DOMESTIC MONETARY FRAMEWORK AND MONETARY POLICY
      A key theme in A Monetary History is the role of banking arrangements
and monetary policy as the setting for monetary disturbances.
     In this section, the literature is surveyed for both the pre—1914 period
when the U.S. did not have a central bank and the period since 1914 when
monetary policy has been conducted by the Federal Reserve System.
     4.1 The National Banking Era
      4.1.1   j   ticitofHiah-Powered Money
      A   key problem facing the national banking system, which ultimately led to
its replacement by the Federal Reserve System, was the inelasticity of high—
powered money — the inability to convert deposits into currency during
banking panics. This problem was exacerbated by 'the inverted pyramid of
credit" — interbank deposits held in New York and to a lesser ex$ent Chicago
and St. Louis. In times of financial stringency country banks o.uld recall
deposits from the central reserve cities to meet local demands for currency, in
turn exacerbating pressure on the reserves of these banks.
       Cagan (196:3) agreed with Friedman and Schwartz that the key defect of
the national banking system was inelasticity of the currency and that the
problem was solved by the Aldrich Vreeland creation of emergency currency. In
addition, he argued that minimum reserve requirements didn't reduce monetary
instability because banks viewed these reserves as locked—up. For Cagan, the
inverted pyramid of credit was not as serious as commonly believed because the
call loan market, in which interbank deposits were invested, would have
attracted the funds anyway. The key problem with the inverted pyramid was
that it raised the money multiplier, thereby allowing a greater monetary
contraction than otherwise in the face of an attempted conversion by the public
of its deposits into currency.
       Dewald (1972) contended that the U.S. had virtually all the elements of a
central bank in place with the national banking system. The New York City
national banks, by serving as a depository for other banks, acted as a central
reserve. In addition, they acted as lender of last resort by providing interbank

                                       26
loans, by channelling specie from abroad and from the Treasury to other banks
and by banding together and issuing clearing house certificates. Schwartz
(1972) denied that the New York banks could be regarded as a central bank
since they could not issue high—powered money at will. Furthermore, interbank
bane and clearing house loan certificates did not represent additions to
high-powered money but substitutes.
      4.1.2 The National Bank Note Puzzle
      National bank notes representing liabilities of    the national banks were
issued by banks depositing government securities with the U.S. Treasury equal
in face value before 1900 to 111% of the value of notes issued. The amount of
notes issued depended on the market prices of the securities serving as
collateral. As long as bonds sold at or above par, it was profitable to issue
notes. Except for the period 1884 to 1891, Friedman and Schwartz noted, based
on calculations in Cagan (1965), that eligible U.S. securities sold above par for
all the fifty years before the establishment of the Fed.' The amounts issued
varied with their profitability, yet the amount of notes issued was well below the
maximum.     Friedman and Schwartz viewed this as a puzzle.       [slither bankers
did not recognize a profitable course of action ... or we have overlooked some
costs of issue that appeared large to thom.' (Friedman and Schwartz, p. 24)
       Goodhart's (1965) explanation for less than the maximum note issue for the
period 1907-1913, was uncertainty over the possibility that circulation privileges
would be terminated in forthcoming reform legislation, which reduced the value
that banks attached to bonds serving as collateral. For James (1976), the reason
for the less than maximum note issue in the last quarter of the nineteenth
century was that the rate of return on loans was sufficiently high to make it
more profitable to make loans through creating deposits rather than buying
government bonds and then issuing notes (in the form of loans) on the basis of
90% of par value. Local loan rates were higher in the south and the west than
in central reserve cities accounting for the lower fraction of the maximum note
issue in these regions. As loan rates converged towards the end of the
nineteenth century, national banks in the interior increased their note issue.
       4.2 Founding of the Federal Reserve System
       4.2.1 A Change in Regime
       The beginning of operations by the Fed in 1914 marked a major
watershed" in U.S. monetary history. According to Friedman and Schwartz, (p.
9), the change in internal monetary arrangements coincided with a loosening of


                                       27
the external link to the gold standard. These two changes created the potential
for the new central hank to exercise deliberate control over the stock of money
and promote monetary stability. Yet, the record of subsequent events and
greater variability of money aftor 1914 than before led them to conclude that
"[t]he blind, undesigned and quasi-automatic working of the gold standard
turned out to produce a greater measure of predictability and regularity —
perhaps because its discipline was impersonal and inescapable — than did
deliberate and conecious control exercised within institutional arrangements
intended to promote monetary stability." (p. 15)
       Mankiw, Miron and Weil (1987) demonstrated that a significant change in
monetary regime actually occurred at the beginning of operations by the Fed in
November 1914 evidenced in the behavior of interest rates, and that market
agents rationally anticipated the change. They showed that the stochastic
process of the three—month time loan rate at New York City banks changed from
one of mean reversion with a strong seasonal from 1890 to 1910, to one close to
a random walk from 1921—1933. This, they argued, reflected the Fed's role in
offsetting seasonal and panic—induced fluctuations in interest rstes. Evidence of
low posterior odds ratios (the ratio of subjective probabilities of different switch
dates conditioning on the data) before December 1914, according to the authors,
casts doubt that absndonment of the gold standsrd in August 1914 explains the
change in stochastic process.       Moreover, they found that the relationship
between 6—month and 3—month rates changed in a manner consistent with the
expectations theory of the term structure. Regressions of the long rate on the
short rate revealed the long rate to be less responsive to shocks in the short
rate in the earlier subperiod. Switching regressions revealed the change in
stochastic process to have occurred between December and Februsry 1915 and
the change in expectations to have preceded the regime change by one month.
        4.2.2 A Chsnge in the Seasonal Pattern of Interest Rates
       The seasonal in short—term rates under the national banking system
reflected autumnal crop moving and Christmas demands for currency which put
pressure on bank reserves and hence on interest rates. The Fed reduced the
seasonal in short—term interest rates, altering its outstanding credit to offset
seasonal fluctuations in bank reserves, and at the same time, increased the
seasonal in currency outside the Treasury and Fed and in high—powered money,
(Friedman and Schwartz, 191—196)



                                        28
      More    recently evidencefor a significant decrease in nominal interest rate
 seasonality after 1914 was found by Shiller (1980), who used the X—1ll seasonal
 adjustment program, and by Mankiw and Miron (1986) and Mankiw, Miron and
 Weil (1987), who used time series methods.
        According to Miron (1986), financial panics in the U.S. before 1914
 generally occurred at seasonal peaks in nominal interest rates. This reflected
 the tendency of seasonal demands for credit to raise interest rates, increasing
 the ratio of loans to reserves and deposits to reserves. Panics precipitated by
 exogenous shocks occurred at times when banks were least prepared. After
 1914, however, the Fed extended reserve bank credit to accommodate seasonal
 credit demands, thereby considerably reducing the amplitude of the seasonal
 interest rate cycle and preventing any panics from occurring between 1914 and
 1929.   On grounds similar to Trescott (1982), Field (1984a), Miron associated
 banking panics after 1929 with a shift to a restrictive policy and the reduction
of seasonal accommodation.la
       8ecause a similar reduction in seasonality occurred in a large number of
 countries at the same time, Clark (1986) was skeptical of the Friedman and
Schwartz view that it was the advent of the Fed that accounted for the
 reduction in the seasonal in short—term interest rates.           Moreover, the
disappearance of the U.S. and U.K. interest rate seasonal occurred three years
 before a significant seasonal appeared in total currency and high—powered money
in each country. Though the reduction in the U.S. interest rate seasonal from
 1914 to 1916 might be explained by the liquidity effects of reduced reserve
requirements and gold inflows, Clark doubted that U.S. seasonal policy could
explain a similar phenomenon in other countries. Instead, he attributed the
timing of the change in the seasonal pattern of interest rates in 1914 to the
breakdown of the gold standard.
       Clark's view, however, was challenged by Bar-sky, Mankiw, Miron and Weil
(1987). Evidence that the seasonal pattern of interest rates did not change after
the U.S. and U.K. left Bretton Woods in 1973 and that the correlation between
U.S. and U.K. interest rate levels and changes did not change before and after
1914 makes their case that the change in the seasonal was unrelated to the
change in regime. Instead they constructed a hypothetical model in which a
central bank, committed to interest rate smoothing and avoiding gold flows, is
introduced into a world already containing a central bank dedicated to the same
policies (the Bank of England). The two central banks, each pursuing its own


                                       29
policy but taking the other's actions as given, smooth interest rates without gold
flows. This is in contrast to the case of a single central bank whose attempts to
smooth interest rates will OiWas be offset by gold flows. Based on this model,
the authors argue, it is plausible that the introduction in 1914, into the world
monetary system of the Fed, dedicated to smoothing interest rates, can explain
the reduction in the interest rate seasonal in the U.S., U.K., and other countries.
      A fundamental problem with Barsky et al's explanation is that in 1914 all
countries (except the U.S.) had left the gold standard, Consequently they would
not be worried about gold flows. In addition the question remains why the Fed
was so special Why could not the Bank of England and the Bank of France,
each of which represented large gold standard countries, have initiated the
reduction in the seasonal before 1914? Possibly the answer lies with the
populists in the U.S., who influenced the constitutional structure of the Fed and
who were strongly opposed to the seasonal.
              Founding Principles versus
         -4.2.3                              Rjz
      The Fed was established to provide elasticity to the money supply —
specifically to provide easy convertibility between deposits and   currency and to
prevent a recurrence of the banking panics of the national banking era. This
goal, according to Friedman and Schwartz (Chapter 5), was to be achieved by
the expansion and contraction of Federal Reserve notes and deposits. Two key
principles lay behind the establishment of the Fed: the gold standard and the
real bills doctrine.2
      West's (1976, 1977) reading of archival material and contemporary sources
led him to support Friedman and Schwartz's interpretation — that the two
principles behind the Federal Reserve Act were obsolete before the Fed opened
its doors. The real bills doctrine behind the Federal Reserve Act reflected early
nineteenth century reality — the widespread use of bills of exchange and
commercial bills. However, after the Civil War, the market for commercial bills,
especially two—name bills, declined, Furthermore, the classical gold standard
principle behind the Federal Reserve Act was based on a stylized model of
observance by the Bank of England of the rules of the game' and its use of
the discount rate to facilitate gold flows. According to West, the Bank had
difficulty making Bank Rate effective and frequently violated "the rules' through
the use of policies such as the gold devices (Sayers, 1936). Thus the Fed was
designed to follow a policy which never existed.



                                        30
      4.2.4 The Fed's First Policy Failure 1920—21
      According to Friedman and Schwartz (p. 238), if the Fed had raised the
discount rate earlier in 1919 this would have moderated post-World War I
inflation and the subsequent contraction. Fuel was added to the fire by further
raising the discount rate in 1920 and keeping it there until May 1921. Thus
1920—21 was the first important test of Fed monetary policy and its first failure.
       They (p. 234) interpreted the Fed's reluctance to reduce the discount rate
in 1920 after prices and output had declined bocause of concern over its gold
reserve ratio. Wicker (1966, 1967, ch. 3), however, based on his reading of
Federal Reserve records, regarded domestic considerations as more important.
Fed officials in his view feared that lowering the discount rate before member
bank borrowing had been reduced to desirable levels would encourage further
specuiative borrowing. The Fed did not understand the harmful effects of
deflation, believing that with declining prices and activity member bank
borrowing would quickly be liquidated. The problem, not recognized by the Fed,
according to Wicker, was that much of the buildup in hank credit financed
inventories which took several months to liquidate.
       Wicker's reading of the archives suggests that a reinterpretation of
Friedman and Schwartz's view of 1920-21 may have merit.
       1.3 Was the Federal Reserve System's Policy Consistent 1923—33?
       Friedman and Schwartz (Chapter 6) described the 1920's as the 'High
Tide" of the Federal Reserve System.        Though the real bills doctrine still
strongly influenced Fed policy and despite an ongoing conflict between Governor
Strong of the New York Fed and the Federal Reserve Board that affected all
policy discussion, the Fed, nevertheless, successfully conducted countercyclical
stabilization.2    They then went on to argue in chapter 7 that the contraction
of 1929—33 could have been prevented if the policies developed in the 1920's
were consistently applied.
       Friedman and Schwartz attributed the policy failure to a "shift of power
within the system and the lack of understanding and experience of the
individuals to whom the power shifted." (p. 411)
       The only episode when the system united was the decision to raise the
discount rate after Britain left gold in September 1931. The experiment with
expansionary open market policy in 1932 did not reflect a change in policy but
was just a temporary reaction to Congressional pressure.ls The final banking



                                       31
panic in 1933 demonstrated a complete lack of leadership as each reserve hank
acted to protect its own reserves.
     -
       According to Friedman and Schwartz, none of this would have happened
had Benjamin Strong lived or if the pre—Fed aet of monetary institutions,
including restrictions of payments and the Aldrich Preeland Act, were in place.
       Wicker (1955) denied that Fed policy deteriorated dramatically after
Strong's death in 1928. Based on his reading of the minutes of the Open Market
Policy Committee, unavailable to Friedman and Schwartz when they wrote the
book, he concluded that the Burgese-Riefler-Strong doctrine of open market
operations predominated both before and after Strong's death.
       According to this doctrine, commercial banks were reluctant to borrow from
the Fed and did so only if in need. By engaging in open market sales, the Fed
could induce banks to borrow. When member bank indebtedness rose, rates were
raised and loans reduced. By engaging in open market purchases, the Fed
reduced member bank borrowing. Interest rates feB and banks increased their
outstanding loans and inveatmanta.
       The decision to conduct open market purchases depended on the level of
member bank indebtedness in the reserve districts of New York and Chicago. In
1924 and 1927, member bank borrowing in those cities was sufficiently high to
induce open market purchases whereas in 1930 it was comparable to or below
that of 1924 and 1927. Consequently, there wee no need seen for action.
Moreover, based on the voting record of the executive committee of the Open
Market Policy Committee (OMPC) in 1930, three of the four members who voted
against purchases had bean on Strong's Open Market inveatment Committee in
the 1920'a, suggesting to Wicker that Strong might not have carried the day,26
       Brunner and Meltzer (1968), supported Wicker's claim that the
Burgesa—Riefler—Stroog doctrine remained in place after Strong's death.
According to their interpretation of statements of the Fed staff, members of the
(OMPC) and reports sent to each board member and Reserve Bank president,
policy was consistent over the whole period. Based on the Burgess—Riefler—
Strong doctrine, the Fed had two policy indicators: the level of borrowed
reserves and short—term market interest rates. According to Brunner and
Meltzer, market interest rates were the key policy indicator during the Great
Contraction. The reason the Fed failed to increase high—powered money after
1929 was that market interest retes had fallen to levels lower than reached in
earlier contractions.


                                       32
       Meltzer (1976) explained the majority of decisions by the Fed to purchase
or refrain from purchases in the period September 1929 to April 1931, by the
level of borrowing, the change in borrowing, and the level of ahort—term interest
rates. Focus on nominal interest rates as measures of ease and tightness,
according to him, ignores the distinction between real and nominal variables.
Thus low market interest rates, which may actually reflect deflationary
 expectations and a high real rate, were misinterpreted aa evidence of ease.
        Trescott (1982), on the other hand, claimed that Fed policy after 1929
 represented a radical departure from its policy over the period 1924-29 He
 estimated a monthly regression to explain Fed holdings of open market securities
 for the 1924—29 period by variables determining defensive operations sod
 dynamic operations. He then generated levels of open market securities each
 month in 1930—33 on the couoterfactual assumption that the Fed continued its
 policy regime of 1924—29 through 1933. Beginning December 1929, actual federal
 open market credit increasingly fell below its estimated value.            Trescott
attributed the changes in monetary policy after 1929 to a change in the
 structure of the Open Market investment Committee (OMIC). Before 1929, as
 Friedman cod Schwartz argued, it was dominated by the Federal Reserve Bank of
 Sew York.  1     January 1930, the OMIC (which consisted of the five key reserve
 banks)   was   replaced by a new Open Msrkct Policy Committee (OMPC) which
 included all twelve banks.       This chsnge produced two blocks to effective
decision nokiog: (a) some of the new banks were hostile I expansionary
 policies; (h) as the size of the necessary interventions increased, the greater the
likelihood they would need the approval of the entire OMPC sod the Board,
rather then just the discretion (as in the previous regime) of the Sew York Fed.
        Finally, to determine whether Fed policy changed in 1929, as argued by
Friedman and Schwartz and Trescott, or whether the Fed followed the same
flawed strategy in the early 1930's as it did in the 1920's, as argued by Wicker
and by Druoner and Meltzer, Wheeluck (1987) tested whether policy resctinn
functions over the 1919 to 1933 period for different policy tools changed
significsntly in 1929. In support of the Drunoer, Meltzer—Wicker view, he found
that the Fed's policy tools responded to the same indicator variables over the
whole period but that they responded less vigorously in the 1929-31 contraction
than in earlier periods,27 Agsin in agreement with the shrive authors, he
concluded that the Fed did not conduct expansionary open market purchases
because low values of its key policy indicators — member bank borrowing and
                                       33
market interest rates — indicated monetary ease Estimated demand functions
for member bank borrowing for the system as a whole and for each Fed district
suggest that the Fed's strategy was flawed. it ignored the influence of
declining economic activity and financial crises on the demd for member bank
borrowing.
       In defense of Friedman and Schwartz, however, Wheelock noted that the
redistribution of power away from the New York Reserve Bank might have locked
the system into a more restrictive monetary policy than otherwise. It did so by
increasing the influence of officials who opposed expensionary open market
policy relative to those who consistently advocated expansionary policies and who
possibly understood the basic flaw in Fed strategy.
       In sum, evidence from archival sources and from econometric reaction
functions is not entirely in favor of A Monetary History's interpretation of the
reason Fed policy failed during the Great Contraction. The revisionist view
suggests that the Fed failed because it followed a flawed policy strategy
developed in the 1920's. It ran into trouble in 1929—31 because its principal
policy indicator — short-term market rates — was misinterpreted as a signal of
ease. During the contractions of the l920's, the decline in activity was so
moderate that neither member bsnk borrowing nor short—term interest rates fell
sufficiently for the Fed to refrain from am expansionary policy. This is not to
say that superior leadership might not have jettisoned the strategy. But such
am explanation places perhsps too much emphasis on the personality of one
individual prevailing agsinst institutional tradition.
       4.4 New Deal Regulation of the Banking System 1933-35
       The emergency legislation of 1933 and subsequent bank acts created a
package to insure the stability of the banking system and prevent a recurrence
of bank panics (Friedman and Schwartz, Chapter 2).
       For Bemston (1982), the New Deal legislation package of FDIC and
                                       -
regulation of the commercial banks — specifically the prohibition of interest
payments on demand deposits and the eeparation of investment from commercial
banking — represented a horse trade between the small unit banks and large
money market banks. The small unit banks wanted deposit insurance to protect
them from runs. They also continued to oppose branch banking.2" The big city
banks were not interested in deposit insurance but wanted a prohibition of
interest payments on demand deposits as a price fixing arrangement.2 9 The
investment bankers at the same time wanted protection from commercial bank
                                      34
 competition.3    New Deal legislation was a deal whereby the small unit banks
 received FDIC and continuation of the McFadden Act prohibition against
 branching, the large banks received the prohibition of interest payments on
 demand deposits, and the investment bankers received freedom from commercial
 bank participation in their business.
       Recently the contribution of federal deposit insurance to monetary stability
 has been questioned. Schwartz (1987) argued that it was price level stability
until the mid—1980a, rather han federal deposit insurance, that was responsible
for financial stability.    During this period other countries without deposit
insurance also expeiriericod financial stability. Given price stability, an effective
lender of last resort can insure stability with or without deposit insurance.
Moreover the flat insurance premium FDIC charges on deposits, regardless of
risk, has in recant years — as a consequence of reduced regulation of the
financial sector in the face of inflation         increased the incentives for risk
taking and hence the potential for monetary instability, Short and O'Driscoll
 (1983(, Kane (1985).
       4.5 The Increase in Reserve Requirements 1936—37
       In chapter 8 of A Monetary History, Friedman and Schwartz documented
the consequences of a major policy error by the Federal Reserve System — a
doubling of reserve requirements between August 1936 and March 1937 — which
led to a sharp monetary contraction and recession in 1937—38. They dismissed as
 incorrect the Fed's liquidity trap explanation of the excess reserves. According
to their interpretation, two shifts occurred in the liquidity preferences of the
banks: an increase in the reserve deposit ratio from 1933 to 1936 in response to
the 1929—33 collapse; and then a second increase from 1937-1940 as the banks,
viewing their increased required reserves as unavailable to them in the event of
a liquidity crisis, restored their desired holdings of excess reserves to the
previous level. Thus they concluded that the adjustment of the actual deposit
reserve ratio to a change in the desired ratio takes up to three years.
         Horwich (1963, 1966), based on a lack of correlation between effective
reserves and bank earning assets in the mid 1930's, argued for the liquidity
trap interpretation of excess reserves, although Brunner (1965) correctly
criticized Horwich's methodology as flawed in its specification. Morrison (I96C
provided evidence in favor of Friedman and Schwartz's interpretation. Against
the liquidity trap hypothesis he provided evidence: first, that Canadian banks
did not exhibit excess reserves despite similar movements of interest rates and
                                       35
real income (also see Friedman and Schwartz, p. 458); second, that country
member          reserve deposit ratios quickly restored their original relationship
to that  of nonmemher    hanks after the reserve requirenent doubled in 1936—37;
third, that the elasticity of the demand for excess reserve shnws little evidence
of increase ns interest rates feIi.'
       Mere recently, Wilcox (1984) estimated a demand function fur excess
reserves, based en the Tebin—Brainard model of bank asset demand end supply,
and quarterly data for New York City member banks, In addition to the
traditional interest rate and wealth variables he included a proxy varishle to
capture Friedman and Schwartz's shock hypothesis (that the demand curve
shifted as a reaction to the liquidity crisis and doubling of reserve
requirements). Both the interest rats and the shock variable were significant.
Moreover, the interest elasticity of demand for excess reserves rises as the
interest ratc fails, a rasuit which Wilcox interpreted r.s evidence of ths liqnidiiy
trap view, 10 accordance with Brunner's (1965) critique of AMoneqvTjjtor,
the adjustment period to a liquidity shock is somewhat shcctcr (two ycars) than
that reported by Friedman and Schwartz, Finally, simulations of the model over
the 1933-40 poriod revoaled changes in interest retos to explain much more of
the increase in excess reser'. c a tics n the financial shock proxies, especially after
1935,
               use of a log linear demand function biases the caso towards
        Wilcox's
finding a liquidity trap. Also emitting nemmember banks and member hunks
outside New York biased the case against the Friedman and Schwartz view.
Since most bank failures occurred among smaller banks outside New York, one
would expect the New York banks to he more interest sensitive and less affected
by financial shocks, given their larger size and more diversified portfolios.
       For at least a decade, Friedmam and               interprelatinn of excess
reserves was accepted although the portfolio adjustment mechanism of the
banking system was questioned IBrunrier 1965, Tebin 1965, Johnson 1965).
Wilcox's recent study, despite some problems, suggests that the topic is worth a
deeper Took.
      4.6 Treasury Dominance of the Federal Reserve
       Friedman and Schwartz, chapter 9, documented a major shift in policy
responsibility frem the Fed to the Treasury in the aftermath of the Creet
Cer.tractien. The Fed switched to a passive policy (with the exception of the
1936-37 doubling of reserve requirements) because it believed the traditional
                                         36
  tools of monetary policy h- be ineffective since they could net redo the ucceas
  reserves accumulated by tho banking system.
         Tome (1983) apphnd the theory of horesocrecy to explain some aspot a
  Fed policy in the 1930's and 1940's, According to this theory (Niskanen 1971,
  \cheson and Chant, 1973) the Fed acts to maximize iLa discretionary profits —
 the revecuc from its pmn murket port folio —— eli of which it was allowed to keep
 efter 1933.
        The model Tomna constructed predicts that the Fed will try to imicresso its
 share of inflation tax revenue, at the expense of the commercial bsnks and the
 Treasury, by following policies to reduce the retio of the tetel mooney stock to
 Federel Reserve credit. Rut at the same time it will attempt to forestall potential
 intervention by the Treasury and the Congress by transferring seine of its
 resources to the Treasury.
        Thus, scrording to Tome, (pp. 181—182) the Frd'a acceptance )f thE
 Treasury's oii aterilication policy in I 93C rather then c )tldocting the open
 market 5Oii5      if, lid : t represent acceptance of Treasury dominance ever
 monetary policy, as Friedeiamm and Schwartz argued (p. 532), hut rather
 represented n policy teaigc; d to preserve its share of inflation tax revenue at
 the expense of the Trees ii   . C id sterilization according to Tome ana a way of

preventing the Ic is; ry fr:;; ;nt miming to capture the apiteI gain from
monetization of geld inflowa.
        Evidence for the bureaucratic model is based on en ehaerved positive
association between the Fed's expenditures and its open market wealth.32
        A key implication of 'Ida approach is that thi Fed has smiffiriant

independence to produce whatever rate of monetary growth is required to
maximize its profits. This assumes the central hank operates in n veceum,
completely removed from the underlying political realities. The ecerd, to the
                                                                    m



centrary, indicates that the Fed'a overnll policy stance is cloarly related to the
desires of the elected government, Wemntraub (1978). The scope for the type of
independent action suggested by Tome is limited indeed.
       4.7 The Wend War If Rend-Price-Support Pregram
       During Wend War II, the Fed folluacd e bond price pegging prugrn;;; to
essist Treasury bend finsncing of the war at favorable interest rates. Wicker
(1969) held, contrary te Friedman and Schwartz, that the Fed did not give up its
independence to the Treasury by agreeing to the bemd price suppert program in
March 1942. Based em his reading of the record, both the Fed and the Treasury
                                       37
were in favor of preventing interest rates from rising hut disagreed on how to
do it — the Treasury favoring reductions in reserve requirements to provide
excess reserves, the Fed favoring open market operations .Aa a compromise, the
Treasury accepted a Fed plan to peg the short-term interest rate at 3/85%
       Rather than being an engine of inflation," Tome (1985) construed the
bond price support program (Friedman and Schwartz, Chapter 10), as a aoiution
to the time inconsistency problem faced by the wartime monetary authorities
following Bsrro and Gordon (1983). According to the Bsrro—Gordon hypothesis,
as lung as the public rationally expects the monetary authorities to produce
monetary surprises, they will reduce their resI essh balances, and hence the
authorities will capture less scigniorage than long—run revenue maximizing would
predict. To solve the problem e prssnnounced rule is needed. The 2 1/2%
ceiling an long—term yields was a rule to allow the authorities to rearrange the
 time path of inflation, to satisfy the government's intention to shift consumption
from the future to the present and to assurc the public that while money growth
 might incrssse during the wer it did not represent a long—run policy For
lung—term interest rates to stay below the pegged level for eatended poriods of
 time, and long—term expectations to stay low, open market operations had to
 the long—run inflation rote low         The support program thus implied that
 anticipated rapid money growth during the war would be followed by o ion g
 period of restruint.
        Tome's arguments in favnr of this view were: (1) if the public did nof
 believe in the government's commitment, it would have shifted into short-ferie
 securities; (2) money growth declined sfter the war; (3) reel cesh belencesvere
 ahnormslly hi%h even after price controls were lifted — reflecting expectotoue
 of postwar disinflation; (4) based on the 35% greater incrense in intcrost rates
 thet occurred during World War 1, seigniorsge collected in World War ii, ebscnt
 the bond support program, because of reduced reel cash balances, would hare
 been 3.5 to 10% lower each year.35
        An interpretation elternetive to that of Tome's, which also stresses the role
 of expectations, yet is consistent with that of Friedman and Schwartz, is thsl
 long-term price expectations• ware anchored by a strong belief in a re4orn to i he
 gold standard, The expe rieo,ee of rapid deflation after World War I in the F'S.
 and other countries committed to s return to the gold etsndurd, would still ho a
  the memories of investors. Moreover, investors would have been aware of the
 negotistiens leading to the Bretton Woods Agreement in 1914. In addition, Toru
                                       38
fails to mention the wartime unavailability of consumer durablea and he role of
wartime price controls. These sore two factors which, according to Friedman
and Schwartz, raised the lewd of real cash balances (also see Rockoff, 198l) in
turn generating more infiation tax revenue than otherwise, and at the same time
rcducing inflation e xpectationa,
5.    MONETARY STANDARDS
      The ninoty—four years spanned by A Monetary Iliatory were characterized
by aeveral distinct relationships between the U.S. economy and the rest of the
world. Friedman and Schwartz devoted considerable attcntion to the role of the
monetary standard in influencing the relationship between monetary and other
variables.
      5.1   TheehockEisod'.       1878
      The greenback period 1862-4873, was a unique episode of freely floating
exchange rates between the U.S. and thc rest of the world.
      The literature stemming from Friedman and Schwartz's treatment of the
greenback episode focuses on throe th,mea:          tho conditions' re'ired for
resumption; the role of "news'; and Greahain's Law.
      5.1.1 The (cndtions B—   oir fr
                                  I     Resumption
      Timberlake (1075) argued, contrary to Friedman sod Schwartz, that the
Treasury did oct diroetly to reduce the money supply and fostrr resumption.
His interpretation )f the R";umption Art of 1875 was that it allowed the
Secretary of the Treasury to r' fir,' U.S. notis ejUOi to the gross amount of
national bank notes issued without accounting for voluntary retirement by the
commercial hooks. Successive   Seeretaros of the Treosury took advantage of this
provision   to reduce high—powered money.
       Based on Berry's (1978) GNP defl'mtors rather than the wholesale price
series uaed by Friedman and Schwartz ond Kindahi (1961), Officer's (1981)
calculation of the real exchange rote between the U.S. and Great Britain in the
greenback era suggests that conaidersbly less than the 54 percent deflation that
Friedman and Schwartz calculated was required to resume specie payments. In
addition, Officer found that the uae of Oerry's GNP data corroborates Friedman
and Schwartz's conclusion that deflation was a result of rapid real growth and a
virtually constant money stock.'
       5.1.2 The Role of "News"
       According to Friedman and Schwartz, "news" affects the exchange rate to
the extent it affects the demand for and supply of foreign exchange and at one
                                     39
remove   the determinants of the price level.   Some  studies, however, have found
evidence to support Mitchell's (1903) emphasis on the importance of "news" as an
exchange rate determinaot. Roll (1972), using the capital asset pricing model,
demonstrated that the Civil War bond markets were efficient, in thst bond prices
quickly reflacted changes in the premium on gold, as well as all information on
military events.
        McCandless (1985) tested W. C. Mitchell's hypothesis (1903) that short—term
movements of exchange rates during the Civil War could be explaioed by war
news. Based on a time series model using semi—monthly data of the gold prices
of the curreocies of both the Uniom and Confederacy, he found that a "oewa"
variable, containing information on battles and major political events,
systematically affected the exchange rates of the belligerents in accordance with
Mitchell's hypothesis.
        Fur Friedman sod Schwartz the i000ey stock was an independent variable
with the price level and exchaoge rate strongly influenced by monetary forcea.
According to Calomiris (1926), tho exchange rate was determioed primarily by
 'fiscal oews" — news about the size of the goveromeot's budget deficit and the
speed of retirement of debt — which ioflueoced the probability aod timing ef
resumption. to turn, the price level was anchored by movements in the
exchange rate. Civcn the price level aod the exchange rate, the mooeyeuppiy
passively adjusted to equate real money supply and demand.                    Vector
autoregressions provided evidence for his view. They       show  that innovatines in
the exchange rate sod price level precede iooovatioos in the money stock, and
that innovations in several proxies for fiscal mewe precede those for the
exchaoge rate and the price level.
        Unfortunately, this study, like the McCandless study does cot explain how
fiscal and war news affects the fundameotal determinants of the exchange rate.
Moreover, Calomiris' model of an endogeoous money supply implies an uostable
money multiplier, an implication inconsistent with ample evideoce that it is stable
and predictable.36
        Phelps (1985) compared Friedman and Schwartz's approach to resumption to
that of the finance sprosch (Sargent and Wallace 1983). According to Phelps,
the Friedman and Schwartz view Implies that the behavior of the greenback
price of gold should vary inversely with expectations of future money growth.
In the finance approach (the approach also followed by Calomiris), it should vary
inversely with the probability of resumption, which in turn depends on
                                       40
 announcements of a fiscal pohcy compatible with gold convertibility and an
 announcement of • he date of resumption, Phelps devised a chronology   f   13 ke
 financial avents in the greenback era, which he uaed to show that the exchange
 rate respondod in tho direction predicted by events suggesting future changes
 in money growth in only 7 cases, whereas it responded to 'fiscal news" in all 13.
        A key difficulty with tho finance approach is that cx ante news is
 virtually impossible to identify. The events deemed important from today's
 perspective may nut have been dccci '1 so by norkc t participants at tb' time.
        5.1.3 Gresham's Law
        Despite Cresham's Law — which Rolnick end Weber (1986) dcfir,- os "the
 claim that when market and legal priccs of money differ, bad money drives cut
the good," — the issue of greenbacks did not drive both gold and silver coins
out of circulation. Instead, though smell denomination silver coins disappeared,
in the eastern part of the country gold coins circulated at a premium. Ihe
authors explained this paradox as follows. If two types of money are coined and
made legal lender and the market and legal prices differ, the money which is
overvalued at the mint beeoeies the unit of account, and the undervalued money,
if of large denomination, circulates at a premium while small denomination coins
are bundled end used as a store of value. The reason is that the tronsoctiona
costs of paying a premium will likely he higher for small than larger
denomination currency.
       Furthermore, the fact that in the west, gold remained the unit of account
and medium of exchange while greenbacks circulated at a discount does nct,
according to these authors, contradict the hypothesis that the overvalued
currency becomes the unit of account. The reason they give is that in 1863
California passed legislation which effectively divested greenbacks of legal
tender status so they did not have to be accepted for payment at par.
       This approach is based en a misinterpretation of Gresham'a Law. Friedman
and Schwartz clearly state in footnote 16, page 27, that Gresham's Law "applies
only when there is a fixed rate of exchange,..." According to them, the
simultaneous circulation of geld coins and greenbacks simply refiectod tho
operation of a flexible exchange rate. The reason subsidiary silver disappeared
was that the market value of sLIver waa bid op to the point which would make it
useless to facilitate low value transactions.
       To sum up, Dfficer, using better data confirmed Friedman and Schwartz's
explanation for and the timing of resumption. Several articles suggest that
                                      '11
"news" may be a more important factor in exchange rate detcrminebcu than
Friedman and Schwartz accept, but thie literature doee not explain how "news
affected the fundamental determinunte of exchange rates, Finally, Rolnirk and
Weber view the greenback epieode as a denial of Gresham's Law but their
reinterpretation itself does not make clear the distinction hetween fixed and
flexible exchange rates among types of money.
       5.2 The Classical Gold Standard, 1879-1911
       The U.S. reetored specie payments on January 1, 1879, and returned to the
gold   standard.
      According to Friedman and Schwartz, the way in which adjustment to hoth
external and internal dieturbancea took place was via the claseicol (Hume)
price-apecie-flow mechaniem aided by capital flows.
       5.2.1 The Balance of Payments Adjustment Mechanism: Hume vs. MABP
       By contrast to the classical balance of payments adjustment mochanisin of
the gold standard, in the monetary spproech to the balance of payments (MAPP),
prince and intreet rates arc rigidly linkod together through the foroe of
arbitrage in commodities and capital markets, and gold flows are the
equilibrating mechanism by which excess demsnde (or supplies) of money are
cicored (Frenkel, 1971; Johnson, 1976; Mundell, 1971).
       Mccloakoy and Zecher (1976) tested a model of the monetary npproacb to
the balance of payments that assumes arbitrage in world commodity and capital
markcts to explain movements in the U.F. and U.S. balance of payments under
the gold standard, 1880—1913.
       The authors tested the key assumption of commodity arbitrage by
examining correlations among price changes between countries, and among
regions within countries under the gold standard. For traded goods, such as
wheat, they found snohronous correlations equally high among regions as among
nations, unlike the case of nootraded goods, such as labor services and bricks.
For overall price indices they found a significant correlation between the
wholesale price indices of the U.K. and the U.S., less so for ClIP deflators and
even less for consumer price indices. The larger share of traded goods in the
wholesale price index undoubtedly accounts for higher correlation for the WP1.
Evidence in favor of capital market arbitrsge was less conclusive.3 They ase
compared gold flows       predicted by a simple demand for money function less
the money supply produced by domestic credit expansion — with actual gold
flows, and found a vary close relationship.
                                      42
       According to Mrr'loskey and Zecher (1984), Friedman ond S hwartz based
 their mnterpretation (p 99) of the 1279—82 episode as an excellent example of the
 operatten of the classicol gold standard on annual date. An examination of
 monthly data on gold flows and changes in the price lovel revealed no t nJ -y n
for price rises t    follow gold inflows, but rather price risr preceded gold flows,
 evidence M.Jioskey and Zecher interpret t.. be consistent with arbitrage and the
monetary ajpr carh.
       Fime mom   p1981) in reply argued that the relationship between changes in
 money supplies and price levels is mare pertinent than that between gold flows
and price iC' eta. Moreover if one examincs aO1O i-annual data, the evidencc for
 that episole suggests that changes in money precoded changes in the price
levol, and that when account is taken of the proximate determinants of the
money stock, it turns out that a rise in the money multiplier enabled the money
supply U.. rio. after rosumeptiw. deepltc an initial gold inflow, and far a large
geld inflow in 1879 to be absorbed by a rise in the geldhigh powered money
ratio rathom than the annoy supply. Thus for him, the episode still remains as
an example A the classical mechanism in
       The bri'f lmterature cited here on the classical gold standard adjustment
mechanism for the United States could he supplemented by earlier articles on
bath the pr-        il War p 'rind and this period by Maresich (1960), Williamson
(1961, 1963; and Willett (1968). Pertinent recent evidence for other ceuntrias
include: Jencing (1941)       Sr. I n; Fratianni and Spinelli (1984) —
                                                                        Italy; Rich
(1984) - Coned-i; and Drummend (1976)  —    Russia.
                          e
       The upshot of tb- studies is that the answer to tho gu. stion whether
the Home m :hanism ar th' mmetary approach batter explains the operation of
the classic ii old standard remains unresolved.. The evidence is e...nsistent with
the existence of a number of adjustment mechanisms — commodity price
arbitrage, mnterest rate arbitrage, changes in relative prices, geld flows, emoney
supply changes, and changes in the underlying structure of the internntienal
economy — each operating within different time horizons. Thea rneing-arerr
between the classmcal and monetary approach models only has limited value
because of the complexity of the issue.
       5.3 The Silver Agitation
       Shortly after the U.S. successfully returned to the geld standard,
maintonance of the standard was threatened by political agitation for the free
coinage of silver. The Free Silver movement achieved sane of its aims with the
                                       43
passage of the Bland Allison Act of 1878 which created a silver trading dollar
and, the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890 instructed the Treasury to
purchase 4.5 million ounces of silver per month, According to Friedman and
Schwartz (p. 131), the ensuing issue of silver certificates in itself would not
have increased the money supply sufficiently to force the country off the gold
standard because of the offsetting effects of other sources of change in
high-powered money. The real threat to the gold standard created by the silver
purchasee were the adverse expectations created that these purchases would
lead to even more. The resultant capital outflow led to more deflation than
would otherwise have occurred.     The deflationary pressure in turn was an
important contributor to the banking panic of 1893 and the depression of the
mid 90's. Between 1893 and 1896 threats to the Treasury's gold reserves were
allayed by direct measures taken by the Troasury including the formation of
ayndicates of bankers who used their credit abroad to engineer offaetting capital
inflows.
      Garber and Grilli (1985) interpreted the Belmont-Morgan syndicate of 1895
as a successful attempt to prevent a speculative attack on the fixed exchange
rate gold standard. Their model of speculativo attack posits am increased
probability of attack on the currency to the extent the rate of domestic credit
expansion generates an exchange rate in excess of parity. The U.S. in the
period 1890—95 ran continuous budget deficits financed by domestic credit
expansion; of special importance for the deficits were the silver purchases after
1890.   The Belmont-Morgan syndicate reduced the money supply by selling
government bonds for gold and succeeded in reducing the probability of
speculative attack.'9
      According to Friedman and Schwartz (p. 134), had a silver standard been
adopted after 1879, the U.S. would have had the benefits of s flexible oxchange
rate with the rest of the gold standard world. The resultant fall in the
monetary demand for gold and increase in the monetary demand for silver would
have raised the gold price of silver sufficient to offset the deflation that
occurred under the gold standard.
      In support of this contention, Drake (1986) calculated the hypothetical
 behavior of the U.S. price le'eI between 1879—1914 had the U.S. not demonetized
silver in 1879. Accounting for biases in the market to mint ratio due to the
hypothetical monetization of silver, the effects of releasing gold and s reduction
in silver for nonmonetary uses, as well as for the effects on other bimetallic
                                      44
countries, he found that the U.S. wholesale price index would have been more
stable than it was,4° that the U.S. would have been on a gold standard for most
of the period with the exception of 1879—90, and that the gold—silver ratio would
not have strayed for long from the 16:1 mint ratio.
       5.4 The Gold Exchange Standard 1920—1933
       The gold exchange standard reinstated in the 1920's was more fragile than
its pre—Worid War r antecedent as countries substituted holdings of foreign
exchange for gold, hence reducing the gold reserve base for the world money
supply, and aa countries adopted gold sterilization policies, thereby preventing
the balance of payments adjustment mechanism from working.
       5.4.1 The Role of the Gold Standard and U.S. Monetary Policy in
              Transmitting the Great Contradiction
       A number of authors provide evidence in support of Friedman and
Schwartz's interpretation of the role of the gold standard and U.S. policies in
transmitting the Great Depression.
       According to Huffman and Lothian (1984), unexpected monetary shocks that
affected real income in one country, in turn were transmitted via specie flows
(and short-term capital flows) to the money supplies of other countries, and them
to real activity. The gold standard thus served to transmit the business cycle
from country to country. Evidence for this view is based on Granger causality
tests over the period 1833 to 1933.
       Choudhri and Kochin (1980) in a comparison of the experience of a number
of small European countries during the Great Depression (1930-33) found that
only Spain, a country which maintained flexible exchange rates with the gold
standard world, was successfully insulated from the Great Depression. Dividing
their sample of countries into:       (a) countries which maintained the fixed
exchange rate gold standard throughout the depression — The Netherlands,
Belgium, Italy and Poland; (b) countries which left gold in 1931 with the U.K. —
Norway, Denmark and Finland; and (c) Spain, they regressed real output and the
price level for each country on U.S. real output and the price level. The
results showed a strong influence of the U.S. depression on the gold standard
countries, Spain completely unaffected, and the other countries in depression
until they cut the link with gold in 1931.
       Eichengreen (1987a) provided evidence that the national gold policies of
the U.S. and France were a key cause of international monetary contraction.
Based on a pooled cross—section time series regression of the demand for
                                      45
international reserves for 24 countries, he showed that U.S. and French gold
policies reduced available gold reserves to these countries by one half.
Furthermore, the effects of these policies on the worldwide demand for reserves
far outweighed the effects of a shift in liquidity preferences, in the wake of the
international financial crisis of 1931, away from holding reserves in the form of
foreign exchange.
       However, Fremling (1985) challenged Friedman and Schwartz's view that the
Great Depression was transmitted from the U.S. to the rest of the world during
the period 1929-31 as evidenced in an increase in gold inflows and the monetary
gold stock, According to her, gold inflows to the U.S. and an increase in U.S.
gold reserves did not necessarily mean that other countries were losing gold.
Gold mining as well as conversions of existing private gold stocks into currency
could have raised total world reserves.
       She presented evidence that from August 1929 to August 1931, gold
 reserves in the rest of the world increased from $8.3 to $8.7 billion versus $3.9
 to $4.9 billion in the U.S. Furthermore, though holdings of foreign exchange in
 the rest of the world declioed it was insufficient to offset the increase in gold.
 Rates of change of the total currency stock and gold reserves in the U.S.
 compared with the rest of the world indicate that the rest of the world also
 engaged in significant sterilizstion. Thus to the extent the Great Depression was
 transmitted internationslly, other countries as well as the U.S. must have played
 a significant role.41    However, Fremling's analysis considers only aggregato
 behavior, not   the  one—to—one relations of the U.S. in acquiring gold and each
 country losing gold.
       Thus, with the exception of Fremling's study, the evidence is overwhelming
 in favor of the contention in A Monetary History that the Great Depression was
 spread internationally by the gold standard. Other forces, both real and
 monetary, however, also played a role in the internstional transmission of the
 Great Depression.4
        5.5 The New Deal Monetary Standsrd
        The New Deal produced major changes in the monetary standard.
        A silver purchase progrsm designed to aid the domestic silver industry
                            t
 was instituted at the same r.e as the gold purchase program.
        Brsndt and Sargent (1987) reinterpreted the Chinese silver purchase
 episode. According to Friedman and Schwartz, the increase in the price of
 silver led to sn appreciation of the Chinese yuan, a decline in exports, a rise in
                                       46
imports, a fall in the monetary silver stock, a fall in the money stock and hence
 falling prices and  output.    Brandt and   Sargent provide new evidenc8 that
 though prices fell and the monetary silver stock declined, inside money (private
 bank notes and deposits> increased, so that the total money supply increased.
Also according to them, that real output did not fall.
        They view China as a small open economy under the specie standard
following a real bills policy (Sargent and Wallace 1982). As a small open
economy, China took world prices as given, and by discounting only real bills
the private banks ensured convertibility of the currency into specie. Banks
issued private notes backed by government securities. Because the securities
were backed by future taxes, the authors argue that they can he treated as
equivalent to real bills. Because China had a vertical Phillips curve real output
did not contrac, as a result of the deflation produced by the U.S-induced rise
in the price of silver. The increase in inside money reflected intermediation by
the private banks attempting to capture the real resources tied up in a
commodity money. The reason given for China's departure from silver and
conversion to a fiduciary standard in 1935 was that the government wanted to
capture the social saving from issuing paper money for itself.
        The paper suffers from a number of serious shortcomings. First the
timing of the regime change in 1935 is consistent with Friedman and Schwartz's
explanation that it was purely a reaction to the silver purchase policy, Second,
a closer examination of the evidence presented reveals that real output did
decline from 1931-1934. Third, Tamanga (1942) showed that most hank loans were
made on real estate collateral, a far cry from real bills. It is not certain that
inside money in fact increased, as Brandt and Sargent contend. Some evidence
exists that suggests declining operations by native banks. Modern banks, for
which they provide estimates, may simply have replaced the issues of the native
banks that no longer operated.




                                      47
6.    CONCLUSION: THE LEGACY OF A MO1ETARY HISTORY
      A Monetary History of the United States has spawned   a vast literature in
economic history.   Much of the literature has either corroborated or extended
themes raised by Friedman and Schwartz.
        Their views on the timing of resumption, on the implications of a
                                                                           of the
hypothetical bimetallic standard for price stability in ths last third
nineteenth century, on the defects of the theory underlying the Federal Reserve
                                                                          all been
Act, and on the regime change following establishment of the Fed have
reconfirmed by subsequent       researchers  applying newer  techniques and   more

recently available data sources.
        A number of controversies, however, still remain unresolved.
                                                                       The role of
 'news" in the greenback era; whether the Hume price—specie—flow-mechanism or
the monetary approach better explains balance of payments adjustment under the
 classical gold standard; whether the Fed really anocthed the eeaaonai in interest
 rates and moreover whether its establishment oxplaina an observed change in the
  stochastic pattern of interest rates around the world; the mechanism of banking
  panics; whether commercial banks in the 1930's faced a liquidity trap in excess
  reservee or a shift in liquidity preferences; whether the Fed subordinated itself
  to the Treasury in the 1920's and 40's, or was acting as a revenue maximizing
  bureau; and whether the bond pride eupport program was an engine of inflation
  or an example of a Barro—Gordon rule.
         On one important issue, the literature disagrees with the Friedman and
  Schwartz position — whether Federal Reserve policy was inconaiatent before and
  after 1929. The archival evidence marshalled by Wicker, Brunner and Meltzer,
  supplemented by Wheelock's econometric evidence makes a strong case for the
  position that the Fed followed the flawed Burgese—Riefler—Strong doctrine
  throughout the 192O's and early 1930's. The reason for the Fed's failure to
  conduct expansionary monetary policy 1929—3 1 was that based on its indicators
  — the level of nember bank reserves and market interest rates — it believed
  conditions were easy. However, aa Wheelock points out the shift in structure of
   the Fed after Benjamin Strong's death likely worsened things, in accord with
   Friedman and Schwartz's position, as it weakened the influence of individuals
   who had the ability and understanding to depart from the flawed strategy.
         Finally, a number of episodes have not yet been reassessed by a later
   generation of scholars, One is the post-1951 period, which Friedman and

                                        48
 Schwartz regarded as a decade of monetary tranquility in a turbulent era, Why
 was that period so special?
       The legacy to economic history of A Monetary History is not simply that its
 scholarly and thought-provoking reinterpretation of U.S. monetary history has
 generated a growth industry of scholarly papers. The legacy also stems from
 the novel way in which Friedman and Schwartz presented monetary history from
 the perspective of the relationship between the stock of money and the rest of
 the economy. This interweave between monetary theory and economic history
 has changed the way monetary history is approached around the world. The
analytical framework of the modern quantity theory underlying the book —
modified and expanded to incorporate newer theoretical and empirical techniques
— has been applied to the experiences of numerous countries over vast ranges
of history.
       Before A Monetary history monetary history was dominated by the study of
 the development of financial and monetary institutions, the conduct of monetary
policy, and the anatomy of financial crises. A number of monetary theorists
used historical examples to illustrate particular monetary theories, e.g., Fisher
 (1911), Keynes (1930), Warburton (1952). Some historians applied the quantity
theory to explain episodes of inflation, e.g., Hamilton (1934) and White (1980).
Friedman and Schwartz were the first authors to consistently apply a set of
theoretical tools to the monetary history of a major country over close to a
century, spanning numerous institutional changes and monetary disturbances.
       In addition, the data on the money stock, its components and other
aggregates compiled in A Monetary History and in the two companion volumes,
has proved and will continue to prove invaluable to both historical and applied
research in monetary economics,
       By calculating the hypothetical effects on the money stock of a
one—billion—dollar—open—market operation at various watersheds during the Great
Contraction, the authors pioneered in the posing of counterfactual questions —
an important tool of economic history — even before Robert Fogel's (1964)
renowned study of the impact of the railroads on U.S. economic growth.
       The unique portrayal of the historical circumstances of monetary
disturbances, and of alternative institutional arrangements as background
conditions serve the monetary economist with the closest thing to a laboratory
experiment. The book's example has become an important tool of modern
macroeconomic research.
                                      49
      In the dark age of vector autoregressions where it is no longer possible
to identify truly causal relationships, turning to the record of history provides
a beacon of light. A Monetary Hisjpçy has shown the way.




                                      50
                                    FOOTNOTES
* For    helpful comments and suggestions, I would like to thank George Benston,
 Bennett McCallum, Allan Meltzer, Hugh Rockoff, Anna Schwartz and Geoffrey Wood.
 Able research assistance was provided by Ivan Marcotte.
            However the reviewers all had critical comments to make.          Clower
 criticized their methodology for its opaqueness, Tobin was highly critical of their
 treatment of the long-run behavior of velocity and of their explanation for
 excess reserves in the l930's Brunner (1965) also criticized the treatment of
 excess reserves arid, along with Meltzer, the lack of an explicit model of the
 money supply process.
          See Price (1961). Also see Bordo and Landau (1979) for earlier evidence
 on the pattern of citations in economic theory.
          There has been only limited attention paid to the inflation of 1897- 1914.
 See Schwartz (1973) for an excellent summary of worldwide historical evidence
consistent with the view presented in A Monetary History that sustained rises in
the price level are closely associated with money growth in excess of the growth
of real output.
           In a similar type of argument, Calomiris and Hubbard (1986) attribute
economic contraction in the pre—191I period to credit rationing in the face of
deflationary shocks.
          See Calomiris and Hubbard (1987).
            Based on Granger causality tests between the unexpected shock
component of failed business liabilities and a proxy for consumption (pig iron
production) and a measure of losses on deposits.
        1 It also should be
                             pointed out that there were numerous arrangements
available short of complete restriction. Thus, for example, in the 1930's banks
would pay out part of a withdrawal and then pay interest on the remainder.
          This section draws on Bordo (1986).
          Friedman and Schwartz (1963 a, b) recognize the possibility of influences
running from income to money but present evidence that for major contractions
the influence from money to income clearly dominates.
        10 The
                sample underlying Gordon and Wilcox's simulations covered only a
limited number of observations of business cycles, Lothian (1981) noted. In
regressions based on annual money and income data over the period 1893—1928,
money explained a substantial proportion of the fall in income until 1930 and all
of the decline in the decade of the 1930'8.
                                       51
       Lothian also compared the experiences of the U.S. and the U.K. in the
depressions of 1920—21 and 1929—33, presenting evidence that the cycles in both
countries had monetary origins and that monetary factors explained their
severity and duration. For money to be passive, he added, some factor other
than monetary growth must have varied in the same way between the two
countries to explain their different cyclical performances, yet no one had
produced such evidence.
       Meltzer (1981) denied that the monetary base could have been caused by
feedback fron income because (a) banks rarely borrowed from the Federal
Reserve; (b) there was little evidence of a strong influence coming through the
balance of payments; and (c) Fed open market policy did not respond much to
movements in income.
           Trescott (1984) found that Boughton and Wicker's demand for currency
regression was unstable when divided at February/March 1933 and at January
 1924. When the pre—l924 and post—March 1933 periods are removed (the first
 period, according to Trescott (1982), representing a different policy regime, the
second dominated by the Bank Holiday), the regression showed bank failures to
 have been the key cause of the rise in the currency—depositratio 1930—33.
       12 Wicker regarded the failure of the flank of United States in December

 1930 as localized in New York City, contributing little to an increase in the bank
failure rate elsewhere in the country.
       The banking panic of 1930 according to Wicker (1982) was unique in that it
 originated outside the New York money market and had no discernible effects on
 interest rates except in local markets. Its only effect appeared to he a decline
 in expenditure in the St. Louis Federal Reserve District (the district containing
 most of the affected banks) that was induced by a reduction in bank debits.
        13 Also see Gandolfi and Lothian (1979) and Schwartz (1981). Although

 Boughton and Wicker (1984), found interest rates to be a significant determinant
 of the deposit—currency ratio, they were doubtful that the elasticity was large
 enough to justify Temin's claim.
        14 See also Schwartz (1981), p. 20 and Meltzer (1976), who argued that an

 implausible implication of Temin's position is that if the economy was
 characterized by an excess ipply of money, excess supply of goode and labor,
 therefore by Wslrss' Law there would have been an excess demand for securities.
           Also see Temin (1983).
        16 See Bordo and Schwartz (1977), p. 102.
                                       52
data.
        '    Anderson and Butkiewicz (1980) obtained similar   results using quarterly

        16  Streefkerk (1983) constructed a rational expectations based model of
the Great Depression in the      U.S. which, following the approach of Brunner,
 Cukierman and Meitzer (1980), distinguishes between temporary and permanent

        '
 shocks. His preliminary results are consistent with the Schwartz account.
           Hamilton (1987b) reinterpreted this episode and the 1931 gold drain as
 examples conducive to analysis by the speculative attack models developed by
 Garber and Flood (1982) and others.
           Bessier (1985) tested Warren's (1935) hypothesis that leaving the gold
 standard and allowing the price of gold to rise would immediately raise the price
of traded goods and hene the price level. Dossier found, based on innovation
 accounting from vector autoregressions with weekly data, that gold prices in
 1933 Granger caused key agricultural commodities prices, with a very rapid
 response.
       21
           Cagan (1965) calculated the rate of return on issuing national bank
 notes as the rate) of the net interest income earned on the bonds purchased
with the notes issued (net of the costs of note redemption, cash reserves on the
notes at the Treasury, and a small tax on the note issue) to the amount of
capital tied up in acquiring the bonds — the difference between the market
price and the amount of notes issued. He found rates of return comparable to
those on other assets over the period 1875 to 1913 except for the late 1880's.
By 1900, the rate of return was close to 25%. For Cagan, the puzzle was to
explain why at such high rates of return less than 60% of eligible notes were
issued.
       22 Canova (1987), who used a model of stochastic seasonality based on

spectral methods, found that the interest rate seasonal wasn't eliminated in 1914.
He attributed the reduction in banking panics after 1914 to the Fed's ability to
offset foreign-induced shocks to the money supply. Also see Dewald (1972) for
evidence against a raduction in the seasonal, and Wheelock (1987) who found no
evidence of any change in interest rate and bank reserves seasonals after 1929.
       23 Friedman and Schwartz saw an
                                           inconsistency between the two founding
principles in that the gold standard effectively limited money issue whereas the
real bills doctrine did not. See Mints (1945). Sargent and Wallace (1982)
constructed an overlapping generations model for a small open economy under
the gold standard, which they argue was consistent with the real bills doctrine
                                         53
of Adam Smith. However, Laidler (1983) saw little relevance of their model to
Smith's treatment of the reel hills doctrine or the gold standard.
           However, Tome (1987) demonstrated, based on vector autoregressions
end monthly data, that the Fed could not have conducted countercyclicel open
market operations during the 1920's because such operations were fully offset by
changes in member bank borrowing which left Federsl Reserve credit constant.
       25 Epstein and Ferguson (1984) disagreed that the reason the Fed

conducted large open market purchases in early 1932 was because of
Congressional pressure. It did so because the rise in the discount rate in
October 1931, by reducing bond prices, threatened the solvency of many large
banks, which put pressure on the Fed to sot. The reason for early abandonment
of the program was declining abort—term yields which squeezed the earnings of
many large commercial banks (they hsd shifted their portfolios from long-term to
short—term bonds as a reaction to the preceding liquidity crises). According to
the authors, it was no accident that Governor MacDougall of Chicago and
Governor Young of Boston were the chief opponents of open market purchases.
These were two kay districts whose member banks had the highest ratio of
investments to loans and the lowest net earnings.
          Wicker also disagreed with Friedman and Schwartz's view that domestic
rather than international considerations dominated policy in the 1920's. His
interpretation of the evidence was that in 1924, the majority of governors voting
for expansionary open market policy did so because of a desire to build up the
security holdings of the Fed to be used to offset a future inflationary gold
 inflow, In addition, Strong wsnted to reduce the interest rate differential
 between London and New York to help Britain return to gold. International
 considerations also predominsted in 1927 according to Wicker. By contrast, in
 1930, the gold standard was not in danger, hence little need was soon for
 expansionary policy. Brunner and Meltzer's (1968) interpretation of the record
 disputes Wicker's emphasis on international factors. Their critique is buttrasaad
 by the insignificant influence of several international variables in Fad policy
 reaction functions that Wheelock estimated (1987).
            Wheelock used s longer sample period than Trascott used, and
 constructed separste reaction functions for each of the Fed's policy tools,
 whereas Tresoott focused only on the Fed's open market holdings, and conducted
 formal stability tests.   Bis application of stability tests to Trescott's modal
 showed no change in policy in 1929.
                                       54
            For a discussion of the influence of the small unit bank lobby on U.S.
 banking legislation before 1929, see White (1983).
        25 See Friedman and Schwartz, footnote 22, pp. 443—4 for a similar view.
Also see Schwartz (1979). For evidence that the paying of interest on demand
deposits did not load banks to engage in riskier investments than otherwise, see
Benston (1964).
           White (1986) effectively argues that investment banking activity by the
commercial banks during the 1920's did not impair their balance sheets.
           There is overwhelming evidenco against a liquidity trap in the demand
for money during the 1930's, See e.g., Gandolfi (1974), Gandolfi and Lothian
(1976), and the studies surveyed in Laidler (1985). Brunmer and Meltzer (1968)
provided evidence against a liquidity trap in bank excess reserves.
            Based on a regression using annual data 1947 to 1979 of changes in
real Federal Reserve expenditures on the Fed's open market wealth, a measure of
the Fed's nonmonetary output, and a wage variable.
           The 1947 agreement between the Fed and Treasury to eliminate the 3/85
ceiling   on  short—term rates was not a reflection of the Fed's concern with
inflation, as argued by Friedman and Schwartz, according to Tomo (1982).
Instead according to the theory of bureaucracy, it ser'.ed to eliminate a program
which made short—term bonds as good as money. Tho agreement caused banks to
increase excess reserves, reduce the deposit—reserve ratio and hence the money
multiplier, thereby raising the Fed's share of inflation tax revenue. Further,
according to this interpretation, the Fed's decision in 1947 to turn over a
fraction  f   its open market revenue to the Treasury was in exchange for the
Treasury's agreement to eliminate the ceiling on short—term rates, At the acme
time, the transfer served to prevent an attempt by Congress to capture some of
the inflation tax revenue earned during World War 11.
           According to Officer the wholesale price series Kindahl and Friedman
and Schwartz used is flawed by double counting, the omission of services, and
the overweighing of imports.
           Indeed the annual growth rate of Berry's real GNP series of 4.2 percent
from 1869—1879 is almost identical to Friedman and Schwartz's refined estimate
(1963, Table 3, p. 39) of 4.3 percent.

      '    See e.g., Cagan (1965).
            Calomiris and Hubbard (1987) provide further evidence of commodity
and capital market arbitrage. They calculated allowable bandwidths between U.S.
                                      66
and British prices of selected commodities consistent with arbitrage, finding the
actual price movements fall withio the range.       Evidence for capital market
integration  is based on triangular arbitrage between U.S and British high—grade
commercial paper rates and bEla of exchange.
           Aghelvi's (1975) evidence for the U.S. during this period that
anticyclical moveneota of the balance of trade dominate procyclical movements of
net capital flows supports the Friedman and Schwartz rather than the monetary

        '
approach model.
          Gerber (1985) treated dollar bonds under himetaUiam as a type of option
allowing the holder to receive on maturity either gold or silver, whichever
metal's price had increased relative to the official price. Calculation of the
option value of honda during the period 1818-1896 provided evidence on thc
probability the market attached at various times to a switch between silver and
gold.
        °   Also   ace Tinberlakc (1978al who made a similar argument without tho
simulations.
          l-lamiltoo(1987a) motes that the fact that net gold flowa went to thc U,E.
still supports Friedman and Schwartz. Also it is not clear from Erenliog's
argunent why it should matter if the sourcoa of gold are private or official.
          See ag, Meltzer (1976), Brunner (1981) and Saint Etienne (1984) on tho
importance of the Smoot-liawley tariff, Eichengreem (1987b) for the counter view.
Eichengreen (1987c) assesses various monetary and nonmonetary explanations,
downplaying virtually all except the consequences of U.S. and French
contractionary gold policiea.




                                         56
                                   REFERENCES

Acheson, K. and Chant, J. F., 1973.  Bureaucratic Theory and thc choice of
    Central Bank Goals.   Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, May, pp.
   C37-55 5.
Aghelvi, B. S., 1975. "The Balance of Payments and the Money Supply Under the
   Gold Standard Regime: U.S. 1879-1914.' American Economic Review, 65, pp.
    10—58.

Anderson, 2. L. and J. L. Butkiewi'-z, 19R0, "Money, Spending and The Great
    Depression.' Southern Economi: JurnaI. Vol. 47, N. 2, October, pp. 388-403.
Barro, R. and B. Gordon, 1983b. "Rules, Discretion and Reputation inaModel of
    Monetary Policy."   Journal of Monetary Econmc, Vl. 12, No. I (Jiiy),
    1r'l-.loo
Barsky, B. B., Mankiw, N. G., Mirn, J. A,, Weil, B. U., 1987. "The Worldwide
    Chang. 0. ho Bohaviuc of Interest Ratc ar..J Pc e5 in 1911.             (Mimeo)
    Paper presented at the WEA International M etings, Vancouver, ranada, July.
Benston, G., 1964. "Interest Payments on Demand Deposits and Rank Investment
    Behavior. J, urnal ,f P litical           tol,IXX11, No. 5 (pp. 431 419).
Benston, C., 1982. 'Why Did Congress Pass New Financial Services Laws in the
    1930's?" Fedora! Reserve Rank of tlanta F anemic Review )lpril), pp. 7-10.
Bernacke, B., 1983.      "Non Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
    Propagat.,uo ,f the Great Depr asian." lacricun Economic Revioa (Juno), 101.
    73, N. 3, pp. 25—17C,
Berry, T. S., 1968. Estrnuto'4 Innusl Variations in Cross National Product 1789 to
    1909. The Bcstwick Press, University of Richmond, Richmond.
Bessler, D. A,, 1985. "Agricultural Prices, The Gold Standard, and the Great
    Depression. The Warren Thesis Revisited."           (Mimeo) Texas A and M
    University.
Blanchard, B. and Watson, M., 1982.        "Bubbles, Rational Expectations, and
    Financial Markets" in P. Wachtel (ed), Crises in the Economic and Financial
    Structure. Lexington Books, Lexington, Massachusetts.
Bordo, M. B., 1986.      "Explorations in Monetary l{istory:    A Survey of the
    Literature."    Explorations in Economic History, 18, No. 3 (October;, pp.
    339—415.
Bordo. M. B. and Landau, D., 1979. "The Pattern of Citations in Economic Theory
    1948—68:    An Exploration Towards a Quantitative History of Thought."
    History of Political Economy, Vol. ii, No. 2, pp. 290—253.
                                        57
Bordo, M.    and A. 3. Schwartz, 1977. "Issues in Monetary Economics and Their
            D.

   Impact on Research in Economic history," in P. Gallnan (ed.).        Recent
                                                                            in
   Development in th Stud' of Businese and Economic History: Essays
   Memory of Herman E. Eroos, JAI Press, Greenwich, Connecticut.
Boughton, J. and Wicker, E., 1979. "The Behaviour of the Currency-Deposit Ratio
   During the Great Depression." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
   November, Vol. 1, No. 4, 405—418.
Brandt, L. and Sargent, T. 3,, 1987. "Interpreting New Evidence about China and
    U.S. Silver Purchases." (Mimeo) Hoover Inatitution.
Brunner, K., 1965. "Inatitutinna, Policy, and Monotary Analysis." Journal of
    Political Eoonom LXXIII, (April), pp. 197-218.
Brunner, K., 1981.    "Comment" in The Great Dopreaaion Revisited.      Boston:
   Msrtinus Nijhoff.
Bruaner, K., Cukierman, A,, and Meltzer, A. B., 1980. "Stagflation, Persistent
   Unemployment and the Permanence of Economic Shocks." ipppngLofonstar"
    Economics, 6, 467-492.
Brunner, 3. and Moltzer, A. H., 1968. "Liquidity Traps for Money, Bank Credit,
    and Interest Ratea." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 76, No. I (Jan/Fsh),
    pp. 1-37.
_____________________________________1968. "What Did we Learn from the Monetary
     Experiences of the United States in the Great Depreaaion?" Canadian Journal
    of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 334—48.
Brunner, K., and Meltzer, A. K., 1988. "Money and Credit in the Monetary
    Transmission Proceaa."        Anerioan Eoonomio AasopjjionPaepqd
    Prooeedinga, May.
                                                                          — An
Cagan, P., 1963. "The First Fifty Years of the National Banking System
    Historical Appraisal" in Deane Carson (ad.). Banking and Monetary Studies,
    Richard B. Irwin, Homewood, Illinois.
Cagan, p., 1965. Determinanta and Effecta of Changes in the Stock of Money,
    1875—1960. Columbia University Press, New York.
Caloniria, C. W., 1986. "Understanding Greenback Inflation and Beflation: An
    Asset Pricing Approach." (Mimeo) Northweatern University, September.
Calomiris, C. W. and Eubberd P. G., 1986. "Price Flexibility, Credit Availability,
    and Economic Fluctuations:           Evidence from the U.S., 1879-1914.'
    Northwestern University (Mimeo) December,

                                      58
Calomiris, C.   W.   and Hubbard, B.   G., 1987.   "The International Adjustment Under
    the Classical Gold Standard: Evidence for the          U.S. and Britain, 1879 -1914."
    N.B.E.R.    Working Paper, No. 2206.
Canova, F., 1987. "Seasonality, the Creation of the Fed and Financial Panics: A
   Reinterpretation," (Miineol, University of Minnesota.
Choudhri, E. and l{ochin, L., 1980. "The Exchange Rate and the International
   Transmission of Business Disturbances: Some Evidence from the Great
   Depression. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. XII, No. 1, Parf I
    (November), 565—574.
Clark, T., 7986. "Interest Rate Seasonals and The Federal Reser:o." Journal of
     Political Economy, 91, I(Feb.), pp. 76—125.
Clower, R. W., 1964. "Monetary History and Positive Economics." Journal of
     Economic History, Vol. 24, pp. 384—80.
Cease, H., 1937. "The Nature of the Firm." Ecunomica N.S., 4, pp. 386-405.
DeLong, J. B. and Summers, L. H., 1985. "The Changing Cyclical Variability of
     Economic Activity in the United States" in H. J. Gordon (ed.). The merican
     Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, Chicago, University of Chicago Press
    for the N.B.E.R.
Dewald, W. C., 1972, "The National Monetary Commission: 1 Look Back." Journal
    of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. IV, No. 4 (November), pp. 930—956.
Diamond, P. W. arid Dybvig, P. H., 1983. "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
     Liquidity." Journal of Political Economy, 91, 3 (June), pp. 401—419.
Drake, L., 1985. "Reconstruction of a Bimetallic Price Level." pJ.atiensin
    Economic History, Vol. 22, No. 2 (April), 194—219.
Drummond, 1., 1976.       "The Russian Gold Standard, 1897-1914."       Journal of
    Economic History, Vol. XXXVI, No. 3 (September), pp. 663—688.
Eichengreen, B., 1987a. "The Political Economy of            th
                                                              Smoot-Hawley Tariff.'
    Research in Economic History (forthcoming).
Eichengreen, B., 1987b. "The Gold Exchange Standard and the Great Depression."
    Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper. No. 1298.
Eichengreen, B., 1987c, "Did International Economic Forces Cause the Great
    Depression?"       (Mimeo)      Presented at Western Economic Association
    Intoriationa1 Meetings, Vancouver, June.
Epstein, G. and Ferguson, T., 1984. "Monetary Policy, Loan Liquidation, and
    Industrial Conflict:     The Federal Reserve and the Great Contraction."
    Journal of Economic History, Vol. XLIV, No. 4, December, pp. 957—984.
                                           59
Evans, P.,  1985. "Monetary Collapse During the Great Depression: Did the Money
     Stock Fall, or Was it Pushed?" University of Houston (Mimeo).
Field, A., 1984a. "Asset Exchanges and the Transactions Demand fur Money,
     1919—29." American Economic Review, Vol. 74, No. 1 (March), 13—59.
Field. A., 19Mb. 'A New Interpretation of the Onset of the Great Depression."
     Journal of Economic History, Vol. XLIV, No. 2 (June), 489—498.
Fisher, I., [19I1J, 1971. The Purchasing Power of Money. Eelly, New York.
Fogel. B., 1964, Railroads and American Economic Growth.            Johns Hopkins,
     Baltimore.
Fratianni, M. and F. Spinelli, 1984.       "Italy in the Gold Standard Period,
    1861—1914," in M.D. Hordo and A. J. Schwartz (ads), A Retrospective on tho
   Classical Gold Standard, 1821—1931, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Fremling, G. M., 1986. "Did the United States Transmit the Groat Depression to
    the Rest of Lhe World?" American Economic Review, Vol. 75, No. 5,
    (December), pp. 1181—1185.
Fronkol, J., 1971. "A Theory of Money, Trade and the Balance of Payments In u
    Model of Accumulation." Journal of International Economics, 1, pp. 159—187.
Friedman, M., 1956. "The Quantity Theory of Money — A Restatement" in Studios
    in the Quantity Theory of Money ad., M. Friedman, University of Chicago
    Press, Chicsgo.
Friedman, M., 1984. Comment on McClcskoy and Zochor in M. D. Dordo and Anna
     J. Schwartz (ads.), A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821—1931,
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz, 1963a, A Monetary History of the United Stotes
     1867—1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz, 1963b. "Money and Business Cycles." Review
     of Economics and Statistics, 45, No. 1, part 2 (February), pp. 32—64.
Friedman, M. and A. .1. Schwartz, 1970. Monetary Statistics of the United States.
    National Bureau of Economic Research, New York.
Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz, 1982. Monetary Trends in the United States
     and the United Eingdom. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Gandolfi, A. E. and Lothian, J. B., 1976. "The Demand for Money from the Groat
     Depression to the Proscot." American Economic Review, Vol. 66, #2, pp.
    46—51.
Gandolfi, A. E. and Lnthion, J. R., 1979. "Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great
    Depression." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, November, pp. 679-91.
                                       60
Garber, P. M., 1981. 'The Lender of Last Resort and the Run on Savings and
    Loans.' NBER Working Paper No. 823.
Carber, P. M., 1980. "Nominal Contracts in a Bimetallic Standard." American
    Economic Review 76 (December), pp. 1012-1030.
Carber, P. and Grilli, V., 1986.  The Belmont-Morgan Syndicate as an Optimal
    Investment Banking Contract." European Economic Review, 30, 649—672.
Carber, P. and Flood R., 1982. 'Bubbles, Runs, and Gold Monetization," in P.
    Waehtel, (ad.) Craes in thn F'or.omic and Financial Structure. Lexington
    Books, Lexington, Massachusetts.
Coodhart, C.A.E., 1968. "Profit on National Bank Notes, 1900-1913.' Journal of
    Political Econo, 79(October), pp. 515-522.
Cordon, P. and J. Wilcox, 1981.      "Manetarist Interpretations of the Great
    Dopression An Evaluation and Critique," in P1. Brunner (ed) The Great
    Depressions Revisited. Martinus Nijhoff, Boston,
Corton, C., 1921a. "Priate Clearinghouses and the Origins of Central Banking."
    Federal Reservo Rank of Philadelphia Review, January/February.
Gorton, C., 198th.    "Banking Panics and Business Cycles." Wharton School
    (Mimeo).
Gorton, C., 1985a. "Clearinghouses and the Origins of Central Banking in the
    U.S." Journal of Economic History, Vol. XLV, No. 2 (June), 277—284.
Corton, C., 1985b. "Bank Suspensions on Convertibility." Journal of Monetary
    Economics, Vol. 15, N. 2 (March), 177-193.
Hamilton, E., 1934. American Treasure and the Price Revolution in Spain. Harvard
   University Press, Cambridge.
Hamilton, 3. 0., l9B7a. "Monetary Factors in the Great Depression." Journal of
   Monetary Economics, 19, pp. 145—169.
Hamilton, J. D., 198Th.    "The Role of the International Gold Standard in
   Propagating the Great Depression."             Paper presented at the WEA
   International, Vancouver, July.
Horwich, C., 1963.    "Effective Reserves, Credit and Causality in the Banking
    System of the   Thirties" in D. Carson (ed.) Banking and Monetary Studies.
   Hornewood, Ill., Richard Irwin.
Horwich, C., 1966.    "Liquidity Trap in the Thirties: Comment." Journal of
    Political Economy, Vol. 74, No. 3 (June), pp. 286-290.



                                     61
Huffman, W. and Lothian, J., 1984.  "The Gold Standard and the Transmission of
    Business Cycles, 1833—1932," in M. P. Bordo and A. 3. Schwartz (eds.) A
    Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821-1931. University of
    Chicago Press, Chicago.
James, 3., 1976.    'The Conundrum of the Low issue of National Bank Notes,
    Journal of Political Economy, 84(April), pp. 359—367.
Johnson, H. G., 1965.     'A Quantity Theorist's Monetary History of the United
    States." Economic Journal, Vol. 75, PP. 388-96.
Johnson, H. G., 1975. "The Monetary Approach to Balance of Payments Theory.'
    The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments, ed. by J. Frenkel and H.
    C. Johnson, PP. 147-167.
Jonung, L.,    1984.  "Swedish Experience Under the Classical Gold Standard,
    1873—1914," in M. 0. Bordo and A. J. Schwartz (eds.), A Retrospective on the
    Classical Gold Standard, 1821—1931, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Kane, E. J., 1985. The Gathering Crisis in Federal Deposit Insurance. MIT Press,
    Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Keynes, 3. M., [1930], 1971. The Applied Theory of Money: A Troatir on Money.
    Vol. 6 of The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes. Reprint. London:
    MacMillan and New York: Cambridge University Press for the Royal Economic
    Society.
Kindahi, 3., l961. "Economic Factors in Specie Resumption." Journal of Political
    Economy, 59, pp. 30-48.
Kindleberger, C. P., 1973. The World in Depression 1929—39.         University of
    California Press, Berkeley.
Laidler, D., 1984. "Misconceptions about the Real Bills Doctrine: A Comment on
    Sargent and Wallace." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 92, No. I, pp.
    149—155.

Laidler, D., 1985. The Demand for Money: Theories and Evidence, Third Edition,
    Harper and Row, New York.
lothian, 3. P., 1981. "Comments on Monotarist Interpretations of the Groat
    Depression," in Ii. Brunner (ed.) The Great Depression Revisited, Martinus
   Nijhoff, Boston.
Macesich, 6., 1960.    "Sourc,a of Monetary Disturbances in tho United States,
    1834—45."   Journal of Economic History, 20, pp. 407—434.


                                      52
Mankiw,  N. C., and Miron, J. A., 1986.   'The Changing Behavior of the Term
    Structure of Interest Ratos." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Cl, 2 (May),
    211—228.
                                             "The Adjustment of Expectations to
Marikiw, N. C., Miron, J. A., Weil, D. N., 1987.
   a Change in Regime: A Study of the Founding of the Federal Reserve."
   American Economic Review, Vol. 77, No. 3 (June), pp. 358—374.
Mayer, T., 1978a, "Money and the Great Depression: A Critique of Professor
   Te:niri' Thesis." Explorations in Economic history, Vol. 15, No. 3, (April), pp.
    127—145.
Mayer, T., 1978b. "Consumption in the Great Depression." Journal of Political
   Economy, Vol. 86, Vol. 1, (February), pp. 139—115.
McCandless, G. T., 1985. "Money, Expectations and the U.S. Civil War." Dartmouth
   College (Mime4.
McCloskey, P. N. arid J. R. Zecher, 1976.      "How the Gold Standard Worked,
   1880—1913,"  in  J. Frunkel and H. G  Johnson  The Monetary Approach to the
   Balance  of Payments, University of Toronto  Press.
McCloskey, P. N. and J. R. Zecher, 1984. "The Success of Purchasing Power
   Parity: Historical Evidence and Its Implications for Macroeconomics," n M. P.
   Bordo and A. J. Schwartz (eds.) A Retrospective on the Classical Gold
    Standard,  1821—1931, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Meltzer, A. H., 1965. "Monetary Theory and Monetary History." Schweizerische
    Zeitschrift fur Volkswirtgchaft und Statistik, 101, Jahrgang, Heft 1, Pp.
    404—422.

Meltzer, A.     H,  "Monetary and Other Explanations of the Start of the Great
                     1976,
    Depression." Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 1, No. 4 (November), pp.
    455—471.

Meltzer,   A.    H., 1981.          "Comments on Monetarist Explanations of the Great
    Depression," in          K.   Brunner (ed.) The Great Depression Revisited. Martinus
    Nijhoff, Boston.
Mindell, B., 1971. Monetary Theory, Pacific Palisades, California, Goodyear.
Mints, L., 1945. A History of Banking Theory in Great Britain and the United
    States. Chicago. University of Chicago Press.
Miron, J. A., 1986. "Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest
    Rate, and the Founding of the Fed." American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No.
    I   (March), 125—140.

                                                63
Mitchell, W. C., 1903.ffltorof     the Greenbacks. University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago.
Morrison, G., 1966.      Liquidity Preference of Commercial Banks, Chicago,
    University of Chicago Press.
Niskanen, W, A., 1975.     Bureaucracy and Representative Government, Aldine,
    Chicago.
Officer, L. A., 1981, 'The Floating Dollar in the Greenback Period: A Tcst of
    Theories of Exchange Bate Determination." Journ1 of Economic History, Vol.
    XLI, No. 3, (September), pp. 629—650.
Phelps, B. B., 1985. A Finance Approach to Convertible Money Regimes: ANew
     Interpretation of the Greenback Era. Ph.D. Dissertation, Yale University.
Price, D. J., 1961. Little Science, Big Science, New York,
Rich, 0., 1984. "Canada Without a Central Bank: Operation of the Price Specie
     Flow Mechanism, 1872—1913," in M. D. Bordo and A. J. Schwartz (ads.), A
     Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821-1931, University of
     Chicago Press, Chicago.
Rockoff, H., 1981. "Price and Wage Contracts in Four Wartime Periods." Journal
     of Economic History, Vol. XLI, No. 2 (June), 381—401.
Roll, B., 1972.    "Interest Rates and Price Expectations During thc Civil War'
     Journal of Economic History, 32, (June), pp. 476—498.
Rolnick, A. and Weber, W., 1986. "Gresham's Law or Gresham's Fallacy." Journal
     of Political Economy, 94, pp. 185—189.
Saint—Eteinne, C., 1984.     The Great Depression, 1929—1938: Lessons for the
     1BBO's, Stanford: Hoover Institution Press.
Sargent, T. J. and Wallace, N., 1982. "The Real Bills Doctrine versus the Quantity
     Theory: A Reconsideration." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 90, No. C
     (December), pp. 1212—1236.
Sargent,T. J. and Wallace, N., 1983. "A Legal Restrictions Theory of the Demand
     for Money and The Bole of Monetary Policy."           Federal Reserve Bank of
     Minnesota Quarterly Review, Winter.
Sayers, H. S., 1936. Bank of England Operations 1890-1914, London: P. S. King
     and Son, Ltd.
Schwartz, A. J., 1973. "SecuEr Price Change in Historical Perspective." Journal
     of Money, Credit and Banking, 5, Part II, pp. 243—269.


                                      64
Schwartz,    A.    J.,   The Aliber, Dewald, and Gordon Papers, A Comment.'
                          1972.
    (1972). Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. IV, No. 4 (November), pp.
    978—984.
Schwartz, A. J., 1979. "Discussion," in 0. M. Walton (ad). Regulatory Change in
   an Atmosphere of Crisis: Current Implications of the Roosevelt Years.
   Academic Press, New York, pp. 93-99.
Schwartz, A, J., 1981. "Understanding 1929—33," in H. Brunner (ed.) The Great
   Depression Revisited, Martinus Nijhoff, Boston.
Schwartz, A. J., 1986. 'Real and Pseudo Financial Crises," in F. Capie and G. E.
   Wood, ads, Financial Crises and the Workd Banking System, London,
    MacMillan.
Schwartz,    A.   J.,    1987.    Financial Stability and the Federal Safety Act."   (Mimuo)
    N.B.E.R.
Shiller, B. J., 1980. 'Can the Fed Control Real Interest Bates?" in Rational
    Expectations, and Economic Policy, Stanley Fischer ed. Chicago: University
   of Chicago Press.
Short, P. D. and O'Driscoll Jr., C. P., 1983.       "Deregulation and Deposit
    Insurance," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Review, September, pp.
    11—22.
Smith. B. 0., 1987    'Bank Panics, Suspensions, and Geography: Some Notes on
    the 'Contagions of Fear' in Banking."       (Mimeo).   University of Western
    Ontario.
Sprague, 0. M. W., 1910. History of Crises under the National Banking System
    (National Monetary Commission). Washington, D.C. Government Printing Office.
Stauffer, B., 1981. "The Bank Failures of 1930—31." Journal of Money, Credit
    and Banking, Vol. XIII, No. 1 (February), pp. 109—113.
Streefkerk, N., 1983. "The Economics of Output Changes: The American Great
    Depression: A Rational Expectations Analysis." (Mizneo). Rottordam: Erasmus
    University.
Tamanga, F. M., 1942. Banking and Finance in China, New York, Institute of
    Pacific Relations.
Temin, P., 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression. W.W. Norton,
    New York.
Ternin, P., 1983. "Monetary Trends and Other Phenomena." Journal of Economic
    History, Vol. XLIII, No. 3 (September), 729—739.

                                               65
Timberlake, Jr., H., 1975. 'The Resumption Act and the Money Supply." Journal
   of Monetary Economics, VII, 343—354.
Timberlake, Jr., P., 1978a. "Repeal of Silver Monetizaton in the Late Nineteenth
   Century." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 10, No. 1 (February),
   pp. 27-45.
Timberlake, Jr., H., 1978b. The Origins of Central Banking in the United States,
   Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Masschusetts.
Timberlake, Jr., H., 1984.       "The Central Banking Role of Clearing House
   Associations." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. XVI, No. 1
    (February), 1—15.
Tobin, Jr., 1985. "The Monetary Interpretation of History." American Economic
   Review, June, 55, 26—37.
Toma, M., 1982.       "Inflationary Bias of the Federal Reserve System:       A
   Bureaucratic Perspective." Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 10, No. 2
    (September), pp. 163—190.
Toma, M., 1985. "A Duopoly Theory of Government Money Production: The 1930's
   and 1940's." Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 15, No. 3 (May), pp.
    363—382.
Toma, M., 1987.   "The Policy Effectiveness of Open Market Operations in the
    1920's." Miami University (mimeo).
Trecott, P., 1982. "Federal Reserve Policy in the Great Contraction:           A
    Counterfactual Assessment." Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 19, No. 3
    (July), pp. 211—220.
Trescott, P., 1984. "The Behavior of the Currency-Deposit Ratio During the Great
    Depression." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, XVI (3), August,
    362—365.

Vaubol, R., 1984a. "International Debt, Bank Failures and the Money Supply:
    The Thirties and the Eighties." Cato Journal, Vol. 4, Mo. I (Spring!
    Summer), 249-.268.
Waldo, D. G., 1985.    "Bank Runs, the Deposit-Currency Ratio and the Interest
    Rate." Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 15, No, 3 (May), pp. 269—278.
Warburton, C., 1958. "Variations in Economic Growth and Banking Developments
    in the United States frcn 1835 to 1885," Journal of Economic History, 18, pp.
    283-297.
Warren, C. F. and Pearson, F. A., 1935. Gold and Prices, New York, Wiley.

                                      66
Weinstein, M., 1981.     "Some Macroeconomic Impacts of the National Industrial
    Recovery Act,    1935—35' in K. Brunner (ed.) The Great Depression Revisited,
    Martinus Nijhoff, Boston.
Weiritraub, H., 1978. "Congressional Supervision of Monetary Policy." Journal of
    Monetary Economics. Vol. 4. pp. 341-362.
West, H. C., 1976, "Real Bills, tho Gold Standard, and Central Bank Policy.'
   Business History Review, Winter, pp. 503—513.
West, R. C., 1977. Banking Reform and the Federal Reserve, 1863-1923. Ithaca
   Cornell University Press.
Whoelock, 0. C., 1987.    The Strategy and Consistency of Federal Reserve
   Monetary Policy 1919—1933. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, University of Illinois
    at Urbana—Champaign.
White,   A. D., 1980.   Fiat   Money   Inflation in France. Cato Institute, Washington,
    D.C.
White, H. N., 1982. "The Political Economy of Banking Regulations, 1264-1933."
    Journal of Economic History, Vol. XLII, No. 1, March, pp. 33—42.
White, E. N., 1983. The Hculation and Reform of the American Banking
    1900—1929, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
                                                                                  Sy
White, F. N., 1981. "A ReintorprotatLo of the Banking Crisis of 1930."             Journal
    of Economic History, Vol. XLIV, No. 1, March, pp. 119—138.
White, F. N., 1986.     "Before the Glass Steagall Act:      An Analysis of the
   Investment Activities of National Banks, Explorations in Economic Hi4o,
   Vol. 23, No. 1 (January), pp. 33—56.
Wicker, E., 1965. "Federal Reserve Monetary Policy 1929—33: A Reinterpretation."
   Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 73, No. 4, pp. 325—43.
Wicker, 8., 1966. Federal Reserve Monetary Policy 1917-1933. New York, Random
   House.
Wicker, E., 1960.     "A Reconsideration of Federal Reserve Policy during the
    1920—21 Depression."   Journal of Economic History, Vol. XXVI, No. 2, June.
Wicker, F. R.,  1969.   "The World War II Policy of Fixing a Pattern of Interest
    Rates." Journal of Finance, 24, pp. 447—458.
Wicker, E., 1980. "A Reconsideration of the Causes of the Banking Panic of
    1930." Journal of Economic Histppy, Vol. XL, No. 3 (September), pp. 571-583.
Wicker, 8., 1982. "Interest Ratos arid Expenditure Effects of the Banking Panic
    of 1930." Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 19, No. 4 (October), pp.
    435—445.
                                               67
                       'Was   the Bank Boliday of  1933 Caused by a Bun on the
Wigmore, B., 1987
    Dnllar"     Journal of Economic History,   Vol. XLVII. No. 3 (September) Pp.
    739—756.
Wilcox, J. A., 1964.   "Excess Reserves in the Great Depression."   NBEB Working

     Paper No. 1374.
Wiflismson, J. C., 1961.    "International Trade and United States Economic
    DevelopmsnU 1827-1643." Journal of Economic Eistory, 21, pp. 372—383.
Williamson, J. C., 1963. "Real Growth, Monetary Disturbances and the Transfer
    Process: The United States, 1879—1900." Southern Economic Journal, 29, pp.
    167—180.
Willett, T., 1968.  "International Specie Flows and American Monetary Stability
    1834—60."   Journal of Economic History, 28, pp. 28—50.




                                         68
