                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           PUBLIC DEBT THROUGH THE AGES

                                      Barry Eichengreen
                                      Asmaa El-Ganainy
                                          Rui Esteves
                                     Kris James Mitchener

                                      Working Paper 25494
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25494


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Barry Eichengreen, Asmaa El-Ganainy, Rui Esteves, and Kris James Mitchener.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Debt Through the Ages
Barry Eichengreen, Asmaa El-Ganainy, Rui Esteves, and Kris James Mitchener
NBER Working Paper No. 25494
January 2019
JEL No. F0,H0,N0

                                          ABSTRACT

We consider public debt from a long-term historical perspective, showing how the purposes for
which governments borrow have evolved over time. Periods when debt-to-GDP ratios rose
explosively as a result of wars, depressions and financial crises also have a long history. Many of
these episodes resulted in debt-management problems resolved through debasements and
restructurings. Less widely appreciated are successful debt consolidation episodes, instances in
which governments inheriting heavy debts ran primary surpluses for long periods in order to
reduce those burdens to sustainable levels. We analyze the economic and political circumstances
that made these successful debt consolidation episodes possible.

Barry Eichengreen                                Rui Esteves
Department of Economics                          Graduate Institute of International
University of California, Berkeley               and Development Studies
549 Evans Hall 3880                              Chemin Eugène-Rigot 2
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                          1211 Geneva
and NBER                                         Switzerland
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu                       rui.esteves@graduateinstitute.ch

Asmaa El-Ganainy                                 Kris James Mitchener
International Monetary Fund                      Department of Economics
700 19th Street, NW                              Leavey School of Business
Washington, DC 20431                             Santa Clara University
AELGanainy@imf.org                               Santa Clara, CA 95053
                                                 and NBER
                                                 kmitchener@scu.edu
                                    PUBLIC DEBT THROUGH THE AGES 1


                                              I. INTRODUCTION

        Sovereign debt is a Janus-faced asset class. 2 In the best of times it relaxes the domestic
constraint on savings, smooths consumption, and finances investment. Investors see it as a safe
haven, as delivering “alpha,” and as a means of portfolio diversification. In the worst of times it is
associated with debt overhangs, banking collapses, exchange-rate crises and inflationary
explosions. Investors see it unenforceable, illiquid and prone to messy debt workouts.

        In this paper, we use history to analyze both aspects. Historical evidence provides insight
into the seasons of darkness by increasing sample size. This helps because defaults on sovereign
debt are not as frequent as on, say, corporate bonds. History also can enrich our understanding of
those features of sovereign debt that are associated with crisis resolution, since there are variations
over time in the structure of debt contracts, their enforceability and the costs of default.

        But a long-run perspective is equally useful for understanding the seasons of light. History
illustrates how governments have used sovereign debt to shape economic and political
development. It shows how they have used it to help build lasting states, provide public goods and
complete infrastructure projects. Historical experience sheds light on how sovereign debt evolved
into a safe asset, as governments have sought to render it more attractive to investors and, in the
course of so doing, underpin the financial system.

        History doesn’t always unfold at the same pace, and the same is true of this paper. In its
first half (Sections 2-4) we review two millennia of debt history in an effort to recover the origins



1
  We thank Chengyu Huang for excellent research assistance and Michael Bordo, Mark De Broeck, Marc Flandreau
and Kenneth Rogoff for helpful comments. We also thank Ali Abbas, Alex Pienkowski and participants at the IMF
conference on Sovereign Debt (September 13-14, 2018) for useful suggestions. A revised version of this paper will
appear in “Sovereign Debt: A Guide for Economist and Practitioners, edited by S.M. Ali Abbas, Alex Pienkowski,
and Kenneth Rogoff (forthcoming, Oxford University Press and the IMF). This paper was originally published as
IMF Working Paper 19/6. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, or IMF management. © International Monetary Fund.
2
 In what follows, we focus on the debt of national (central, federal) governments and not those of state
governments, local governments and parastatals except where the latter have been explicitly assumed by the national
government, although this distinction is subject to both data and definitional problems, some of which are described
below.
                                                           2


of sovereign borrowing. In the second half (Sections 5-7), we then focus on the most recent century
of sovereign debt history, with its more direct implications for contemporary policy makers.

                                   II. PUBLIC DEBT AS STATE BUILDING

         Though it is challenging to pinpoint precisely when sovereign borrowing began, two
criteria can help us identify when political entities first began making concerted use of marketable
debt instruments. The first is the existence of the institutions necessary to issue public debt: durable
towns, cities, states and nations with well-defined borders; contract laws recognizing polities as
entities capable of borrowing; and ledgers for payment and repayment (i.e., accounting systems). 3
A second criterion is market constraints: the immediate demand for credit by the polity must
exceed tax revenues; and a sufficiently large number of individuals other than the sovereign must
have wealth sufficient to lend substantial sums.

         Although the written record points to instances of public borrowing as long as two thousand
years ago, recent scholarship points to 1000-1400 A.D. as when borrowing agreements with states
were concluded with regularity and debt contracts entered into by sovereigns were standardized. 4
Loans to territorial monarchs in Late Medieval Europe, such as those provided by Italian bankers
to Edward III during the Hundred Years’ War (1337-1443), were short term and bore high interest
rates. 5 Only after 1500 were territorial states able to borrow long term. Small city-states, in
contrast, appear to have been able to borrow at longer maturities already the in 13th and 14th
centuries. Epstein (2000) and Stasavage (2011) argue that city-states were able to borrow long



3
  Removing the polity from the borrowing equation and replacing it with a single sovereign ruler (as was the case for
many historical instances) simplifies the institutional requirements, since the contract can be written between an
individual and the sovereign’s creditors.
4
  One of the earliest recorded defaults concerns the public borrowing of the Greek city-states that formed the Attic
Maritime Association, which had contracted loans from the Temple of Delos during the period 377-373 B.C. The
Temple, which acted as a quasi-central bank to Greek city-states, lost roughly 80 percent of its principal when two
of 13 city-states completely defaulted, and eight others did so partially. However, such instances appear exceptional
until the second millennia A.D. A small treatise attributed to Aristotle collects a series of these anecdotes for the
period up to the 4th century B.C. (Aristotle 1920). Roman politicians frequently found themselves in debt, but the
Roman treasury sold no bonds or bills (Frederiksen 1966), and neither Ottoman nor Chinese rulers made significant
and sustained use of public borrowing (Drelichman and Voth, 2014).
5
 This means high interest rates relative to the risk-free rate. Stasavage (2011) compares interest rates on these loans
with the rate of return implied by land rents (his measure of the risk-free rate).
                                                           3


term because they were compact, merchant-dominated polities with representative institutions
capable of monitoring the sovereign.

         An initial spurt of lending came from the papal finances in the 1260s. Although nominally
rich, the Roman Church was hampered by the geographic dispersion of its property and other
income sources, such as Peter’s pence. 6 Engaged in a long conflict with the Holy Roman emperor,
the Church needed a way of paying the troops of its Italian allies. The solution of its Tuscan
bankers was to anticipate income from Church property and religious dues. The Church
encouraged banking firms to incorporate as joint stock companies as a way of stabilizing this early
form of financial intermediation. These new banking firms had legal personalities independent of
their investors. They had transferable shares. This new corporate form enabled them to increase
their capital base and expand their lending capacity by selling shares and attracting deposits from
wealthy individuals (Padgett 2012). They used the resulting income to grant advances to the
Church.

         This papal model was then emulated by the city-states of the Italian Peninsula. 7 Debt
contracts took the form of annuities called “rentes” and “renten.” These specified that lenders
would receive a stream of interest payments over their lifetimes or in perpetuity, with the principal
never repaid. Perpetuities were liquid because the stream of payments was not tied to the original
lender. 8 They formed the embryo of a permanent stock of public debt, since perpetual annuities
could only be redeemed if the city raised sufficient revenue to repay the principal, which was the
exception to the rule. 9 (Life annuities, as noted, expired instead with the death of the original
purchaser.) A further advantage of perpetual annuities was that they allowed lenders to circumvent



6
 This was the annual tax of one penny from every English householder having land of a certain value paid to the
Papal See, from Anglo-Saxon times until it was discontinued in 1534 following King Henry VIII's break with Rome.
7
 Albeit from the unpromising start of “forced loans” raised to deal with military emergencies. Munro (2013)
describes how this innovation spread to other European polities, starting with Catalonian cities in the early 14th
century.
8
 Owing to this liquidity, they bore lower yields than lifetime annuities. Munro (2013) mentions that in the 1330s,
Barcelona issued perpetual annuities with a yield of 7.2 percent and “two-lives” annuities for 14.3 percent.
9
 Visitors to the Italian city of Perugia can admire a rare example of extinction of the public debt stock. In 1234, the
commune paid up all its debt and had a stele erected on the cathedral’s façade to commemorate the event (Belforti
1843).
                                                            4


religious doctrine on usury; since perpetuities never had to be repaid, theologians regarded them
as legitimate contracts under which one party purchased a stream of future income from the other. 10

           The marketability of perpetual annuities created the conditions for the emergence of
secondary markets, first locally, then nationally and finally internationally. 11 Negotiability
transformed these securities into what was in effect a public financial good. Investors regarded
these government debt instruments as safe, liquid and therefore eligible as collateral in over-the-
counter markets. 12 Although it is uncertain when sovereign debt was first used as collateral, by the
end of the early modern period (the 16th through 18th centuries) it had become the dominant form
of collateral for short-term credit in Europe. 13 By expanding the collateral space, government
annuities contributed to the development of financial markets, to the expansion of trade, and to the
acceleration of growth.

           Most immediately, the acceptability of long-term government debt as collateral reduced
required returns. Lenders had reason to believe, were they to have to liquidate such collateral, that
they could do so at an attractive price. Politically independent city-states with control of their tax
bases were thus able to issue long-term tradable debt at around 5 per cent (Pezzolo 2014),
noticeably below prior rates. The liquidity and acceptability of these government bonds in turn put
downward pressure on the rates on short-term loans to the private sector secured by that
collateral. 14

           The supply of loans from city-states and territorial monarchies was driven by the need to
finance military campaigns and secure borders. While direct and indirect taxes on trade and
consumption might suffice for maintaining borders in peacetime, foreign military campaigns or


10
  The final theological settlement of the issue was arrived at in the 15th century. It added additional conditions for
the legitimacy of perpetual annuities; however, it turned out these were easier to circumvent than then initial
prohibition against interest from mutuum (Munro 2013).
11
     Sovereign debt was initially marketed to foreigners by the County of Holland in the 16th century (Neal 2015).
12
     As is also often the case today.
13
   For instance, de Luca (2008) documents how city bonds were preferred as pledges in collateralized loans (censi
consegnativi) in Milan in the late 16th century.
14
   This virtuous circle or complementarity between public and private credit continues all the way to today’s
financial architecture, where sovereign bonds provide the long-maturity benchmark asset for asset managers
engaged in portfolio diversification and risk management.
                                                             5


the need to repel incursions by foreign troops could overwhelm existing revenue streams. The
decline of feudal obligations for military service led sovereigns to create armies for hire, such as
the condottieri of Venice, Florence and Genoa. With more than 500 European polities vying for
power, war was frequent (Tilly 1992). Sovereign debt thus developed as a vital means of state
survival (Stasavage 2011). It enabled the state to finance expenditures of uncertain size and
duration. Thus, as states evolved and developed, often in response to war, fiscal capacity did as
well (Tilly 1992; Yun-Casalilla and O’Brien 2015).

           From the 16th century, Europe’s political geography coalesced into the nation states
recognized at the Peace of Westphalia in 1648. In parallel, many European states evolved from
absolutist regimes to more limited government. Dincecco (2009, 2010, 2011) argues that increased
centralization was conducive to the growth of incomes and increased state revenue. 15 He posits
that centralized states, in contrast to absolutist and fragmented regimes, imposed limits on rulers.
These states were therefore more responsible fiscally and able to offer lower sovereign yields. This
shift in state structure coincided with growing use of sovereign debt to fill fiscal gaps and with the
emergence of secondary markets. 16

           From the mid-17th century, European states accumulated sovereign debts that look
positively modern in terms of their shares of GDP, between 20 and 60 percent of national income
(Drelichman and Voth, 2014). To be sure, this transition was not uniform. Nor did it obviate the
need for costly and sometimes unsuccessful experiments. Absolutist monarchs such as Philip II of
Spain still funded their military campaigns by borrowing from international bankers, the most
important of whom were based in Genoa. 17 Drelichman and Voth (2014) show how Genoese
bankers were able to align the Spanish king’s incentives by forming cartels that prevented
competition from interlopers, à la Bulow and Rogoff (1989).




15
   This view is consistent with Alesina and Spolaore (2003), who argue that extreme fragmentation and
decentralization on the one hand and excessive consolidation and centralization of state power on the other are both
likely to be inefficient. Europe in this period can be seen as moving away from extreme fragmentation but not (yet)
to excessive centralization (although problems of fractionalization remained, as we recount below when describing
the Dutch experience).
16
  These observations are consistent with empirical and theoretical work suggesting the existence of a positive
relationship between financial development and a state’s ability to tax (Besley and Persson 2009).
17
     They were a direct outgrowth of that city-states earlier history in dealing with sovereign debt.
                                                          6


         The subsequent development of these instruments occurred in states that were sufficiently
credible to issue negotiable debt that was traded in impersonal markets, as opposed to among a
small number of well-connected bankers. The Dutch provinces, in their long fight for
independence from the Habsburg Monarchy, first scaled up this model, and then added an
international twist, whereby the securities issued by the central government and cities were
marketed beyond the frontiers of the state itself (Tracy 1985).

         Notwithstanding its relative success, the Dutch model was hampered by fiscal
fractionalization, as individual cities and provinces fought to retain control of their tax bases and
minimize their share of central government expenses. This tension arose at a time when the Dutch
state was attempting to mobilize against the France of Louis XIV and then England (de Vries and
van der Woude 1997). The English mobilized even more extensive financial resources once they
overcame the limitations of Dutch finance by developing a broader tax base (the excise tax and a
more efficient system of tax collection). Brewer (1989) shows that Britain was able to more than
triple its tax take from the late Stuarts to the war of American independence, rendering it a
formidable if not always triumphant military power. 18

         Reinforcing these developments was the decision to charter the Bank of England as banker
to the government in 1694. Following a series of defeats at the hands of the French, William III’s
credit was exhausted. In exchange for a £1.2 million loan, he allowed the subscribers to incorporate
as a joint stock company, the Bank of England, that received a banking license and the privilege
of issue in London. This was effectively a debt-for-equity swap. 19 In time, the relation between the
Bank and the state moved away from the funding of long-term debt to becoming the government’s
bank and the public debt office, simultaneously managing the money supply and floating new debt
(Roberds and Velde 2014, Neal 2015). Monetary and fiscal policies were comingled in this new



18
  This stood in contrast to the less elastic land taxes and more costly consumption taxes of Continental Europe.
Then, of course, came William Pitt’s introduction of the income tax at the end of the 18th century.
19
   The British government resorted to similar operations to fund its many wars until the 1740s. In return for forcing
more debt onto the Bank’s balance sheet, the government granted extensions of the Bank’s charter and operations. In
1720, the South Sea Company offered an even more ambitious plan to swap high-yield government bonds with its
rising stock. With the burst of the South Sea Bubbly, part of this operation ended up in the Bank’s balance sheet. In
France, John Law famously scaled up the debt-for-equity model by swapping the whole stock of government debt
with stock of the Mississippi Company (Neal 1990).
                                                         7


institution in ways that enabled the English government to fund itself at the lowest rates in Europe,
issuing 3 percent annuities, while building up the single largest debt stock (Neal 1990).

                              III. FROM WAR FINANCE TO PUBLIC GOODS

         Fiscal states thus evolved in response to the efforts of rulers to secure borders, expand
territory and survive. After 1650, larger, more centralized states increasingly possessed the fiscal
machinery to raise revenue in uniform ways and had a veto player, such as a parliament, to monitor
and discipline public expenditure (Dincecco, 2011, 2015). 20 Consistent with models in which
strong states spend more on public goods (Acemoglu 2005), sovereign borrowing progressively
shifted toward the provision of public goods. Domestic public debt took the turn first, with the
issuance of bonds to finance education and public works. As incomes rose, manufacturing
developed and cities grew, demands arose for clean water, sewers, and still more extensive public
education. By the 19th century, sovereign debt was being used to finance everything from water
and sewer works to railroads, ports, and canals.

         This shift toward public investment acquired additional momentum with the development
of global capital markets; foreigners searching for yield beyond their borders found it in debt
backed by infrastructure projects, first and foremost railways but other investments as well.
Foreign assets rose from 7 percent of world GDP in 1870 to 20 percent in the first decade of the
20th century (Obstfeld and Taylor 2004). Table 1 summarizes investments in sovereign debt and
their geographic distribution in the four decades preceding World War I. The first three columns
show new issues of external debt by all levels of government in 28 countries since 1880. 21 The
data come from securities listed in the three principal capital markets: London, Paris, and Berlin.




20
  The seminal paper on a parliament’s ability to monitor the spending of the monarch is North and Weingast (1989)
who argue that the English monarch credibly pledged to pursue a sustainable fiscal policy after the Glorious
Revolution. This paper spawned a voluminous literature providing further tests of the hypothesis for England (not all
of which reach positive conclusions) as well as for other countries. See Dincecco (2015) for a list of references.
21
  They therefore provide comprehensive coverage only of the external debt of those nations. The number of
countries varies, as we only consider independent nations. In the last period, we include three new sovereigns—
Australia, New Zealand and the South African Union.
                                                                            8


               Table 1. Geographical Distribution of debt flows and stocks, 1880-1914

                                          (Each column made up of percentages that sum to 100)
                                                    Debt flows                                                    Debt stocks
                    Foreign                          Foreign               Foreign               Foreign           Foreign       Total
                   1880-1889                        1890-1899             1900-1913              1913-14           1913-14      1913-14
     Europe           36.8                             48.5                  37.4                  47.3              48.9         73
     North America    7.9                              10.6                  9.3                   2.4               2.3          4.3
     Latin America    47.8                             12.3                  21.3                  9.2               9.8          5.1
     Africa                                                                  0.4                   7.8               7.4          2.6
     Asia             7.5                                28.6                25.9                  26.1              24.9         9.6
     Oceania                                                                 5.7                   7.1               6.7          5.3
     Total (USD m)   957.6                             1284.5               4398.6               12729.1           13453.1      40171.8
     # sovereigns      26                                26                   28                    28                45          45

       Sources: Bent and Esteves (2016) and United Nations (1946). Values in percentage unless otherwise noted.



         Intra-European debt flows accounted for the largest share of new issues, but other regions
were prominent in certain periods. Latin America was responsible for almost half of all issues
before the 1890 Baring Crisis, for example, after which the share of Asia rose, driven by
borrowing by Japan and China.

         The last three columns of Table 1 are from a United Nations report tallying sovereign debt
stocks on the eve of World War I. This report encompasses both foreign and domestic debt stocks
and covers a larger group of economies. The authors estimated the total stock of debt in 1914 to
be in excess of $40 billion US, $13.5 billion of which was foreign debt. The distribution of debt
does not change significantly as a result of this broader geographic coverage. But this presentation
highlights the importance of domestic debt and the fact that Europe was the most heavily indebted
continent. 22

         Not all sovereign borrowing funded productive investment. A considerable fraction
financed consumption, including government consumption (Feis 1930; Fishlow 1985; Mitchener
and Weidenmier 2010), while other borrowing was for the traditional purpose of war finance. For
example, Japan floated its first government bonds in London, at 9 percent in 1870 and 7 percent


22
  This last observation is not surprising. European countries had greater fiscal capacity, while emerging nations
depended more on foreign finance and were less able to borrow in local currencies at home.
                                                        9


in 1870 and 1873, to support the new Meiji regime’s modernization agenda. 23 In 1899, Japan then
issued bonds in London, New York, and Hamburg in preparation for the impending Russo-
Japanese war. 24 Qing China, battling Russia on its Northern border and hostile U.S. and European
powers along its coastline, borrowed for defense and to pay reparations. It floated an 8 percent
sterling-denominated bond in 1875, a 6 percent issue in 1885, and a 4.5 percent issue in 1898 (this
last at an issue price of only 90 percent of face value and secured by customs receipts). It issued
domestic bonds in 1894 to finance the First Sino-Japanese War and in 1898 to help pay for the
indemnity of the Treaty of Shimonoseki. Both issues predictably lapsed into default when the Qing
stepped down in 1912 (Ho and Li 2010).

        Even when notionally raising debt to fund public goods, not all emerging economies
governments were able to manage their growing debt stocks to avoid insolvency. Box 1
describes the experience of Egypt, where fiscal expansion led first to the loss of financial
autonomy and ultimately even political sovereignty.




23
  Whereas the first issue financed railway construction, the second was used to pay off the accumulated debts of
the earlier feudal regime. The interest rates it was charged were even higher than those paid on marginal
credits such as those of Egypt and Romania, reflecting ongoing civil conflict prior to the Meiji’s final
consolidation of power and the difficulties of building a functioning tax system.
24These bonds bore an interest rate of 4 percent and ran an impressive 55 years to maturity, arguably
reflecting the fact that Japan had gone onto the gold standard in the 1890s (Tomita 2005).
                                             10


                    Box 1. Egypt’s Debt History in the 19th Century

        The history of public debt in Egypt highlights several 19th century themes:
excessive borrowing by local administrations, great power rivalry, loss of financial
sovereignty and, ultimately, loss of political independence. Although formally a province
of the Ottoman Empire, Egypt acquired substantial autonomy thanks to the efforts of
Muhammed Ali, who ruled from 1805. In 1841 a settlement was reached whereby the
Porte granted Ali and his successors the title of governor of Egypt (known as Khedive) in
exchange for an annual tribute. While this settlement did not grant the privilege of issuing
state loans, neither did it exclude it.1 Taking advantage of the ambiguity, the Khedive Said
(1854-63) issued short-term loans and obtained a personal loan from the Comptoir
d’Escompte in Paris to fund the construction of the Suez Canal.
        The era of modern state finance started in 1862 with the flotation of a £2.2 million
external loan in London, helped along by the temporarily strong cotton prices produced by
the American Civil War. When Khedive Ismail assumed power in 1863, he thus inherited a
sizable debt. But rather than consolidating, he borrowed to finance everything from a
national road system to an opera house (Landes 1958). By 1876 the funded debt had risen
to £69 million, the floating debt to £26 million. Since the tax base did not rise
commensurately, new loans had to be raised just to fund interest and amortization
payments.2
         Declining cotton prices, the 1873 financial crisis, and the 1875 Ottoman default
then closed the markets to Egyptian loans. In an effort to normalize relations, Ismail turned
over customs duties, tobacco-monopoly revenues and provincial taxes to representatives of
its foreign creditors, organized as the Caisse de la Dette Publique. This was the first
application of foreign financial control of the finances of impecunious debtors, a model
copied for the Ottoman Empire in 1882, Serbia in 1895 and Greece in 1898 (Mitchener and
Weidenmier 2010). The Caisse received the assigned revenues directly from the source
and possessed veto power over new borrowing or changes to taxation.3 In exchange, it
consolidated most of the external debt into a new 7 percent loan.4
        After uprisings against foreign control and murders of Europeans, Britain
bombarded Alexandria and occupied Egypt in 1882, taking charge of government finances
(Feis 1930).5 The stated policy of the British government had been never to intervene in
foreign countries on behalf of the commercial interests of its subjects. But as Platt (1968)
and Lipson (1985) observe, exceptions were made for strategic reasons.6 In the case of
Egypt, commercial, political and financial interests came together.
        Among the priorities of the British administration was restoring the solvency of the
Egyptian state, which was achieved with the issue of a new loan in 1885 under the
guarantee of Britain and five other European governments (Esteves and Tunçer 2016).
Under British rule, public revenues increased by 50 percent between 1882 and 1904.
Because the Caisse had accumulated large reserves, the French creditors agreed to reduce
their control over public revenues. The government used the resulting flexibility to return
to the market and convert old debt into new loans paying half the previous rate.
                                                           11


          Between 1882 and 1913, outstanding foreign debt fell from ten times government
 revenues to half that value. Roads, railroads, and canals, including the Aswan Dam, were
 constructed using funds from tax revenues, and new loans were placed on international
 capital markets. Yet, despite this progress, public revenues in Egypt grew the least among
 its peers under international financial control (Turkey, Serbia, Greece). This was partly
 because the Caisse, earning ample revenues under the status quo, did little to encourage
 fiscal reforms, such as re-directing revenues from land tax to indirect taxation and customs
 revenues, which were cheaper to administer and easier to increase (Tuncer 2015). On the
 eve of World War I, Egypt thus had one of the weakest fiscal capacities among its peers.
                 Foreign borrowing by Egypt before and after financial control
                                      Foreign loans               Effective       Debt per capita
                 Period
                                   (nominal value in £m)        interest rate         (in £)
              1862-1876                     69                       8.5                7.2
              1876-1913                     55                       4.5                7.5
          Source: Tunçer (2015).


 1
  The Ottomans themselves only issued their first foreign loan in 1854. However, since all Egyptian taxes
 were levied under the Ottoman Sultan’s authority, the future Egyptian loans would be issued with the
 Sultan’s permission.
 2
  The Khedive resorted to increasingly desperate measures, pledging the revenues of his extensive personal
 estates (Dairas), pre-collection of taxes (in exchange for a 50 percent discount) and selling 45 percent of
 Suez Canal shares to the British government.
 3
   The British and French governments forced dual control over the remaining Egyptian finances by securing
 the right to appoint two controllers-general (one for revenues and the other for audit and debt) with powers to
 collect and administer the revenues and expenditures of the Egyptian state.
 4
  The new debt service remained unsustainable, however, until a reduction, three years later, of the coupon to
 4 percent.
 5
     This despite the fact that the French in fact held two-thirds of the debt.
 6
  This position is often referred to as the ‘Palmerston doctrine’ after the erstwhile British foreign secretary,
 who made it clear in 1848 that “it was entirely a matter of discretion, and by no means a question of
 international right” whether the British government would support the interests of British bondholders abroad
 (cit. in Tunçer 2015: 17).




           Between a third and half of all domestic investment in Australia, Canada, Argentina,
and Brazil in the second half of the 19th century was financed by capital imports (Fishlow
1985). 25 Edelstein (1982) estimates that, in 1913, Great Britain kept 32 percent of its net
national wealth overseas and had allocated 4 percent of its GDP to capital formation abroad

25
   A peculiarity of the pre-1914 international debt market was the importance of sub-sovereign borrowers,
especially colonies. There was, however, a pecking order of colonial borrowers. Colonies with European settlers
issued substantially more debt as share of their economy’s output compared to territories whose populations had
indigenous majorities (Accominotti et al. 2010; Davis and Huttenback 1986).
                                                         12


every year on average for more than 40 years. Other international financial centers included
Paris, Hamburg, Berlin, Brussels, Amsterdam and Zurich. Together with England, France,
Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Switzerland accounted for 87 percent of overseas
lending in the 1870-1913 period (Maddison 1995).

           At the beginning of the 19th century, wealthy households held the majority of sovereign
bonds. But with the progress of financial development, banks substantially increased their
share (Ferguson 2006). This provided diversification for individual investors, who as small
depositors invested indirectly in the market through financial intermediaries, as well as for the
banks themselves, while enhancing the safe-asset function of sovereign debt. 26 By 1883,
foreign government bonds accounted for 23 percent of all securities quoted on the London
Stock Exchange (Michie 1999). They still accounted for 21 percent in 1913, far outstripping
the share of domestic public debt (Tomz and Wright 2013). 27

           Starting with Amsterdam, but followed by London, Paris and Berlin, the microstructure
of the securities market adapted to accommodate foreign bonds (Michie 2006). Large
investment houses dominated underwriting and issuance, while specialized market makers
provided secondary market liquidity (Michie 1999). Flandreau et al. (2010) suggest that
underwriters played a role in regulating sovereign debt issuance by signaling to markets which
countries had lower ex-ante default risk. Sovereign spreads were ex-post negatively correlated
with underwriter reputation through the end of the 19th century, as more reputable underwriters
issued new debt placements of high-quality sovereigns. This signaling function had become
less relevant by the end of the 19th century, as the access of investors to information on
sovereigns improved. Specialists started issuing financial handbooks with information on
foreign governments while the financial press provided coverage of the market. 28 Bondholder

26
   The managed investment fund industry also emerged in this period, first in the U.K. in the late 1860s, and
later in the U.S., offering the advantages of liquidity and diversification to the medium-sized retail investor
(Chabot and Kurz 2012; Chambers and Esteves 2014).
27
     Domestic debt constituted 14 percent of all securities issued in London in 1913.
28
  Improvements in the circulation of information would not have been possible without breakthroughs in
technology, in particular the telegraph and telephone (Michie 1987). On the role of the press, see Scheffers and
Roberts (2014).
                                                         13


organizations also acquired the double function of monitoring borrowers and coordinating
restructuring negotiations. 29

           Financial integration was reinforced by monetary convergence, as countries and
colonies abandoned paper and bimetallic systems for the gold standard. Early empirical work
suggested that gold-standard adoption, by eliminating monetary discretion, lowered borrowing
costs (Bordo and Rockoff 1996). Subsequent recent research has shown that membership in
the gold club did not eliminate currency risk (Mitchener and Weidenmier 2015), although it
helped governments to relieve the “original sin” of only being able to sell their debt abroad
when denominated in gold (Flandreau and Sussman 2005). A consequence of this growing
tendency of states in other regions to tap European capital markets was an increasing co-
movement of business and financial cycles (Bordo and Haubrich 2010). This manifested itself
in the high correlation of sovereign spreads across countries, although that correlation was still
lower than today (Mauro, Sussman and Yafeh 2002). It is uncertain whether this correlation
heightened the risk of contagious crises (Neal and Weidenmier 2003; Mitchener and
Weidenmier 2008). But that debt crises occurred in waves (Reinhart and Rogoff 2009; Reinhart
et al. 2016) is at least suggestive of the existence of contagion. 30

           In the 19th century, defaults on external debts were common. Figure 1 plots the
incidence of new defaults and the percentage of independent nations under default by decade. 31
The peaks of the two series are associated with some of the largest international financial crises
of the period. The first Latin American debt crisis, starting in 1826, touched almost all the
continent and came on the heels of large capital inflows from Europe. The unconditional

29
  The prototype of such organizations was the British Corporation of Foreign Bondholders, created in 1868
(Esteves 2013; Flandreau 2013).
30
     See Bordo and Murshid (2001) and Ba (2017) for further hints in this direction.
31
   The number of sovereign nations increased over the century until a maximum of 47 on the eve of the World
War. As a consequence, we adapt our calculations to the number of countries effectively independent in each
year.
                                                         14


probability of default rose above 5 percent per annum, and by the end of the decade close to a
third of all independent nations had defaulted on their external debts. Renegotiation was slow,
and only in the 1860s did the fraction
                                                   Figure 1. Sovereign Default Prevalence, 1800-1913
of countries in default fall below a                                    (In percent)

quarter. 32 Normalization was short-               40                                                                                      6
                                                                                         Countries in default
                                                   35                                    Incidence (likelihood of new defaults), RHS
lived, however, as the new capital                                                                                                         5
                                                   30
bonanza collapsed with the 1873
                                                                                                                                           4
                                                   25
crisis. The likelihood of new defaults
                                                   20                                                                                      3
rose to 2.5 percent per annum, and
                                                   15
emerging economies were affected                                                                                                           2
                                                   10
disproportionately.                                                                                                                        1
                                                     5

         The next spike followed the                 0    1800                                                                             0

                                                                 1810

                                                                        1820

                                                                              1830

                                                                                     1840

                                                                                            1850

                                                                                                   1860

                                                                                                         1870

                                                                                                                1880

                                                                                                                       1890

                                                                                                                             1900

                                                                                                                                    1910
Baring crisis in 1890. Although the
default rate rose above 4 percent per             Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and authors’ calculations.
                                                  Notes: Composition of coverage: 47 nations that became independent some time before
                                                  1913. The sample includes emerging and advanced economies. See data annex for the list
annum, its highest level since the                of countries included in the sample. Countries in default refer to the number of
                                                  independent nations in default in a given year over the total number of independent
1820s, the number of defaulting                   nations in the same year. Incidence of new defaults refers to the unconditional probability
                                                  of default per anuum, i.e., the number of defaults per year in a given decade divided by the
                                                  number of independent nations in the same decade. The data refers to external public debt.
nations rose more modestly and then
fell continuously until 1913. Defaults were resolved faster than in the early part of the century:
according to Suter (1990), the average duration of defaults fell from 14 years prior to 1870, to
8 years in the 1870s and 1880s and 2 years thereafter, with help from bondholders’ committees
and, in some cases, direct intervention by the governments of creditor countries (Mitchener
and Weidenmier 2008). 33


32
  Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) emphasize that sovereigns also frequently defaulted on their domestic debt
obligations. These defaults, however, are not very significant in the group of countries represented in Figure 1.
33
  Mitchener and Weidenmier document that creditors, on occasion, imposed “supersanctions” – either placing
countries under “fiscal house arrest” by using foreign administrators to collect customs and carry out fiscal
administration or by using gunboats to force repayment. Generally, these sanctions were applied against
smaller, less-powerful debtors and sometimes reflected the existence of complementary geopolitical motives
(proximity to the Suez Canal, the Isthmus of Panama). These mechanisms appear to have been effective: the ex-
ante default probability fell by more than 60 percent after a country had been supersanctioned, and risk
premiums fell by roughly 200 basis points due to improved fiscal discipline.
                                                15


        The historical literature points to macroeconomic imbalances, political instability and
war as among the principal causes of default (Feis 1930; Fishlow 1985; Tomz and Wright
2013; Reinhart and Rogoff 2009). Notwithstanding improvements in the industrial
organization of the sovereign debt market, collective-action problems limited the ability of
creditors to deter future defaults on sovereign bonds. Reputable underwriters sometimes acted
to screen out dubious credits and discourage excessive borrowing, but in an increasingly
contestable market they might see their position undermined by new competitors with less
reputation at risk (Flores 2011). Strict adherence to the doctrine of sovereign immunity
prevented the bondholders from pursuing legal redress. Reputation alone was often insufficient
for deterring default when circumstances were unpropitious (Flandreau and Zumer 2004). The
conclusion of Lindert and Morton (1989) that ‘‘investors seem to pay little attention to the past
repayment record of the borrower’’ may be exaggerated, but it points to the fact that sovereigns
were often able to take steps to placate the creditors – negotiating a settlement, undertaking a
bond exchange, and going onto the gold standard – and regain market access relatively quickly.

        For some countries, default became a recurrent hazard. This is evident if we calculate
the probability of default conditional on the number of previous defaults. For the countries
covered in Figure 1, the conditional probability of default was relatively low at about 1.5
percent per annum for countries with up to one default prior, but rose to 2.2 percent after two
defaults and 4.7 percent after three.

                          IV. DEBT CONSOLIDATION BEFORE 1913

        In this section, we describe three notable debt consolidation episodes before World War
I: Great Britain after the Napoleonic Wars, the United States in the last third of the 19th century,
and France in the decades leading up to 1913. While the colorful debt crises and defaults of
the first era of globalization have been much discussed, less attention has been paid to these
successful consolidation episodes. We focus on these three cases because they involved three
of the largest economies of the period, but also because their debt burdens were among the
heaviest. British public debt as a share of GDP was higher in the aftermath of the Napoleonic
Wars, for example, than Greek public debt in 2018. But in all three cases, high public debts
were successfully reduced relative to GDP. They were reduced in different ways, however,
than is typical of 20th and 21st century economies. In particular, there was no restructuring or
                                                          16


renegotiation of official or privately-held debts in these cases. Nor was there financial
repression, i.e., measures artificially depressing interest rates.

         Our analysis follows Abbas et al. (2011, 2014a) in decomposing debt changes
according to the following debt accumulation equation:

                                             𝑖𝑖 −𝛾𝛾
         𝑑𝑑𝑇𝑇 − 𝑑𝑑0 = ∑𝑇𝑇𝑡𝑡=1 𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 + ∑𝑇𝑇𝑡𝑡=1 1+
                                              𝑡𝑡   𝑡𝑡
                                                      𝑑𝑑 + ∑𝑇𝑇𝑡𝑡=1 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡                          (1)
                                                 𝛾𝛾 𝑡𝑡−1
                                                  𝑡𝑡




         Equation (1) states that, the total change in the debt-to-GDP ratio (𝑑𝑑𝑇𝑇 − 𝑑𝑑0 ) over an
episode is the sum of three components, each cumulated over the episode years: (i) the primary
budget balance (𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 )—sometimes referred to as the fiscal effort; (ii) the product of the lagged
debt ratio and the differential between the effective interest rate on debt (𝑖𝑖𝑡𝑡 ) and the nominal
GDP growth rate (𝛾𝛾𝑡𝑡 )—a term that captures endogenous debt dynamics but can also be thought
of as capturing financial repression insofar as the real interest rate is successfully kept below
the real rate of economic growth; and (iii) a residual stock-flow adjustment term (𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡 ). 34 Box
2 details the nature of the operations captured in this residual term.




34
  Note that the decomposition methodology understates the true contribution of economic growth to debt
reduction to the extent that high growth eases the political constraints on improving the primary fiscal balance.
See Mauro and Zilinsky (2016) for a discussion of an extended decomposition approach that attempts to address
this issue. The extended approach is more data-intensive, which is a constraint when analyzing long historical
periods as in this paper. It requires strong assumptions about the responses of fiscal variables to growth in order
to quantify the additional indirect impact of growth on changes in debt through its impact on fiscal variables.
                                              17


           Box 2. Definition and Interpretation of the Stock-Flow Adjustment

          The SFA captures statistical discrepancies between the actual change in the debt
 ratio and the sum of the other two components on the right-hand side of equation 1 (the
 primary budget balance and the growth-interest differential). Such discrepancies can
 reflect several factors: valuation effects on foreign currency debt, timing effects (deficits
 are measured in accrual terms while debt is a cash concept), below-the-line operations such
 as assumption of debts of non-governmental entities, debt restructuring or default,
 privatization, and bank recapitalization costs. The SFA will also be affected by other forms
 to support the financial sector that increase the debt but not the deficit, drawdown and
 buildup of government deposits, transactions in financial assets, and measurement and
 statistical errors.
         According to current conventions, financial sector support measures can affect both
 deficit and debt. Unless they are financed from cash reserves, they will increase gross debt.
 Whether they also affect the budget balance depends on whether the operation presents a
 clear loss for the government. If so, they would be classified as a capital transfer—for
 example acquisition of financial assets above market price and capital injections to cover
 bank losses. However, if the government receives shares in a bank or debt securities of
 equal value to the capital injection it provides, the support measure is classified as a
 financial operation that only affects the government gross debt. Reclassification of entities
 from the financial sector to the general government sector (e.g., the nationalization of
 banks) also increases government debt but not the deficit. (For details, see European
 Central Bank 2015; Maurer and Grussenmeyer 2015.)
         Interpretation of the SFA depends on its sign and on whether the decomposition
 exercise is undertaken for debt accumulation or debt reduction episodes. In a debt
 accumulation episode, a positive (negative) SFA increases (reduces) debt. In a debt
 consolidation episode, a negative SFA means that the debt fell by less (was consolidated
 by less) than the growth-interest differential and primary surplus would lead one to expect.
 Put differently, had the SFA been positive in a consolidation episode (implying that it
 contributed “positively” to the reduction), the decline in debt would have been larger than
 what was observed, assuming that the contributions of the primary balance and the growth-
 interest differential are the same. While large SFAs tend to be common during debt surges,
 they also occur in consolidation episodes (Abbas et al. 2011, Weber 2012). They reflect a
 host of country-specific factors: domestic institutions (budget transparency), politics
 (elections), and economic cycles (recessions). The scale of such discrepancies depends on
 the extent of fiscal transparency in the budget process, among other factors (Alt et al.
 2014).



       The Napoleonic Wars, Franco-Prussian War and U.S. Civil War were the three most
expensive conflicts of the 19th century. Governments and banks were forced to suspend the
convertibility of currency into gold (and, in the French case, into silver) while resorting to
money creation; but in all three episodes, seigniorage accounted for a relatively small fraction
                                                       18


of war finance. The majority of war expenditure was financed by taxation and public debt
issuance. Consistent with theories of optimal tax smoothing (Barro 1987), debt accounted for
the single largest share of wartime financing. Relative to the prewar status quo, taxes were
higher during and after the war, but they were raised by just enough to service and pay down
the debt.

         Britain financed the Napoleonic Wars primarily by borrowing and, in their latter stages,
by raising taxes. Once gold convertibility was suspended in 1797, it relied on the Bank of
England as a purchaser of government securities. But the increase in the Bank’s holdings was
limited; these rose from £10 million in 1797 to £15 million in 1809. Debt securities were placed
mainly with private investors; the government signaled its commitment to maintaining the real
value of its obligations by continuing to amortize debt (maintaining the Sinking Fund
established in 1786) and by indicating its intention of restoring gold convertibility at the prewar
rate. 35 In 1799 William Pitt the Younger then introduced the country’s first income tax. This
contributed fully 20 percent of total tax revenues by 1815. The price level, having risen by 90
percent between 1791 and 1813, was then pushed down to within 10 percent of prewar levels
in 1821, when convertibility was restored. 36

         Union government financing of the American Civil War was not dissimilar. The
majority of wartime spending was financed by issuing bonds and raising taxes. Taxes
accounted for only a small fraction of resources in 1861-2, but their share rose starting in 1863
with increases in tariffs and excises and the introduction of the first income tax in American
history (Pollack 2014). By 1865 a quarter of federal revenues were accounted for by taxes, a
slightly higher share than in early 19th century Britain. Bonds held by the banks and low-
denomination notes in the hands of the public rose from $65 million to more than $2 billion
between 1861 and 1865. The most controversial element was the issuance by the Treasury of

35
   Bordo and White (1991) cite the government’s failure to refute criticism of the Bank of England by the
authors of the 1810 Bullion Report as a clear indication of its intention to restore convertibility at the prewar
rate. Nonetheless, most of these bonds were sold at a significant discount, reflecting the risk premium
understandably demanded by investors in the face of wartime uncertainty. As a result, the resources accruing to
the government fell short of the debt obligations with which it was saddled after the wars (MacDonald 2003).
36
  “Price level” refers to the Gayer, Rostow and Schwartz index of the prices of domestic and imported
commodities.
                                                          19


greenbacks, currency notes not backed by gold, which accounted for 15 percent of wartime
government spending. Associated with their emission was a rise in the price level by about 75
percent, slightly less than in Britain during the Napoleonic period. In the U.S., it took until
1878 for prices to be pushed back down to prewar levels and until 1879 for gold convertibility
to be restored, a somewhat more extended readjustment than in Britain. 37

           French government expenses in 1870-71 were financed half out of taxes (Hozier 1872).
That the war was short limited the need to resort to debt finance. The Bank of France provided
direct advances to the government, collateralized by Treasury securities, and in 1871 to the
Paris Commune, the Bank’s Paris-based directors evidently fearing for their safety. The
indemnity transferred to Germany was then financed by two large postwar bond issues,
rendering the French government’s debt the largest in the world. Still, the yield was just 6
percent, despite the fact that France was defeated and still occupied, testifying to confidence
on the part of investors that the
                                                    Figure 2. Public Debt and Primary Balance in the
authorities would move to stabilize                                  United Kingdom
                                                                   (In percent of GDP)
prices, restore convertibility and
                                                 220                                                                                  10
honor their obligations.                                                               Public Debt         Primary Balance, RHS
                                                 190                                                                                  8

           Table 2 illustrates how these         160
                                                                                                                                      6
high debts were reduced. The starting            130
                                                                                                                                      4
point in each case is the peak debt-to-          100

GDP ratio. The reduction in the                                                                                                       2
                                                  70
British debt-GDP ratio was by far the             40                                                                                  0

largest and longest: the debt ratio fell
                                                  10                                                                                  -2
                                                       1822
                                                       1826
                                                       1830
                                                       1834
                                                       1838
                                                       1842
                                                       1846
                                                       1850
                                                       1854
                                                       1858
                                                       1862
                                                       1866
                                                       1870
                                                       1874
                                                       1878
                                                       1882
                                                       1886
                                                       1890
                                                       1894
                                                       1898
                                                       1902
                                                       1906
                                                       1910




from 194 percent in 1822 to 28
percent nine decades later (see
                                                  Sources: The Bank of England’s database ‘A millennium of macroeconomic data:
                                                  https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/statistics/research-datasets/a-
Figure 2). 38 The French public-debt-             millennium-of-macroeconomic-data-for-the-uk.xlsx and authors’ calculations.



37
     Prices here are the Warren and Pearson index for all commodities.
38
  This is a good place to acknowledge the uncertainty surrounding historical estimates of GDP, which tend to
be produced by estimating growth rates in earlier periods and back-casting modern levels of GDP. In the case of
the U.K., those early growth rates have been revised downward by recent scholars, resulting in upward revisions
of the level of GDP in, say, 1822, when our series for the U.K. begins. We use the most recent estimates of U.K.
                                                                              20


GDP ratio fell from 96 percent in 1896 to 51 percent in 1913, after which consolidation was
terminated by the outbreak of war. This case ranks second in size but first in pace. 39 U.S.
(federal or union) government debt was not as high at the end of the Civil War, and the
subsequent consolidation was more leisurely; however, the process is notable for having
reduced the debt-GDP ratio to virtually zero by World War I. 40

                      Table 2. Decomposition of Select Large Pre-1914 Debt Reductions

                             Debt/ GDP ratio                           Decomposition (in %)
                                                                                                                  Average     Average     Average
 Country         Period                              Primary      Growth-interest                      Stock-flow real GDP effective real inflation
                             Starting Ending                                              g       -i
                                                     Balance      differential (g-i )                  adjustment growth interest rate      rate


 UK     1822-1913 194.1                   28.3        180.5              -95.6          88.4 -184          15.1           1.9            3.5            -0.1
 USA    1867-1913 30.1                    3.2         151.1              -46.3          48.2 -95           -4.8           4.2            4.3            -0.9
 France 1896-1913 95.6                    51.1        100.4               -1.9          96.3 -98           1.6            2.6            2.9            0.5

     Sources: authors’ calculations; data sources: for the US: Carter (2006); for France: Flandreau and Zumer (2004); for the UK: the Bank of England’s database
     ‘A millennium of macroeconomic data: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/statistics/research-datasets/a-millennium-of-macroeconomic-data-
     for-the-uk.xlsx


              In contrast to the post-World War II debt reductions described in Section 7, the growth-
rate-interest-rate differential did not contribute to the decline of debt burdens in these 19th
century episodes. The contribution of this differential was, in fact, negative in all three cases.
It was least negative in France after 1896, since it operated over the shortest span and because
prices, having trended gently downward for much of the 19th century, turned upward in the
mid-1890s, reflecting gold discoveries in the Klondike and Western Australia that reduced real
interest rates (Eichengreen 1982).


GDP combining the values for Great Britain from Broadberry et al. (2015) with those of Andersson and
Lennard (2018) for Ireland.
39
  Pace is important for these decompositions. For example, while Table 2 shows that the excess of the interest
rate over the growth rate was larger for France than the U.S., the contribution of the g-i differential to overall
debt reduction was smaller, since there were fewer years for that differential to impact. See the discussion
below.
40
   In the U.S. case although the difference between the average growth and the average interest rate is small, the
(g-i) term still makes a relatively large contribution to debt reduction. The differential was mostly positive in the
first 20 consolidation years; the differential was more frequently negative later, when the debt stock was
smaller. Thus, the positive differential terms in the early period more than offset the negative terms in the later
period, leaving a relatively large contribution of the differential to debt consolidation despite the fact that
average (g-i) was small.
                                                          21


           Relatively high coupon rates on debts placed during the wars combined with moderate
growth rates and low inflation to produce the negative growth-interest-rate differential. Growth
rates were modest during the First Industrial Revolution, since the productivity increase
associated with mechanization was limited to a narrow set of sectors (Crafts and Harley 1992).
In the French case, economic historians point to a low rate of population increase as a further
factor in the slow aggregate rate of growth (Crouzet 2003). Only the United States, a country
of immigration and a pioneer in the adoption of modern mass-production methods, displayed
what modern observers would characterize as an impressive rate of economic growth. And
even in this case, the real GDP growth rate did not exceed the real interest rate.

           Governments for their part did little to bottle up savings at home or to otherwise use
regulation and legislation to artificially depress yields. The British government did not
discourage foreign investment. 41 French foreign investment was less extensive, but it was
actively encouraged by officials as an alliance-building-and-solidifying device (Feis 1930). In
the U.S., the National Banking Act of 1863 required federally-chartered banks to hold
government bonds as backing for notes, but note issuance was profitable even subject to this
proviso.

           The negative contribution of the growth-rate-interest-rate differential was compensated
for by large and persistent primary surpluses. Britain achieved the impressive feat of
maintaining an average primary surplus of 1.6 percent of GDP for nearly a century (the only
deficit in Figure 2 is at the time of the Boer War). One of the political legacies of Peel and
Gladstone was a fiscal theory or philosophy of “sound finance” emphasizing budget surpluses,
low taxes and minimal government expenditure (Campbell 2004). This philosophy was
integral to the Victorian economic strategy of free trade, peace and retrenchment, in which
trade promoted peace, which in turn permitted military expenditures to be limited. At the same
time, faithfully servicing the debt and progressively reducing its burden enhanced the prospects
for borrowing in a future conflict and thereby helped to secure the nation. 42


41
  Residents famously allocated as much as 40 percent of their savings to overseas government securities and
other foreign instruments, as noted above.
42
     As MacDonald (2003) puts it, the public credit was as vital to the national security as the British navy.
                                                        22


         In political terms, this outcome reflected the balance of interests in Parliament, where
creditors remained generously represented even after the Reform Acts of 1832 and 1837. As
MacDonald (2003) puts it, “The most obvious reason for the firmness of the British
commitment to its public debt was the predominance of public creditors within the political
system.” It was hard, as he observes, to find a member of Parliament who was not also a
bondholder. Successive budgetary reforms starting in the 1820s gave Parliament control over
expenditure and allowed it to apply the resulting surpluses to the reduction of the debt stock.
A consequence of this political equilibrium was that demands for spending on welfare relief
from the disenfranchised masses were kept in check. In exchange, the self-taxing class of
income-tax-paying electors relieved the non-electors from the burden of direct taxation
(Daunton 2001). Budget surpluses then made feasible further reductions in tariffs and taxes,
which reduced the cost of living for the working class (Maloney 1998). 43

         In the U.S., primary surpluses         Figure 3. Public Debt and Primary Balance in the
were consistently achieved despite                                United States
                                                               (In percent of GDP)
the presence of universal (white
                                               35                                                                           4
male) suffrage (Figure 3). That the                                                Public Debt       Primary Balance, RHS
                                               30
economy was expanding strongly,                                                                                             3
                                               25
due not just to the growth of per                                                                                           2
                                               20
capita GDP but also the number of
                                               15                                                                           1
“capitas” in a country of large-scale
                                               10
immigration made managing the debt                                                                                          0
                                                5
burden       correspondingly         easier
                                                0                                                                           -1
(Bayoumi and Bordo 1998). Creditor
                                                    1867
                                                    1869
                                                    1871
                                                    1873
                                                    1875
                                                    1877
                                                    1879
                                                    1881
                                                    1883
                                                    1885
                                                    1887
                                                    1889
                                                    1891
                                                    1893
                                                    1895
                                                    1897
                                                    1899
                                                    1901
                                                    1903
                                                    1905
                                                    1907
                                                    1909
                                                    1911
                                                    1913




interests were strongly represented in
                                                 Sources: Carter (2006) and authors’ calculations.
Congress, especially prior to the
Progressive Era reaction against the “Money Trust.” The tariff, defended by the Republican

43
  Only with the electoral reforms of the 1880s were the urban and rural poor represented in Parliament. Thus,
this political equilibrium reached its limits with these electoral reforms and the increasing organization of
unskilled trade unions, whose members could not afford to pay for self-help welfare and the costs of
rearmament starting in the 1890s.
                                                           23


Party, provided an elastic supply of government revenues in this period of expanding trade. On
the spending side, Southern states opposed an expansive role for the federal government, while
entitlements limited to Civil War pensions contained pressure for public spending. 44

         In France, debt reduction was entirely accounted for by primary surpluses. Those
surpluses       exceeded         British         Figure 4. Public Debt and Primary Balance in France
levels, reaching 2.5 percent of                                   (In percent of GDP)
                                                 100                                                                           3.5
GDP on average, albeit over a                                                     Public Debt           Primary Balance, RHS

shorter period. 45 Consolidation was              90
                                                                                                                               3
delayed for two decades following                 80

the war and payment of the 5 billion              70                                                                           2.5

franc indemnity to the German
                                                  60
Empire (roughly a quarter of one                                                                                               2
                                                  50
year’s French GDP), as French
                                                  40                                                                           1.5
governments first sought to rebuild
                                                       1896
                                                           1897
                                                                1898
                                                                    1899
                                                                        1900
                                                                            1901
                                                                                 1902
                                                                                     1903
                                                                                         1904
                                                                                             1905
                                                                                                  1906
                                                                                                      1907
                                                                                                          1908
                                                                                                              1909
                                                                                                                   1910
                                                                                                                    1911
                                                                                                                        1912
                                                                                                                           1913
the economy and then to counter
German economic and military                      Sources: Flandreau and Zumer (2004) and authors’ calculations.


might, investing in roads, railways,
and schools. From the turn of the century, tensions with Germany (and the first Moroccan crisis
in 1905) then created pressure for military spending. But even this did not stand in the way of
primary surpluses (see Figure 4), governing elites seeing debt reduction as putting the country
in a stronger financial position in the event of a full-blown conflict with that country (Dyson
2014). French leaders attributed the country’s serial defeats to international conflicts, from the
Seven Years’ War to the Franco-Prussian War, and to the weakness of French finances,
compared to those of Britain and Germany. They now sought to take corrective action.


44
   A less unequal income distribution than in the U.K. could also have reduced the pressure for redistribution
taxation, as the median voter’s income was closer to that of the rich (Lindert 1994).
45
  The primary surplus ratio and annual percentage point reduction in the debt ratio were the same because the
initial debt ratio was 100 percent. Analysis of modern data (by e.g., Eichengreen and Panizza 2016) suggests
that this is just about the political limit of the primary surpluses that can be sustained over periods of this length.
By comparison, the pace of debt reduction was 1.8 percent per annum for Britain and 0.8 percent for the United
States.
                                                     24


        Another missing element is the SFA. None of these three governments undertook
involuntary restructurings despite the inheritance of heavy debt. Only in Britain was the SFA
responsible for a nonnegligible share of debt reduction. Its 15 percent share is due to the
conversion of the stock of perpetual debt (Consols) from 3 to 2.5 percent bonds undertaken by
the Chancellor of the Exchequer George Goschen in 1888. 46 Interest rates having fallen, these
bonds were trading above par. Goschen could threaten to repay the principal at par if they were
not converted into new 2.5 percent bonds. The majority was so converted, and the remainder
was paid off out of excess Treasury balances. The important point is that the consequent
reduction in debt held by the public was voluntary.

        Thus, in all three of these large-scale debt consolidations, governments and societies
went to great lengths to service and repay heavy debts. This was partly a matter of the
enfranchisement and political influence of the creditor class. In part, it reflected prevailing
conceptions of the limited functions of government, and limited popular pressure for public
programs, entitlements and transfers. In part, it reflected the imperative of maintaining or
restoring creditworthiness in order to ensure the capacity to mobilize resources and guarantee
state survival. And, in part, it reflected good luck – the absence of major wars and crises during
the consolidation period.

                           V. EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC DEBT SINCE 1900

        We turn now to the evolution of public debt since the early 20th century. We consider
the G-20 economies together with a set of low-income countries. In classifying countries as
advanced, emerging, or low income, we follow the IMF World Economic Outlook
categorization. 47

        We distinguish sovereign debt according to its currency composition, maturity and
holder profile. Debt structure matters for the level and volatility of debt servicing costs, and
for the management of funding (refinancing) and exchange rate risk. Long-term debt generally

46
  In addition to Consols, there were relatively small amounts of fixed-term 3 percent debt (“Reduced Threes”
and “New Threes”).
47
  For advanced and emerging economies, the data start in 1900; for low-income countries they start in 1926
with coverage expanding in the 1950s and again in the 1970s.
                                                 25


commands relatively high interest rates, but rollover risks are lower. Foreign-currency debt
can help reduce borrowing costs but exposes the sovereign to exchange rate risks and can
increase debt-service costs in the event of currency depreciation. Rising foreign participation
can reduce borrowing costs and spread risks more broadly but also raise external funding risks,
to the extent that foreign holdings are “less sticky.” Finally, higher domestic bank ownership
of own sovereign debt can help address funding needs at times of stress, although it can also,
under adverse circumstance, create potentially harmful sovereign-bank linkages and threaten
domestic financial stability.

        Figure 5 is an overview of the evolution of public debt from 1900 to 2015. Prominent
there are episodes when wars, recessions and crises produced sharp increases. In the advanced
economies, these surges are linked to                            Figure 5. Public Debt Ratio
the two world wars, the Great                                        (In Percent of GDP)

Depression, the Great Accumulation         160
                                                       G-20 Advanced Economies
                                           140         G-20 Emerging Economies
(the mid-1970s through mid-2000s),
                                                       Low Inome Countries
and the recession that followed the        120
Global Financial Crisis. In emerging       100
economies, spikes in the debt ratio        80
occurred in the 1930s and in the
                                           60
1970s through the 1990s. In the low-
                                           40
income countries, the major surge
                                           20
was in the 1980s and 1990s. Most of
                                            0
these   debt-accumulation       episodes
                                                 1900
                                                 1905
                                                 1910
                                                 1915
                                                 1920
                                                 1925
                                                 1930
                                                 1935
                                                 1940
                                                 1945
                                                 1950
                                                 1955
                                                 1960
                                                 1965
                                                 1970
                                                 1975
                                                 1980
                                                 1985
                                                 1990
                                                 1995
                                                 2000
                                                 2005
                                                 2010
                                                 2015
were then followed by reversals or
consolidations of some magnitude,            Sources: Abbas et al. (2014a), and latest update of the IMF's Historical Public Debt
                                             Database (HPDD). For advanced economies, data up to 2009 are from Abbas et al. 2011,
                                             and from 2010 through 2015 are from the latest version of the HPDD. For all other
although the Great Accumulation in the       countries data are from the latest version of the HPDD. PPP-GDP weighted averages.

advanced economies is an exception,
up to this point at least.
                                                           26


            Advanced Countries. Debt-to-GDP ratios in the advanced economies averaged 63
percent over the 115-year period. 48 They declined between 1900 and 1914, reflecting broadly
balanced budgets (despite rising military spending) and economic growth (with interruptions,
such as at the time of the 1907 financial crisis). 49 By 1914 advanced-country debt had fallen to
23 percent of GDP, the 115-year low. World War I, the Great Depression and World War II
then created new demands for public spending. Together they drove debt up to about 140
percent of GDP in 1946, the highest level in the 11 decades.

            A period of consolidation extending into the 1970s then followed. 50 Already by 1960,
the halfway point of this interlude, advanced-country debt had fallen to about 50 percent of
GDP on the back of strong growth and
                                                            Figure 6. Debt Composition in Advanced Economies,
limited budget deficits, with help from                                    Maturity and Currency
inflation and low interest rates. The                     (Shares in percent of total public debt, debt ratio in percent)

subsequent rise from the mid-1970s                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                            Post-World War I




                                                                                                                       Post-World War II
                                                                                        Great Depression
                                                                                               Post-Great Depression
                                                                      World War I




                                                                                                         World War II




                                                                                                                                                                               Great Recession
                                                           140




                                                                                                                                                         Great Accumulation
through the 1980s coincided with slower                    120
                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
productivity growth, expanding welfare                     100

states and higher interest rates. 51 This                  80
                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
gradual, sustained rise in debt ratios                     60

persisted through the Global Financial                     40                                                                                                                                    5

Crisis, which gave the trend a further fillip.             20

                                                             0                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                 1900

                                                                     1907

                                                                          1914

                                                                                    1921

                                                                                               1928

                                                                                                         1935

                                                                                                                       1942

                                                                                                                               1949

                                                                                                                                           1956

                                                                                                                                             1963

                                                                                                                                                  1970

                                                                                                                                                    1977

                                                                                                                                                         1984

                                                                                                                                                                   1991

                                                                                                                                                                              1998

                                                                                                                                                                                  2005

                                                                                                                                                                                            2012
            Domestic-currency-denominated
medium-to-long-term                (MLT)         debt            Domestic MLT                   Debt-to-GDP ratio                             Foreign currency-denominated debt, RHS

comprised, on average, close to three-                     Source: Abbas et al. (2014b).
                                                           Notes: G20 advanced economies included are Australia, Canada, France, Germany,
                                                           Italy, Japan, the U.K. and the U.S. PPP-GDP weighted averages.
quarters of total advanced-country debt

48
     Averages are PPP GDP-weighted except where noted otherwise.
49
     Recall the discussion of French fiscal restraint and consolidation in this period in Section 4.
50
     We analyze this episode further in Section 7 below.
51
  Yared (2018) attributes the trend in debt accumulation over the past 40 years in the advanced economies to
population aging and the associated rise in popular demands for pensions, health care and other (often
unfunded) social services. He argues that political economy theories explain these trends as unintended
consequences of mass democracy and its correlates, including rising political polarization and electoral
uncertainty across advanced economies.
                                                       27


(Figure 6). Evidently, an inability to issue long-dated debt instruments in local currency was
not an issue in advanced economies to the same extent as in emerging economies. 52

           There were exceptions, however. In less favorable times such as wars, crises and
recessions, advanced-country governments compensated for the greater perceived riskiness of
their debts by shortening maturities. The MLT share fell during World War I, when the
authorities sought to meet extraordinary military spending needs using short-term debt. It fell
again in the Great Depression and during World War II. The shortening of maturities continued
after the war, as inflation eroded investor appetite for long-dated securities. In the United
States, for example, this share fell steadily from the 1960s through the late-1970s, coincident
with accelerating inflation, although it then recovered sharply starting around the time of the
Volcker disinflation. The MLT share then started rising again in the 1980s, in the U.S. and
more generally, coincident with inflation stabilization and financial development, and
specifically with the growth of investor groups, such as pension funds, mutual funds and
insurance companies, with long-term liabilities and hence strong demand for long-term assets.
Finally, there were sharp fluctuations around the time of the Great Recession: the MLT share
first fell sharply, reflecting heightened uncertainty, but recovered already in 2009-10, as central
banks ramped up their purchases of long-term debt.

           Although the share of foreign-currency-denominated debt of G-20 advanced
economies was low on average (roughly 5 percent of the total), several countries saw it rise
sharply at some point in the 11 decades considered here. 53 In Japan and Italy, shares of foreign-
currency-denominated debt averaged close to 50 percent in 1915-1918 and 1919-1926,
respectively. As noted above, Japan borrowed abroad, in sterling, marks and dollars, to finance
war with Russia, while Italy tapped foreign markets once the political turbulence of the early
1920s had passed (Meyer 1970). This rise in the foreign-currency share of advanced-economy
debt following World War I was general, reflecting the extension of dollar-denominated loans
by the United States to its European allies to finance relief and reconstruction. The subsequent

52
     On the latter, see below.
53
  This general trend is consistent with the “original sin” premise that foreign currency indebtedness and the
associated risks have not been major issues in advanced economies.
                                                        28


decline in this share during the Great Depression reflected the relief received by the advanced
economies on their war-related debts from the U.S. and the U.K. in 1934 (Reinhart and
Trebesch 2014). 54

        A final spike in the share of foreign-currency- denominated debt is visible in the
immediate post-World War II period. This reflects the rise in the share of foreign-currency
debt in Germany in 1953-56, when the Federal Republic negotiated the 1953 London
Agreement under which it assumed a share of the predecessor government’s debts. 55 From
there, the share of advanced-economy debt denominated in foreign currency declined steadily
toward its near negligible levels
                                                 Figure 7. Debt Composition in Advanced Economies,
today. 56                                                                 Holders
                                               (Shares in percent of total public debt, debt ratio in percent)
        The shares of advanced-                                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                  Great Recession
                                             140




                                                                                             World War II




                                                                                                                                            Great Accumulation
                                                                                 Post-Great Depression
                                                             Post-World War I




                                                                                                         Post-World War II
                                                       World War I



                                                                         Great Depression
economy sovereign debt held by                                                                                                                                                      35
                                             120
                                                                                                                                                                                    30
central and commercial banks rose            100
                                                                                                                                                                                    25
in periods of stress, when individual         80
                                                                                                                                                                                    20
investors       drew       back       and     60                                                                                                                                    15
governments, to take up the slack,            40                                                                                                                                    10
leaned on central and commercial              20                                                                                                                                    5

banks. This tendency is evident                0                                                                                                                                    0
                                                   1900

                                                     1907

                                                            1914

                                                                     1921

                                                                                1928

                                                                                            1935

                                                                                                         1942

                                                                                                                 1949

                                                                                                                             1956

                                                                                                                               1963

                                                                                                                                    1970

                                                                                                                                        1977

                                                                                                                                            1984

                                                                                                                                                        1991

                                                                                                                                                                 1998

                                                                                                                                                                     2005

                                                                                                                                                                              2012
during the two world wars, the
                                                          Central bank's holdings                                                   Commercial banks' holdings
Great       Depression,       and     the
                                                          Debt-to-GDP ratio                                                         Non-residents' holdings, RHS
productivity slowdown of the 1970s
                                                Source: Abbas et al. (2014b).
                                                Notes: G20 advanced economies included are Australia, Canada, France, Germany,
(Figure 7).                                     Italy, Japan, the U.K. and the U.S. PPP-GDP weighted averages.




54
  War debts were the dominant type of indebtedness for many advanced countries in the 1920s. That decade
saw some preliminary rescheduling agreements that postponed the repayment of war-related debts but without a
reduction in the notional debt burden.
55
  See Guinnane (2004). West Germany assumed some of the debt of the German Reich; there now being two
Germanys, the West’s lower GDP partly explains the rise in the ratio. During this period, the share of foreign
currency debt in Germany rose to more than 40 percent in 1953 and peaked at 45 percent in 1956 (Abbas et al.
2014b).
56
  A few exceptions like the Roosa bonds denominated in Swiss francs that the U.S. government marketed in the
1960s notwithstanding.
                                                       29


         The share of advanced-economy own sovereign debt held by national central banks is
small on average, at roughly 10 percent. 57 This share rose in the early 1930s, however,
indicative of the stresses of the Great Depression, and then through World War II and in the
immediate postwar period, when central bank purchases were part of the inflation-based
financial repression through which debt ratios were reduced. The central bank share then
trended downward with the development of a broader institutional investor base for
government bonds starting in the 1970s, as noted above. The recent uptick in central bank
holdings reflects the policy response to the global financial crisis, involving quantitative easing
and interventions such as the European Central Bank’s Securities Market Program.

         Commercial banks’ holdings were more than twice as large as those of central banks
over the 115-year period. They were also more volatile, again as evident in the figure.
Generally, banks’ holdings increased in periods of stress, such as World Wars I and II. A
noticeable decline in this share, however, was observed from mid-1980s, reflecting portfolio
diversification facilitated by capital account liberalization and the regulatory changes (the 1988
Basel Accord, which encouraged investment in government securities from other OECD
countries by attaching zero risk weights to those bonds). 58 This decline also coincided with a
rise in non-resident holdings during the Great Accumulation period and with the growth of
nonbank investment funds.

         Emerging Markets. By comparison, public debts have been lower but also more
volatile in G-20 emerging economies, averaging 37 as opposed to 63 percent of GDP. Debt
accumulation episodes there included the 1920-1930s and 1970s-1980s (both centered in Latin
America) and the 1990s (centered in East Asia). U.S. commercial banks first gained a foothold
in Latin America when European banks withdrew during World War I and the Federal Reserve
Act authorized them to branch abroad. As a result of a strong U.S. current account and of the
low interest rates maintained by the Federal Reserve System, U.S. banks were attracted by the

57
   This refers to debt held by the domestic central bank, not also by foreign central banks that may hold some
foreign treasury securities as international reserves.
58
  This diversification shows up in our data as an increase in foreign holdings and a decline in commercial bank
holdings of own-government bonds
                                                         30


high rates on offer in Latin America in the 1920s. 59 As Latin American governments cashed in
on the resulting bonanza, Argentine public debt rose from 56 percent of GDP in 1925 to 118
percent in 1932. Brazilian public debt rose from 21 percent of GDP in 1929 to 52 percent in
1933, Mexican public debt from 18 percent of GDP in 1925 to 38 percent in 1932 for the same
reasons. Much of this 1920s-era debt was denominated in sterling or dollars and marketed to
foreigners. 60

           Debt ratios then fell from their early-1930s peak, as defaulted debts were restructured,
GDP recovered, and budgets were broadly balanced. 61 Suspension of interest and amortization
payments, on external debt in particular, was widespread, reflecting the impact of lower levels
of GDP but also weak commodity prices and restrictive trade policies in the advanced
economies, which made it harder for debtors to earn foreign exchange. Not just emerging
markets in Latin America but also Central European countries unilaterally suspended debt-
service payments for significant periods. In some cases, restructuring agreements were
negotiated with and received the endorsement of bondholders’ committees only after World
War II. 62

           The debt-GDP ratio of the emerging market grouping bottomed in 1947, at 18 percent,
following the wartime period of inflation. Additional debt was then accumulated via
intergovernmental and domestic borrowing, and in the 1970s through foreign-currency
borrowing from money-center banks. The process was interrupted in the 1980s by debt crises
triggered by sharply higher interest rates and weaker commodity prices (Feldstein 2002; World
Bank 2005). Lending resumed once the Brady Plan was launched in 1989, allowing

59
  Latin American countries floated bonds on the London market as well in the 1920s, but New York was far
and away the larger lender.
60
     Although Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) remind us that this was not the entire story (see below).
61
     Fiscal policy in emerging markets in this period is analyzed by Twomey (1983).
62
  Some authors would include the United States in this category. See footnote 72 below. That the normalization
of defaulted debts took so long meant that many emerging markets were unable to borrow externally for
extended periods (due to, inter alia, the Johnson Act of 1934, which prohibited foreign nations in default from
marketing their bond issues in the United States). Eichengreen and Portes (1986) analyze the determinants of
default in a cross-section of countries in the period 1934-38. They find that the share of dollar- and sterling-
denominated debt in default was an increasing function of the debt-GDP ratio and of the deterioration in a
country’s terms of trade in the preceding period (the so-called “commodity lottery” – see Diaz-Alejandro 1984).
They also find that countries that maintained debt-service payments all through the period, including Argentina
and the Central American republics, did so in part by running relatively austere fiscal policies.
                                                       31


commercial bank debts to be restructured and securitized and giving the bond market a liquid
basis on which to build. Seven-plus years of crisis had to be endured prior to this resolution,
during which the high-income countries denied the need for principal reduction, hoping against
hope that their banks could rebuild their capital cushions prior to commencing the write-down
process.

        But with the Brady Plan finally in place, capital flows to emerging economies resumed.
A substantial fraction of these new flows financed chronic current-account deficits. Those
deficits were associated with the maintenance of pegged exchange rates, which encouraged
both lenders and borrowers to discount the risks of foreign-currency-denominated and indexed
debt.

        Many accounts of public debt in emerging markets emphasize this external aspect,
although domestic debt was also
                                                         Figure 8. Debt Composition in Emerging
important over the first part of the 20th                               Economies
                                                           (Shares in percent of total public debt)
century, as documented by Reinhart
and Rogoff (2011). The success of           90

                                            80
emerging economies in placing
                                            70
domestic debt came at some cost,
                                            60
however, in terms of maturity.
                                            50
Figure 8 confirms that in the 1980-
                                            40
2012 period domestic MLT debt               30
comprised a smaller share of total          20
debt in G-20 emerging economies                             Domestic MLT debt
                                            10              Foreign currency-denominated debt
                                                            Domestic MLT debt in G-20 Advanced Economies
than G-20 advanced economies (40             0
                                                 1980
                                                      1982
                                                           1984
                                                                1986
                                                                     1988
                                                                          1990
                                                                               1992
                                                                                     1994
                                                                                          1996
                                                                                               1998
                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                         2002
                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                        2008
                                                                                                                             2010




percent versus 76 percent). In a
number of instances, governments            Sources: Guscina and Jeanne (2006) and authors' calculations.
                                            Notes: G-20 emerging countries included are Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia,
straining to finance current account        Mexico, Russia, and Turkey. G-20 advanced economies included are Australia, Canada,
                                            France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the U.K. and the U.S. PPP-GDP weighted averages.
deficits and roll over maturing
debts shortened the maturity of new placements. Mexico’s notorious tesobonos were only the
most prominent case in point.
                                                         32


        The share of MLT debt rose after the mid-1990s, reaching close to three-quarters of the
debt stock in recent years. This has led some to declare the death of “original sin.” Still, the
share of debt denominated in foreign currencies remains substantially larger than in the
advanced G-20 economies, averaging 46 percent of the total in the 1980-2012 period,
compared to close to zero in the advanced economies. That said, after soaring as high as 80
percent in the mid-1990s, the foreign-currency share has been declining since.

        Overall, the composition of emerging economies’ debt has been riskier, in the sense of
a higher combined share of short-term and foreign currency debt. Despite movement in recent
years toward a more favorable debt structure, this conclusion still holds.

        Low-Income Countries. 63 Public debt in low-income countries (LICs) averaged 38
percent of GDP between 1926 and 2015 but rose as high as 147 percent in the 1990s. The
upturn started the 1970s, as Figure 5 shows. Governments, some newly established, initiated
externally-financed public projects with the aim of strengthening their economies and
offsetting the 1970s growth slowdown.                    Figure 9. Select External Debt Composition
                                                                       Indicators in LICs
                                                         (Shares in percent of total external public debt)
        The hope, as always, was that
economies would grow, and favorable
                                                    30
export performance would allow debt-
service obligations to be met. These
optimistic expectations were shaped by              20

prevailing macroeconomic conditions,
including the commodity price boom of               10

the early 1970s, and by enhanced access
to funding sources. 64 In the event, much            0
                                                         1970
                                                               1973
                                                                   1976
                                                                       1979
                                                                            1982
                                                                                  1985
                                                                                       1988
                                                                                            1991
                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                       1997
                                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                                 2003
                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                            2009
                                                                                                                                 2012




of this external borrowing was used to
finance current expenditure rather than                       Commercial banks' holdings               Short-term external debt
                                                      Sources: World Bank International Debt Statistics and authors' calculations.
developing manufacturing or investing                 Notes: PPPGDP-weighted averages.


63
  See the data appendix for the full list of low-income countries. As noted above, coverage in Figure 5 and
elsewhere expands over time, and includes a growing number of countries following their independence.
64
  For example, the Euromarket became a source of finance for LICs that had not borrowed abroad on a
significant scale before (Senegal, Togo, Kenya, Zambia, and Liberia, for instance).
                                                         33


in infrastructure (Krumm 1985; Greene 1989), echoing the 19th century experience of serial
defaulters. And with the expansion of commercial borrowing, a growing share of the lending
was on unfavorable terms, including short durations and variable interest rates (Figure 9).

           The developing-economy debt crisis of the 1980s erupted in the wake of the late-1970s
oil price shock, unfavorable terms of trade, recession in the advanced economies, and rising
global interest rates. Private investors trimmed their exposures and, with export earnings
stagnant, countries found it increasingly difficult to service their obligations, resulting in
arrears and reschedulings. Many LICs responded not by cutting public spending but instead by
borrowing more to fill funding gaps. Civil strife was another factor exacerbating debt burdens,
for example in Nicaragua and Uganda and to a lesser extent the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Niger (Brooks et al. 1998). Although multilaterals provided support for adjustment
programs, this only left the subject countries more heavily indebted (Easterly 2002; Brooks et
al. 1998; Daseking and Powell 1999). 65 As a result, debt levels rose steadily from the early
1970s, reaching unsustainably high levels by the mid-1990s (Figure 5).

           The IMF and World Bank launched the HIPC Initiative in 1996 to provide
comprehensive debt relief to the poorest heavily-indebted countries. 66 The initiative was
expanded in 1999 to allow for faster, deeper, and broader relief, and supplemented in 2005 by
the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). 67 Of the 39 countries potentially eligible for
HIPC Initiative assistance, 36 (of which 30 are in Africa) received the full amount of debt-
relief for which they were eligible through HIPC and the MDRI. 68


65
  In particular, the IMF’s Compensatory Financing Facility came into heavy use during late-1970s and early
1980s.
66
  There had been earlier, more limited initiatives along these lines, as described by Easterly (2002). The limited
success of these earlier programs in part reflected the revealed preference of debtors for high debt, which may
simply lead to new borrowing to replace old cancelled debts; the granting of progressively more favorable terms
for debt relief which may have perverse incentive effects, as countries borrow in anticipation of debt
forgiveness and delay policy reforms waiting for the best deal (Easterly 2002).
67
     This was intended to accelerate progress toward the United Nations Millennium Development Goals.
68
  See the data appendix for a list of the countries that have received or potentially eligible to receive debt relief
under the HIPC initiative. As of end-August 2016, the total amount of debt relief under the HIPC and MDRI
reached $126.6 billion, with the Democratic Republic of Congo being the largest recipient of debt relief ($16.3
billion).
                                                       34


         According to Easterly (2002) and Gautam (2003), the overall success of the initiative
was attributable to two factors. First, relief was conditional on establishing a track record of
sound policies, thus avoiding incentives to over-borrow and delay necessary reforms. Second,
the initiative was comprehensive: it was a once-and-for-all program in which all creditors,
including multilaterals, participated.

                             VI. TWO DEBT ACCUMULATION EPISODES

         In this section we hone in on the Great Depression and the Great Recession, the two
peacetime periods of rapid debt accumulation in the advanced economies. Our discussion
follows the debt decomposition approach described earlier. 69

         Though there were parallels between the two episodes, there were also differences.
Output and employment losses were much larger during the Depression: real GDP in G-20
advanced economies declined by 4 percent peak-to-trough during the Great Recession but by
19 percent in the Depression. Median unemployment rose to 25 percent at the height of the
Depression but remained in the single digits in the Great Recession.

         Despite the more severe impact on the real economy, the increase in the debt-to-GDP
ratio was less in the Great Depression (24 versus 40 percentage points of GDP). The
explanation for the conjuncture of higher output and employment losses with a smaller
deterioration in public finances lies in the nature of the policy response and in the initial
conditions, i.e., the level of public debt at the onset of the crisis.

         Table 3 suggests that about two-thirds of the increase in the advanced-economy debt
ratio during the Great Recession was accounted for by the cumulative increase in the primary
deficit, reflecting revenue losses on the back of sluggish growth in the aftermath of the
financial crisis and, to a lesser extent, expansionary fiscal policies (IMF, 2013).


69
  The precise years for which the debt decomposition is conducted for each individual country varies so as to
best capture trough-to-peak (peak-to-trough) in its buildup (consolidation) episode. We focus on sustained
changes in debt ratios rather than temporary reversals that were small relative to duration and size of the episode
identified.
                                                                             35



                      Table 3. Decomposition of Select Large Post-1914 Debt Increases

                                    (Contribution to debt increase, percent as share of total)
                                                                Primary                   Interest-growth                          Stock-flow
                                                                balance                      differential                          adjustment

Great Depression (1928-33)                                           -9                             108                                    1

Great Recession (2007-13)                                            67                               25                                   8

     Source: Abbas et al. (2014a) and authors' calculations.
     Notes: Countries included are Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the U.K., and the U.S. PPPGDP-weighted averages, cumulative over the
     episode years.




              In the U.S., the stimulus package enacted in early 2008 targeted tax cuts at low- and
middle-income families. This was followed by tax relief for first-time homebuyers and by the
2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), which authorized nearly $800
billion of stimulus. The largest countercyclical fiscal action in the U.S. history, the ARRA had
important implications for the debt ratio. Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan and the U.K.
similarly enacted fiscal stimulus packages by late 2008. Early measures generally took the
form of tax cuts, while increases in spending, such as extensions and expansions of
unemployment benefits, were deployed subsequently. Public investments were undertaken
with longer lags, reflecting project evaluation and procurement procedures, although bringing
forward pre-planned capital expenditures mitigated this delay in cases such as France and the
U.K. (IMF 2013). 70

              By comparison, there was little discretionary countercyclical fiscal action in the 1930s.
Where the primary balance accounted for two-thirds of all debt accumulation in 2007-13, its

70
   On the monetary policy front, central banks (in the U.S., the U.K. and Japan, followed eventually by the Euro
Area) reduced interest rates (for instance, in the U.S., the zero lower bound was reached by end-2008). After
cutting rates, they implemented a range of unconventional monetary policies aimed at restoring the functioning
of financial markets and intermediation, and providing further monetary stimulus at the zero lower bound.
Forward guidance and quantitative easing in the form of government bond purchases were used to lower long-
term interest rates. Negative interest rates on bank deposits at central banks have also been deployed in some
countries. Through these channels, and by helping to secure recovery, these policies helped to narrow and
reverse the interest rate-growth rate differential.
                                                       36


contribution was negative in 1928-33, when primary balances were, on average, in surplus. 71
In the U.S., however, the Revenue Act of 1932 increased tax rates with the goal of balancing
the federal budget. The New Deal, initiated in early 1933, included new programs aimed at
generating recovery but represented only a modest and temporary countercyclical fiscal
expansion (Brown 1956). 72

         The U.K., like the U.S., did not make much use of fiscal expansion in the early stages
of its recovery (Middleton 1984). France raised taxes to defend the gold standard in the first
half of the decade but then ran substantial budget deficits only after 1936. 73 Germany and
Japan, however, saw large increase in government spending from the mid-1930s. The German
budget deficit as a percent of GDP increased little initially but grew substantially after 1934 as
a result of public works and rearmament (Thomas 1934). Japanese government spending,
particularly military spending, rose sharply between 1932 and 1934, resulting in substantial
budget deficits (Almunia et al. 2010). This fiscal stimulus, combined with monetary expansion
and an undervalued yen, returned the Japanese economy to full employment relatively quickly.

         Another difference is the role of SFA, which contributed more to the increase in the
debt ratio in the Great Recession. This reflected extensive financial sector support in several
advanced economies and loans to support the housing sector, which were not recorded as

71
  Governments were smaller during the Great Depression—the expenditure-to-GDP ratio averaged 8 (40)
percent during the Great Depression (Great Recession). Larger governments during the Great Recession were
associated with bigger automatic stabilizers, which contributed more to the deterioration in the fiscal balances
compared to the Great Depression.
72
  Starting in 1933, the U.S. took monetary measures to prevent prices (and nominal GDP) from falling further
and from increasing the contribution of the growth-interest differential even more. The Roosevelt
Administration took the country off the gold standard and devalued the dollar against gold by approximately 50
percent. Romer (1992) points to the associated monetary expansion as the main factor supporting the recovery
of real GDP in the subsequent period. In order for the government to abandon the gold standard and depreciate
the dollar against gold but not also push up the nominal value of the debt, the U.S. Supreme Court had to uphold
the constitutionality of the abrogation of the gold clauses in U.S. government debt securities. Those clauses
guaranteed holders payment in dollars of constant gold content, meaning that had they not been abandoned a 50
percent devaluation against gold would have required an increase of 50 percent in current dollar interest and
amortization payments. Whether abrogation of the gold clauses should be thought of as a debt default is
disputed. For the latest on this, see Edwards (2018).
73
 The expansionary effect of these deficits, however, was counteracted by a legislated reduction in the French
workweek—a change that raised costs and depressed production (Cohen-Setton et al. 2017).
                                                      37


spending and therefore show up as contributions of the SFA to debt dynamics. 74 Governments
intervened in distressed financial systems and industry in the 1930s as well, but they relied, on
average, more on approaches that did not increase recorded sovereign debt. 75

         But the small average contribution of the SFA to the debt buildup in this period masks
cross-country variations. The SFA contributed more, for example, to the rise in debt in a small
subset of our countries, most notably Japan, where it reflected the operations of the Industrial
Bank of Japan, which engaged in extensive off-balance-sheet transactions. France, where the
SFA adjustment made the largest negative contribution to debt accumulation, remained on the
gold standard throughout the period analyzed here, when countries such as the U.S. depreciated
their currencies. We suspect that the negative SFA for France reflects reductions in the burden
of foreign-currency-denominated debt, supported by the maintenance of the gold standard (the
opposite of the country’s experience in the first half of the 1920s – see below).

         Hence, the Great Depression debt surge was fully accounted for by the growth rate-
interest rate differential, reflecting the large negative shock to output and employment.
Eventually currency devaluations enabled central banks to cut policy rates and then stabilize
and raise prices, translating into a reduction in real interest rates. These policies, along with
relatively low initial debt levels, contained the impact of the interest-rate component on debt
dynamics. They help explain why the increase in debt ratios, in percentage point terms, was
smaller than in the Great Recession. 76


74
   Changes in governments’ financial assets (which capture, among other items, loans to other sectors)
accounted for about 90 percent of the SFA term, on average, over this period.
75
   In many cases, support for the financial sector was provided by the central bank or in the form of government
guarantees and not reported as an increase in government spending, government financing or public debt. For
example, German banks were kept afloat by central bank liquidity provision and government guarantees,
financial injections that never showed up on the government’s balance sheet. In the case of the U.S.
Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), the majority of public finance for bank recapitalization was
provided directly by the Treasury, which gave the RFC $500 million of capital and then additional loans, and
which sold bonds to the public to fund the RFC. Treasury funding totaled $50 billion over the RFC’s
approximately 25-year lifetime (thus averaging $2 billion a year); by comparison, U.S. GDP in 1939 was on the
order of $100 billion. The RFC was also authorized to sell bonds to the public ($3 billion in total), operations
unlikely to be captured by the SFA.
76
  Advanced-country debt was much higher in 2007 than at the start of the Great Depression (84 versus 57
percent of GDP). For the same output and unemployment shock, the snowball effects on public debt were
therefore larger starting in 2008.
                                                                             38


              Debt maturities and the composition of debt holders also evolved differently (Table 4).
During the Great Depression, the share of domestic short-term debt increased as governments
were forced to accept less favorable conditions (shorter maturities) on new issues. 77 The period
also saw a fall in the share of non-resident holdings, consistent with the decline in trade and
capital flows, the imposition of capital and exchange controls, and defaults on external
obligations. Commercial bank holdings of government securities rose as investors substituted
away from other riskier investments. 78


         Table 4. Shifts in Advanced Economies’ Debt Composition, Select Debt Buildup
                                           Episodes
                                      (Shares in percent of total debt, PPPGDP-weighted averages)

                                                                                                                             Cumulative annual
Great Depression                                          1928                     1933                  Change
                                                                                                                              change (1931-33)
     Short-term debt                                        8                        15                       7                            1
     Central bank holdings                                  2                         7                       5                            3
     Commercial banks' holdings                             28                       30                       3                            2
     Non-resident holdings                                  12                       11                       -2                          -2
                                                                                                                             Cumulative annual
Great Recession                                           2007                     2011                  Change
                                                                                                                              change (2009-11)
     Short-term debt                                        20                       17                       -2                          -8
     Central bank holdings                                  7                         9                       2                            5
     Commercial banks' holdings                             11                       12                       1                            0
     Non-resident holdings                                  28                       34                       6                            3

     Sources: Abbas et al. (2014b) and authors' calculations.
     Notes: Countries included are Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the U.K., and the U.S. Averages in PPP-GDP weighted terms.


              The Great Recession, in contrast, saw a shift away from short-duration debt. 79 Central
bank holdings increased in both periods, although Table 4 shows that their holdings rose more
rapidly after 2009 than after 1931. 80 Starting in 2008, demand by commercial banks was

77
  This shift was especially evident at the onset of the Depression. Compare the last two columns of Table 4.
Bordo et al. (2003) also point to the shortening of maturity in several advanced economies during the Great
Depression.
78
     On the increase in commercial banks’ holdings see League of Nations (1934), Appendix III.
79
   There was however a move towards shorter maturity and foreign currency debt issuance in some more
troubled Eurozone countries, Cyprus, Greece, Ireland and Portugal for example (De Broeck and Guscina 2011).
80
   In the case of the Great Depression, the increase in central bank holdings evident in the top panel of Table 4 is
driven by the case of Japan (see above).
                                                       39


sustained by continuing to attach zero risk weights and capital charges to sovereign obligations
from OECD countries. 81 Demand by non-residents, for U.S. government debt in particular,
picked up despite low yields, reflecting flight to safety and the so-called safe-asset shortage.
Non-resident holdings had climbed on the back of financial innovation and globalization,
enabling countries to finance their deficits by issuing MLT debt to both domestic and non-
resident holders while reducing their reliance on central banks.

                            VII. TWO DEBT CONSOLIDATION EPISODES

         In section 4 we discussed three cases of countries that successfully reduced their debts
in the pre-1914 era. Here, we turn to two prominent consolidation episodes in the advanced
economy following the two 20th century world wars. Very different approaches, it turns out,
were pursued in the two periods.

         Advanced-Economy Debt Consolidation after World War I. In the interwar period,
advanced economy debt reductions were achieved partly through economic growth, partly
through restructurings of external obligations, and partly through primary surpluses. The
growth-interest differential contributed less in the 1920s than after World War II, given that
the twenties were a period of deflation, not inflation. 82 Balanced budgets were the norm; net of
interest payments, those budgets delivered primary surpluses that helped to reduce debt ratios
(Table 5). However, the SFA worked against consolidation. This term was driven by France,
which had significant dollar-denominated debt in the early 1920s. 83 Depreciation of the franc
increased the burden of those debts, which shows up as a negative SFA (and an increase in the
debt ratio) in a period of consolidation (when debt is being reduced).




81
  Whatever the underlying creditworthiness of the sovereign in question and whatever the other demerits of the
policy.
82
  Instances of hyperinflation, which had a powerful impact in eroding the burden of MLT debt, notwithstanding
to the contrary.
83
  The sizable dollar denominated debt was incurred as a result of the four liberty loans the U.S. extended to
France during World War I. In the early 1920s, the share of foreign-denominated debt rose significantly in
France (from 24.5 percent in 1921 to about 40 percent in 1925) and stabilized at that level through the early
1940s.
                                                                             40


                     Table 5. Decomposition of Select Large Post-1914 Debt Reductions

                                 (Contribution to reduction, percent as share in total)

                                                           Primary                Growth-interest                           Stock-flow
                                                           balance                  differential                            adjustment
      Post-WWI (1921-29)                                        64                              53                                  -16
      Post-WWII (1945-75)                                       46                              75                                  -21

     Sources: Abbas et al. (2014a) and authors' calculations.
     Notes: For post WWI, the countries (episodes) included are: Canada (1922-28); France (1921-26), the UK (1923-29), the US (1921-29). For post-WWII,
     countries (episodes) included are: Australia (1946-63), Canada (1945-57), France (1949-69), the U.K. (1946-75), and the U.S. (1946-74). PPPGDP-
     weighted averages, cumulative over the episode years.




              Rescheduling of bilateral government credits in the early 1920s postponed repayments
to the U.S. and the U.K. without reducing the nominal debt burden. 84 These maturity
extensions, evident in Table 6, were facilitated by the fact that a substantial fraction of this
debt was held by the foreign official sector, reflecting inter-government obligations incurred
during the war. The share of foreign-currency-denominated debt remained relatively high. It
increased further in the immediate post-World War I period, as foreign loans from the U.S. to
Europe were used to fund relief and reconstruction. That the share of foreign- currency
denominated debt was high meant that it was not easily inflated away. 85

              Ultimately, the overhang was removed by large-scale war-debt reduction, which also
delivered a fall in the share of foreign-denominated debt (Table 6). The Hoover Moratorium
in 1931 allowed 15 European countries to suspend their war-debt payments to the U.S., and at
the 1932 Lausanne Conference the U.K.’s wartime allies were permitted to temporarily
suspend their payments. These suspensions were recognized as permanent in 1934. War debt
relief accounted for 36, 43, and 52 percent of 1934 GDP for France, Greece and Italy
respectively (Reinhart and Trebesch 2014). In Germany, external public debt contracted in the
second half of the 1920s was written down unilaterally in 1933-34, when the National Socialist

84
   Select war debt reprofilings occurred later (e.g., Austrian debt to the U.S. in 1930 and Romanian debt to the
U.K. in 1937), but since these are not G-20 countries these reprofilings are not reflected in our calculations.
85
  Note that Table 5 (and Figure 5 above) do not include reparations obligations from Germany as public debt;
doing so would greatly alter (and dominate) the analysis.
                                                                         41


regime was no longer deterred by ensuing damage to its commercial and diplomatic relations
(Ritschl 2013).

    Table 6. Shifts in Advanced Economies’ Debt Composition, Select Debt Reduction
                                      Episodes
                                    (Shares in percent of total, PPPGDP-weighted averages)

                                                                                                                       Cumulative annual
Post-WWI                                          1922                      1929                   Change
                                                                                                                        change (1922-25)
  MLT domestic debt                                 66                        73                        6                             7
  Foreign currency debt                             12                        13                        1                             6

                                                                                                                       Cumulative annual
The 1930s                                         1932                      1939                   Change
                                                                                                                        change (1932-35)
  Short-term debt                                   15                        14                        -1                             2
  Foreign currency debt                             14                         5                        -9                            -5
 Sources: Abbas et al. (2014b) and authors' calculations.
 Notes: Countries included are Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the U.K., and the U.S. PPP-GDP weighted averages.




          Advanced-Economy Debt Consolidation after World War II. Post-World War II
debt consolidation, from the mid-1940s through the mid-1970s, was the most dramatic such
episode in the 20th century. G-20
advanced economy debt reached 140                                        Figure 10. Interest-Growth Differential in Advanced
                                                                                              Economies
percent of GDP in 1946, as noted,                                                   (Difference in percentage points)
before falling to 30 percent by 1974.
Three quarters of the reduction was
accounted for by the growth-rate-
interest-rate differential, with primary
surpluses playing a smaller role (Table
5). 86 The favorable differential reflected
reconstruction            of the           international
economy,           strong         investment,            and             Source: Abbas et al. (2014a).
                                                                         Notes: G-20 advanced countries included are Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
                                                                         the U.K. and the U.S.



86
   The contribution of the primary surplus varied across countries: it contributed half of the reduction in debt in
the U.S. during 1946-74, for example, but only a quarter in the U.K. over the same period.
                                                         42


successful catch up (Eichengreen 1996). Also important were negative real interest rates
(Figure 10) supported by restrictive domestic financial regulation, widespread capital controls
and persistent inflation (Reinhart and Sbrancia 2015). Regulatory restrictions included interest
rate ceilings and reserve requirements on banks, prudential floors on pension fund assets to be
held as government securities, caps on bank deposit rates, and restrictions on cross-border
foreign exchange transactions. 87 Exchange and capital controls were applied in the 1930s and
persisted after World War II. The
                                                         Figure 11. Central Bank Holdings of Government
international bond market, remained                                      Debt in the U.S.
                                                                            (In percent)
quiescent,     demoralized       by    earlier      20
                                                                 Share of total gross public debt
                                                    18
defaults and by the Johnson Act                                  Share of GDP
                                                    16
(described       above).      Governments           14
consequently shifted toward domestic                12

funding. Central bank holdings of                   10
                                                     8
government paper were high in this
                                                     6
period, and to the extent that their                 4
accumulation          represented          the       2
                                                     0
monetization of fiscal deficits, they
                                                         1914
                                                         1918
                                                         1922
                                                         1926
                                                         1930
                                                         1934
                                                         1938
                                                         1942
                                                         1946
                                                         1950
                                                         1954
                                                         1958
                                                         1962
                                                         1966
                                                         1970
                                                         1974
                                                         1978
                                                         1982
                                                         1986
                                                         1990
                                                         1994
                                                         1998
                                                         2002
                                                         2006
                                                         2010
facilitated inflation. In the U.S., the
                                                    Source: Abbas et al. (2014a).
central-bank share of government debt
reached a record 17 percent of gross debt in the early 1970s (Figure 11). The accumulation of
government debt by the Fed in the pre-1951 Accord period is well-known (see e.g.,
Eichengreen and Garber 1991): the central bank accumulated public debt as needed to maintain
the Treasury-dictated ceiling on interest rates. That the share of gross debt on the central bank’s
balance sheet again rose strongly in the 1960s is perhaps less widely appreciated.

         The roles of inflation and central bank financing in these consolidations differed. Japan
experienced high inflation from 1946 through 1949. 88 (The 12-month change in retail prices in
Tokyo peaked at more than 700 percent in late 1946). In the U.K., in contrast, the roles of

87
  Before World War II there was a gradual shift towards heavier regulation in response to the financial crises of
1929-32. The legacy of these crises made it easier to package those policies as “prudential.”
88
  The Dodge Line Stabilization took place in mid-1949, but even then, it took an additional six months for
inflation to come down to single-digit levels.
                                                                          43


inflation and central bank financing were less, and the rate of debt reduction was only half as
fast. But faster debt reduction in Japan, achieved through inflation, came at the expense of
significant maturity shortening, reflecting declining investor appetite for long-dated securities
(Table 7).

           Table 7. Shifts in Select Advanced Economies’ Debt Composition, Post-WWII

     Country     Debt Reduction relative                 Average debt                          Average     MLT domestic   CB
                                          No. of years
 (Episode years)   to intitail debt level              reduction per year                      inflation      Debt      Holdings

                                                                          (percentage points               Change in shares to total
                                      (percent)                 (years)                        (percent)
                                                                               of GDP)                         debt (percent)

UK (1946-80)                              85                      35              6               7             21            6
Japan (1946-64)                           98                      19             11               42            -33           40

     Sources: Abbas et al. (2014b) and authors' calculations.




               The SFA again slowed debt reduction after World War II. But in contrast to the
aftermath of World War I, when the negative contribution of the SFA was limited to France,
after WWII a large contribution of the SFA was common across G-20 advanced economies.
Nationalizations, subsidies for loss-making public enterprises and other below-the-line
operations contributed to this negative SFA and thereby to increases in debt, partially offsetting
the effects of primary surpluses and a favorable growth-interest-rate differential in this period
of consolidation). 89

               Implications for Today. Countries have pursued two broad approaches to debt
reduction. The orthodox approach relies on growth, primary surpluses, and the privatization of
government assets. In turn this encourages long debt duration and non-resident holdings.
Heterodox approaches, in contrast, include restructuring debt contracts, generating inflation,
taxing wealth and repressing private finance. This in turn discourages foreigners from holding
the government’s obligations and investors from holding long-duration debt.


89
  The inflation and growth slowdown of the early 1970s may have added further to this effect, insofar as
pressure for increased spending was accommodated but governments sought to hide it from voters and the bond
market.
                                                                           44


          Today, financial repression is unlikely to be as effective as after World War II.
Repression then relied on tight financial regulation, capital controls, and limited investment
opportunities. Today a much larger share of advanced economy debt is held by non-residents,
and a lower share by banking systems, making it more difficult to maintain a captive investor
base that accepts debt offering sub-market returns. In addition, regulatory measures compelling
banks to hold domestic government debt and then attempting to inflate it away could threaten
financial stability in the financially-competitive low-growth environment of the 21st century. 90

          The value attached to price stability by central banks and retail investors in government
bonds in turn limits the political viability of surprise inflation. Higher inflation would also have
indirect costs, in the form of a persistent departure from less risky long-duration debt.
Governments would be trading off lower short-run debt-servicing costs for higher costs and
heightened volatility in the future. We saw this in the case of Japan in the previous subsection.

           This tendency is similarly                               Figure 12. Italy: Debt Composition in the 1970s
evident     in    Italy   after    1970.      Its                               through Euro Adoption
                                                                                    90                                                                 25
experience shows that moving back to                                                80
                                                    (Shares in percent of total gross public debt)




                                                                                    70                                                                 20
long-term        debt     denominated         in




                                                                                                                                                            Annual rate of inflation
                                                                                    60
domestic currency and with a fixed                                                                                                                     15




                                                                                                                                                                 (Percent)
                                                                                    50
                                                                   Debt structure




interest rate may take considerably                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                       10
longer than the time needed simply to                                               30

bring down inflation. In the early 1970s,                                           20                                                                 5
                                                                                    10
a spike in Italian inflation coincided
                                                                                          0                                                            0
                                                                                                     1964
                                                                                                     1966
                                                                                                     1968
                                                                                                     1970
                                                                                                     1972
                                                                                                     1974
                                                                                                     1976
                                                                                                     1978
                                                                                                     1980
                                                                                                     1982
                                                                                                     1984
                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                     1988
                                                                                                     1990
                                                                                                     1992
                                                                                                     1994
                                                                                                     1996
                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                     2000




with a sharp increase in the share of the
Bank of Italy’s holdings of sovereign                                                                Domestic short-term and variable long-term debt
                                                                                                     Central bank holdings
debt, which peaked in 1976 (Figure                                                                   Inflation rate, RHS
12). 91 Unhappiness with inflation led in                                Source: Abbas et al. (2014b).




90
  Further, higher bank holdings of own sovereign debt can increase exposure to negative feedback loop
between the sovereign and banks, as was demonstrated recently in the Euro Area sovereign debt crisis.
91
  A full discussion of Italian inflation in this period is beyond the ambit of this paper. Among other things, it
would add the role of supply-side factors (the impact of the oil shock, the presence of wage indexation in the
form of the Scala Mobile).
                                                         45


1981 to the “divorce” between the government and the central bank. 92 The Bank of Italy gained
the autonomy to decide whether to purchase Treasury bills not taken up by brokers at auctions.
The share of debt held by the central bank declined in the second half of the 1970s, but not
until the 1980s did inflation come down. It took even longer for the combined share of domestic
short-term debt and variable rate long-term debt to begin to fall.

           Thus, not only would financial repression be difficult to implement under present
circumstances, but its negative side-effects would persist.

                                              VIII. CONCLUSION

           For hundreds if not thousands of years, sovereigns have borrowed to secure borders to
fight foreign military campaigns. The 19th century was a transitional period when
governments, while still borrowing to prosecute wars, issued debt to build roads, railways,
and ports and to invest in education. The 20th century then saw sharp increases in debt
burdens as a result of major wars but also as a result of recessions, banking panics and
financial crises, and of the public-policy responses to these events. The end of the last
century also saw, for the first time, a secular increase in public-debt-to-GDP ratios in a
variety of countries in conjunction not with wars and crises but in response to popular
demands on governments for pensions, health care, and other often unfunded social services.

           Debasement and restructuring also have a long history. In the 18th and 19th centuries,
some governments went to extraordinary lengths to service and repay heavy debts incurred as
a result of expensive wars (recall the examples of Britain, the U.S. and France in Section 4).
Britain ran primary surpluses for the better part of a century, the United States for five
decades. In part this reflected the political influence of creditors. It reflected the fact that the
franchise was not yet universal and that contemporary perceptions of the role of government
were different from today. It reflected the recognition by decision makers that the
maintenance of debt-service payments, even when difficult, could deliver lower borrowing
costs in normal times and aid with the mobilization of resources in the military and economic
crises not infrequently faced by 18th and 19th century governments. Not least it reflected good

92
     This was the equivalent of the Accord in the United States.
                                               46


luck – that Great Britain was not confronted with an equally costly war between 1815 and
1914 or the United States between 1865 and 1917, and that there was no economic slump as
deep and long as the Great Depression of the 1930s (Grossman and Han 1993). Governments
following this path found themselves able to issue debt at favorable interest rates, long
maturities, and in their own currencies (Bordo, Meissner and Redish 2003).

        Not all governments were able to implement this good equilibrium, however. Some
countries defaulted and restructured their debts, often repeatedly. Inflation and financial
repression were used to reduce domestic claims on the public sector. Episodes like that in the
third quarter of the 20th century, when high advanced economy debts were brought down
through a combination of rapid economic growth and budgetary discipline, were exceptions
to this rule.

        We started with the observation that public debt is a Janus-faced asset class. History
amply fleshes out this portrait.
                                            47


                                     DATA APPENDIX
Countries underlying Table 1: Flow data include (28 countries): Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,
Italy, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Portugal, Russia, Serbia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Uruguay, U.S. Stock data cover (45 countries): Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, Peru, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkey, U.K., U.S., Uruguay, Vietnam, and South Africa
Countries included in the analysis underlying Figure 1 (47 countries): Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Romania, Russia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, U.K., U.S., Uruguay, and Vietnam.
Debt composition data: For advanced economies, data are drawn from Abbas et al. (2014b),
and cover 8 G-20 advanced economies: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
U.K. and the U.S. for the period 1900-2012. For emerging economies, data on debt
composition by currency and maturity cover the period 1980-2012 and are drawn from Guscina
and Jeanne (2006). They cover 8 G-20 emerging economies: Argentina, Brazil, China, India,
Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, and Turkey.
Low-income countries analyzed in Sections 4-6 (57 countries): Based on IMF World
Economic Outlook classification, countries considered include: Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of Congo, Côte
d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Honduras, Kenya, Kyrgyz Republic, Lao P.D.R., Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Moldova, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, São Tomé e Príncipe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands,
Sudan, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, and
Zimbabwe.
Countries that received debt relief under the HIPC initiative include (36 countries):
Afghanistan, Benin, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Comoros, Cote d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, The Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Niger, Republic of Congo, Rwanda, São Tomé, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, and Zambia. The three “pre-decision” countries that
are potentially eligible for HIPCs assistance are: Eritrea, Somalia, and Sudan.
                                               48


                                         REFERENCES

Abbas, S. M. A., N. Belhocine, A. El-Ganainy, and M. Horton 2011. “Historical Patterns and
Dynamics of Public Debt—Evidence from a New Database,” IMF Economic Review, Vol.
59, No. 4, pp. 717-742.

Abbas, S.M.A., N. Belhocine, A. El-Ganainy, and A. Weber 2014a. “Current Crisis in
Historical Perspective,” in C. Cottarelli, P. Gerson, and A. Senhadji, editors, Post-Crisis
Fiscal Policy, pp. 161-191 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

Abbas, S. M. A., L. Blattner, M. De Broeck, A. El-Ganainy and M. Hu 2014b. “Sovereign
Debt Composition in Advanced Economies: A Historical Perspective,” IMF Working Paper,
No. 14/162 (September).

Acemoglu, D. 2005. "Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 52(7): 1199-1226.

Accominotti, O., M. Flandreau, R. Rezzik and F. Zumer 2010. “Black Man's Burden, White
Man's Welfare: Control, Devolution and Development in the British Empire, 1880‐1914,”
European Review of Economic History 14(1): 47-70.

Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore 2003. The Size of Nations, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Almunia, M., A. Benetrix, B. Eichengreen, K. O’Rourke and G. Rua 2010. “From Great
Depression to Great Credit Crisis: Similarities, Differences and Lessons,” Economic Policy
25, pp.219-265.

Alt, J., D. Lassen and J. Wehner 2014. “It Isn't Just about Greece: Domestic Politics,
Transparency and Fiscal Gimmickry in Europe,” British Journal of Political Science, 44, pp.
707-716

Andersson, F. and J. Lennard 2018. “Irish GDP between the Famine and the First World
War: Estimates based on a Dynamic Factor Model,” European Review of Economic History
forthcoming.

Aristotle 1920. Oeconomica, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Ba, H. 2017. “The Systemic Causes of Financial Crises in the Long Nineteenth Century,”
Business and Politics, pp.1-17.

Barro, R. 1987. “Government Spending, Interest Rates, Prices, and Budget Deficits in the
United Kingdom, 1701-1918”, Journal of Monetary Economics 20(2), pp. 221-47.

Bayoumi, T. and M. Bordo 1998. “Getting Pegged: Comparing the 1879 and 1925 Gold
Resumptioiins,” Oxford Economic Papers 50(1), pp.122-149.
                                              49


Belforti, F. 1843. Storia della Città di Perugia, Perugia: Vincenzo Santucci.

Bent, P. and R. Esteves 2016. “Capital Pull Factors at the Turn of the 20th Century: A Sectoral
Analysis”, Mimeo.

Besley, T. and T. Persson 2009. “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation
and Ppolitics,” American Economic Review 99 (4). pp. 1218-1244.

Bordo, M. and J. Haubrich 2010. "Credit Crises, Money and Contractions: An Historical
View," Journal of Monetary Economics 57, pp.1-18.

Bordo, M., C. Meissner and A. Redish 2003. “How Original Sin was Overcome: The
Evolution of External Debt Denominated in Domestic Currencies in the United States and the
British Dominions, 1800-2000,” NBER Working Paper No. 9841 (July).

Bordo, M. and A. Murshid 2001. “Are Financial Crises Becoming Increasingly More
Contagious? What is the Historical Evidence on Contagion?” in S. Claessens and K. Forbes,
editors, International Financial Contagion, pp.367-403 (Boston: Kluwer Academic).

Bordo, M. and H. Rockoff 1996. “The Gold Standard as a “Good Housekeeping Seal of
Approval,” Journal of Economic History 56, pp.389-428.

Bordo, M. and E. White 1991. “A Tale of Two Currencies: British and French War Finance
during the Napoleonic Wars,” Journal of Economic History 51, pp.303-316.

Brewer, J. 1989. The Sinews of Power. War, Money and the English State, 1688-1783, London:
Unwin Hyman.

Broadberry, S., B. Campbell, A. Klein, B. van Leeuwen and M. Overton 2015. British
Economic Growth 1270-1870, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Brooks, R., K. Ross, R. Powell, Y. Quemarez, D. Ross, M. Cortes, S. Rizavi, B. Ketchekmen
and F. Fornasari 1998. “External Debt Histories of Ten Low-Income Developing Countries:
Lessons from Their Experience,” IMF, Working Paper No. 98/72 (May).

Brown, E. C. 1956. “Fiscal Policy in the ‘Thirties: A Reappraisal,” American Economic
Review 46, pp.866-879.

Bulow, J. and K. Rogoff 1989. “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?" American Economic
Review 79, pp.43-50.

Campbell, T. 2004. “Sound Finance: Gladstone and British Government Finance, 1880-1895,”
unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, London School of Economics.

Carter, S., S Gartner, M. Haines, A. Olmstead, R. Sutch and G. Wright eds. 2006. Historical
Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the Present, NY: Cambridge University Press.
                                             50



Chabot, B. and C. Kurz 2012. “British Investment Trusts: The Precursors of Modern Structured
Finance,” Mimeo.

Chambers, D. and R. Esteves 2014. "The First Global Emerging Markets Investor: Foreign &
Colonial Investment Trust 1880-1913”, Explorations in Economic History 52, pp.1-21.

Cohen-Setton, J., J. Hausman and J. Wieland 2017. “Supply-Side Policies in the Great
Depression: Evidence from France,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 49, pp.273-318.

Crafts, N. and K. Harley 1992. “Output Growth and the British Industrial Revolution: A
Restatement of the Crafts-Harley View,” Economic History Review 45, pp.703-730.

Crouzet, F. 2003. “The Historiography of French Economic Growth in the Nineteenth
Century”, Economic History Review 56(2), pp. 215-242.

Daseking, C. and R. Powell 1999. “From Toronto Terms to the HIPC Initiative: A Brief
History of Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries,” IMF Working Paper, No. 99/142.

Daunton, M. 2001. Trusting Leviathan. The Politics of Taxation in Britain, 1799-1914,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Davis, L. and R. Huttenback 1986. Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire. The Political Economy
of British Imperialism, 1860-1912, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

De Broeck, M. and Guscina, A. 2011. “Government Debt Issuance in the Euro Area: The
Impact of the Financial Crisis,” IMF Working Paper No. 11/21 (January).

De Luca, G. 2008. “Government Debt and Financial Markets: Exploring Pro-Cyclical Effects
in Northern Italy during the Sixteenth and the Seventeenth Centuries,” in
F. Caselli, ed., Government Debts and Financial Markets in Europe, London: Picketing and
Chatto, pp. 45-66.

De Vries, J. and A. van der Woude 1997. The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure, and
Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500-1815, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Diaz-Alejandro, C. 1984. “Latin America in the 1930s, in R. Thorpe (ed), Latin America in the
1930s, London: Macmillan.

Dincecco, M. 2009. “Fiscal Centralization, Limited Government, and Public Revenues in
Europe, 1650-1913,” Journal of Economic History 69, pp.48-103.

----- 2010. “Fragmented Authority from Ancien Régime to Modernity: A Quantitative
Analysis,” Journal of Institutional Economics 6, pp.305-328.
                                             51


----- 2011. From Warfare to Wealth: The Military Origins of Urban Prosperity in Europe,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

----- 2015. “The Rise of Effective States in Europe.” Journal of Economic History 75, pp.
901-918.

Drelichman, M. and H.-J. Voth 2014. Lending to the Borrower from Hell: Debt, Taxes, and
Default in the Age of Philip II, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Dyson, K. 2014. States, Debt and Power: ‘Saints’ and ‘Sinners in European History and
Integration, New York: Oxford University Press.

Easterly, W. 2002. “How Did Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Become Heavily Indebted?
Reviewing Two Decades of Debt Relief,” World Development 30, pp. 1677-1696.

Edelstein, M. 1982. Overseas Investment in the Age of High Imperialism: The United Kingdom,
1850-1914, New York: Columbia University Press.

Edwards, S. 2018. American Default: The Untold Story of FDR, the Supreme Court, and the
Battle over Gold, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Eichengreen, B. 1982. “The Proximate Determinants of Domestic Investment in Victorian
Britain,” Journal of Economic History 42, pp.87-95.

Eichengreen, B. 1996. “Institutions and Economic Growth: Europe since 1945,” in N. Crafts
and G. Toniolo eds., Economic Growth in Europe since 1945, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Eichengreen, B. and P. Garber 1991. “Before the Accord: U.S. Monetary-Financial Policy
1945-51,” in G. Hubbard ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises, pp.175-206 (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).

Eichengreen, B. and U. Panizza 2016. “A Surplus of Ambition: Can Europe Rely on Large
Primary Surpluses to Solve its Debt Problem?” Economic Policy 31, pp.5-49.

Eichengreen, B. and R. Portes 1986, “Debt and Default in the 1930s: Causes and
Consequences,” European Economic Review 30, pp.79-120.

Epstein, S. 2000. Freedom and Growth: The Rise of States and Markets in Europe, 1300-1750,
London: Routledge.

Esteves, R. 2013. "The Bondholder, the Sovereign and the Banker: Sovereign Debt and
Bondholders' Protection before 1914,” European Review of Economic History 17, pp.389-407.

Esteves, R. and C. Tunçer 2016. "Feeling the Blues: Moral Hazard and Debt Dilution in
Eurobonds Before 1914," Journal of International Money and Finance 65: 46-68.
                                            52



European Central Bank 2015. “The Fiscal Impact of Financial Sector Support during the
Crisis,” Economic Bulletin 6, pp. 74-87.

Feis, H. 1930. Europe, the World's Banker, 1870-1914. An Account of European Foreign
Investment and the Connection of World Finance with Diplomacy before the War, New Haven:
Council on Foreign Relations.

Feldstein, M. 2002. “Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies:
Overview of Prevention and Management,” NBER Working Paper No. 8837 (March).

Ferguson, N. 2006. “Political Risk and the International Bond Market Between the 1848
Revolution and The Outbreak of the First World War.” Economic History Review 59, pp. 70-
112.

Fishlow, A. 1985. “Lessons from the Past: Capital Markets During the 19th Century and the
Interwar Period,” International Organization 39, pp.38-93.

Flandreau, M. 2013. “Sovereign States, Bondholders Committees, and the London Stock
Exchange in the Nineteenth Century (1827–68): New Facts and Old Fictions,” Oxford Review
of Economic Policy 29, pp.668–96.

Flandreau, M., J. Flores, N. Gaillard and S. Nieto-Parra 2010. "The End of Gatekeeping:
Underwriters and the Quality of Sovereign Bond Markets, 1815-2007," NBER International
Seminar on Macroeconomics 2009, pp. 53-92.

Flandreau, M. and N. Sussman 2005. “Old Sins: Exchange Clauses and European Foreign
Lending in the 19th Century,” in B. Eichengreen, B. and R. Hausmann (eds.), Other People's
Money. Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Markets Economies,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.154-189.

Flandreau, M. and F. Zumer 2004. Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, Paris: OECD.

Flores, J. 2011. “Information Asymmetries and Conflict of Interest during the Baring Crisis,
1880-1890,” Financial History Review 18, pp.191-215.

Frederiksen, M. W. 1966. “Caesar, Cicero and the Problem of Debt”, Journal of Roman Studies
56, pp.128-41.

Gautam, M. 2003. "Debt Relief for the Poorest: An OED Review of the HIPC Initiative,"
Washington, D.C.: World Bank Publications.

Greene, J. 1989. “The External Debt Problem of Sub-Saharan Africa,” IMF Staff Papers 36,
pp. 836-874.

Grossman, H. and T. Han 1993. “A Theory of War Finance,” Defence Economics 4, pp.33-44
                                             53



Guinnane, T. 2004. “Financial Vergangenheitsbewaeltigung: The 1953 London Debt
Agreement,” Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper 880, Department of Economics,
Yale University.

Guscina, A. and Jeanne, O. 2006. “Government Debt in Emerging Market Countries: A New
Data Set,” IMF Working Paper No. 06/98 (April).

Ho, C.-Y. and D. Li 2010. “A Mirror of History: Chinese Bond Market from 1921 to 1942,”
unpublished manuscript, Georgia Institute of Technology and Fudan University (July).

Hozier, H. ed 1872. The Franco-Prussian War: Its Causes, Incidents and Consequences,
London: William Mackenzie.

International Monetary Fund (IMF) 2013. “Reassessing the Role and Modalities of Fiscal
Policy in Advanced Economies,” IMF Policy Paper, September 2013.

Krumm, K. 1985. “The External Debt of Sub-Saharan Africa: Origins, Magnitude and
Implications for Action,” World Bank Staff Working Paper No. 741 (August).

Landes, D. 1958. Bankers and Pashas; International Finance and Economic Imperialism in
Egypt, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.

League of Nations 1934. Commercial Banks, Geneva: League of Nations.

Lindert. P. 1994. “The Rise of Social Spending, 1880-1930,” Explorations in Economic
History 22: 1-34.

Lindert, P.H., Morton, P.J., 1989. “How sovereign debt worked” In: Sachs, J. (ed.), Developing
Country Debt and Economic Performance, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
pp. 39-106.

Lipson, C. 1985. Standing Guard: Protecting Foreign Capital in the Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries, Berkeley: University of California Press.

MacDonald, J. 2003. A Free Nation Deep in Debt: The Financial Roots of Democracy, New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Maddison, A. 1995. Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992, Paris: OECD Development
Centre.

Maloney, J. 1998. “Gladstone and Sound Victorian Finance” in Maloney, J., ed. Debt and
Deficits. An Historical Perspective, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp.154-189.
                                              54


Maurer, H. and P. Grussenmeyer 2015. “Financial Assistance Measures in the Euro Area from
2008 to 2013: Statistical Framework and Fiscal Impact,” Statistics Paper Series No. 7,
Frankfurt: European Central Bank.

Mauro, P., N. Sussman and Y. Yafeh 2002. “Emerging Market Spreads: Then Versus Now,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117: 695-733.

Mauro, P. and J. Zilinsky 2016. “Reducing Government Debt Ratios in an Era of Low Growth,”
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 16-10 (July).

Meyer, R. 1970. Bankers’ Diplomacy: Monetary Stabilization in the Twenties, New York:
Columbia University Press.

Michie, R. 1987. The London and New York Stock Exchanges 1850-1914, London: Unwin
Hyman Ltd.

----- 1999. The London Stock Exchange: A History, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

----- 2006. The Global Securities Market. A History, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Middleton, R. 1984. “The Measurement and Influence of Fiscal Policy in Britain in the 1930s,”
Economic History Review 37, pp.103-106.

Mitchener, K. and M. Weidenmier 2008. "The Baring Crisis and the Great Latin American
Meltdown of the 1890s," Journal of Economic History 68, pp.462-500.

----- 2010. “Supersanctions and Sovereign Debt Repayment,” Journal of International Money
and Finance 29, pp.19-36.

----- 2015. “Was the Classical Gold Standard Credible on The Periphery? Evidence from
Currency Risk,” Journal of Economic History 75, pp.479-511.

Munro, J. 2013. "Rentes and the European' Financial Revolution'", in G. Caprio ed., Handbook
of Key Global Financial Markets, Institutions, and Infrastructure, vol. I, Oxford: Elsevier, pp.
235–249.

Neal, L. 1990. The Rise of Financial Capitalism. International Capital Markets in the Age of
Reason, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

----- 2015. A Concise History of International Finance: From Babylon to Bernanke,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Neal, L. and M. Weidenmier 2003. “Crises in the Global Economy from Tulips to Today:
Contagion and Consequences” in M. Bordo, A. Taylor and J. Williamson (eds.), Globalization
in Historical Perspective, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                                             55


North, D. and B. Weingast 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: Evolution of the Institutions
Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England”, Journal of Economic History 49,
pp.803-832.

Obstfeld, M. and A. Taylor (2004) Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Padgett, J. 2012. “Early Capitalism and State Formation,” in J. Padgett and W. Powell, eds.,
The Emergence of Organizations and Markets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Pezzolo, L. 2014. “The Via Italiana to Capitalism” in L. Neal and J. Williamson, eds., The
Cambridge History of Capitalism, Vol. 1, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Platt, D. C. M. 1968. Finance, Trade, and Politics in British Foreign Policy 1815-1914,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Pollack, S. 2014. “The First National Income Tax, 1861-1872,” Tax Lawyer 67, pp.1-20.

Reinhart, C., Reinhart, V. and C. Trebesch 2016. “Global Cycles: Capital Flows, Commodities,
and Sovereign Defaults, 1815-2015,” NBER Working Paper No. 21958.

Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff 2009. This Time is Different. Eight Centuries of Financial Folly,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

----- 2011. “The Forgotten History of Domestic Debt,” The Economic Journal, Vol. 121, No.
52, pp. 319-350.

Reinhart, C. and B. Sbrancia 2015. “The Liquidation of Government Debt,” IMF Working
Paper No. 15/7 (January).

Reinhart, C. and C. Trebesch 2014. “A Distant Mirror of Debt, Default, and Relief,” NBER
Working Paper No. 20577 (October).

Ritschl, A. 2013. “Reparations, Deficits and Debt Default: The Great Depression in
Germany,” in: N. Crafts and P. Fearon, eds., The Great Depression of the 1930s: Lessons for
today, Oxford : Oxford University Press, pp. 110-139.

Roberds, W. and F. Velde. 2014. “Early Public Banks” FRB of Chicago Working Paper No.
2014-03.

Romer, C. 1992. “What Ended the Great Depression?” Journal of Economic History 52, pp.
757-784.

Scheffers, S. and R. Roberts 2014. The Media and Financial Crises: Comparative and
Historical Perspectives, London: Routledge.
                                             56


Stasavage, D. 2011 States of Credit: Size, Power, and the Development of European Polities,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Suter, C. 1990. Schuldenzyklen in der Dritten Welt: Kreditaufnahme, Zahlungskrisen und
Schulden-regelungen peripherer Länder im Weltsystem von 1820 bis 1986, Frankfurt/ Main:
A. Hain.

Thomas, B., 1934, “Germany,” in H. Dalton et al., Unbalanced Budgets. A Study of the
Financial Crisis in Fifteen Countries, London: Routledge.

Tilly, C. 1992. Coercion, Capital, and European States AD 990-1992, New York: Wiley-
Blackwell.

Tomita, T. 2005. “Japanese Government Bonds 100 Years Ago,” Nomura Research Institute
Paper No.90 (June).

Tomz, M. and M. L. J. Wright 2013. “Empirical Research on Sovereign Debt and Default.”
Annual Review of Economics 5, pp. 247-272.

Tracy, J. 1985. A Financial Revolution in the Habsburg Netherlands: ‘Renten’ and
‘Renteniers’ in the County of Holland, 1515-1565, Berkeley: University of California Press.

Tunçer, C. 2015. Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control. The Middle East and
the Balkans, 1870-1914, Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.

Twomey, M. 1983. “The 1930s Depression in Latin America: A Macro Analysis,”
Explorations in Economic History 20, pp.221-247.

United Nations 1946. Public Debt 1914-1946, New York: United Nations.

Weber, A. 2012. “Stock-Flow Adjustments and Fiscal Transparency: A Cross-Country
Comparison,” IMF Working Paper, No. 12/49 (January).

World Bank 2005. “Lessons and Controversies from Financial Crises in the 1990s,” Country
Notes for Chapter 7: Financial Liberalization: What Went Right, What Went Wrong?” in
Economic Growth in the 1990s: Learning from a Decade of Reform, Washington, D.C.:
World Bank.

Yared, P. 2018. “Rising Government Debt and What to Do About It,” NBER Working Paper
No. 24979 (August).

Yun-Casalilla, B. and P. O’Brien, eds. 2015. The Rise of Fiscal States. A Global History 1500-
1914, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
