NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TOLERANCE AND COMPROMISE IN SOCIAL NETWORKS
Garance Genicot
Working Paper 25506
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25506

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019

Debraj Ray, Joan Esteban, Yann Bramoullé and Laurent Bouton provided very helpful
conversations and feedback. I am also grateful for comments by the participants to the ThReD
conference in Oslo, the Network Conference in Cambridge, UK, and the Conference on Identity
in Namur, as well as seminar participants at Iowa State University, New York University, and
AMSE. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Garance Genicot. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Tolerance and Compromise in Social Networks
Garance Genicot
NBER Working Paper No. 25506
January 2019
JEL No. D85,L14,O12,Z13
ABSTRACT
In this paper, individuals are characterized by their identity — an ideal code of conduct — and
by a level of tolerance for behaviors that differ from their own ideal. Individuals first choose their
behavior, then form social networks. This paper studies the possibility of compromise, i.e.
individuals choosing a behavior different from their ideal point, in order to be accepted by others,
to "belong.'' I first show that when tolerance levels are the same in society, compromise is
impossible: individuals all choose their preferred behavior and form friendships only with others
whose ideal point belong to their tolerance window. In contrast, I show that heterogeneity in
tolerance allows for compromise in equilibrium. Moreover, if identity and tolerance are
independently distributed, any equilibrium involves some compromise.
Garance Genicot
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
37th & O Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
gg58@georgetown.edu

1

1. Motivation
Bernard Crick defines tolerance “as the degree to which we accept things of which
we disapprove” (Crick (1963, rep. 1971)). It is the ability or willingness to withstandsomething, in particular the existence of opinions or behavior that one does
not necessarily agree with. The literature on homophily has long highlighted the
role of preferences in explaining why people associate with and bond more with
others who are similar to them (see McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook (2001) for
a review). People prefer interacting with similar others.
However, there is an important distinction to be made between individuals caring
about the innate identity of their friends – their type – versus caring about the
conduct of their friends – their behavior or adopted identity. In some settings, preferences depend on others’ types such as their religion, ethnicity, sexual orientation
(see Currarini, Jackson, and Pin (2009), Currarini, Matheson, and Vega-Redondo
(2016)). But in other settings, individuals may not actually care about others’ true
identity but care about others’ behavior: whether they act religious, whether they
dress conservatively, whether they appear gay or even how ‘white’ they act (see
Austen-Smith and Fryer (2005), Carvalho (2013), Berman (2000) and Lagunoff
(2001)). This is the type of preference that this paper studies.
In this model, individuals interact in social networks. A person’s utility depends on
her own conduct but also the conduct of others in her network. Individuals differ
in their ideal behavior, their true identity, and potentially in their tolerance for
conduct that differs from that ideal point. Prior to forming their social network,
individuals choose their behavior and can therefore compromise in order to “fit in.”
For instance, a religious person might decide not to display any religious symbol
to be accepted as a friend by a less religious person, or a non-religious person may
sometime go to church to please a friend. To adopt a conduct that differs of one’s
innate identity comes at the cost of cognitive dissonance. The only motive for
compromising in this model is to make friends, i.e. to belong.
I show that there are strict limits to compromise, and that these limits are strictly
decreasing in the tolerance of the most intolerant members of society.

2

At the extreme, I show that if all individuals have the same tolerance levels, then
compromise is impossible in equilibrium. Everyone chooses their preferred code of
conduct. Individuals form links with each other if and only if they tolerate each
other’s ideal points. The intuition for this inability to compromise is simple. When
tolerance levels are symmetric, if one individual needs to compromise to be friends
with another then the latter needs to compromise as well. Since compromise is
costly, individuals have the incentive to do the least possible in order to be accepted.
But this implies that their friendship is not very valuable to others, who then have
little incentive to compromise themselves.
Heterogeneity is needed for compromise to happen. I show that introducing more
intolerant individuals allows the possibility of compromise in equilibrium. With
differences in tolerance levels, tolerant individuals may value the friendship of relatively intolerant individuals, even if the latter do not compromise, and therefore
the former may unilateraly compromise. What is more, this paper proves that if
compromise and tolerance are independently distributed, then there must be compromise in equilibrium. Relatively tolerant individuals compromise for relatively
intolerant ones. Naturally, the joint distribution of tolerance levels and identities
matters. If more extreme identities are less tolerant, reciprocated compromise is
not possible and behaviors tend to be polarized. In contrast, more tolerance at the
extreme encourages a more connected society.
Finally, I contend that this model can also be applied to other settings. For instance, political compromises and alliances between politicians can be important
(Levy (2004)). It could be applied to the choice of technological standards and
the formation of trade networks. Countries could be endowed with different initial
technologies and the complementarities between their technologies could decrease
in the distance between their standard while the cost of modifying a technology
could be proportional to the extent to which it needs to be modified.
The next Section discusses the related literature. Section 3 formalizes the model
described above. Simple examples in Section 4 provide the intuition for the main
results. The latter are presented in Section 5. Section 6 discusses some implications
of the results and Section 7 concludes.

3

2. Literature

This work pertains to the general framework of Akerlof and Kranton (2000), where
1. people have identity-based payoffs derived from their own actions, 2. people
have identity-based payoffs derived from others’ actions, and 3. individuals can
modify their identity at some cost1. Within this framework, this paper provides a
model where an endogenous social network may provide incentives for individuals
to compromise their identity.
Also related is Cervellati, Esteban, and Kranich (2010). In their work, as in this
paper, moral judgments befall others as well as oneself. However, individuals value
the esteem that they receive from others, and deviations of their observed behavior
from a norm of morally appropriate behavior influences esteem. In contrast, in this
paper, individuals value all behaviors according to how they conform or depart from
their own ideals.
Homophily in social networks has been amply documented empirically (see Marmaros and Sacerdote (2006) for a recent example, and McPherson, Smith-Lovin,
and Cook (2001) for an overview).2 This paper contributes to a growing theoretical literature on homophily and the formation of friendship networks (Currarini,
Jackson, and Pin (2009), Currarini, Matheson, and Vega-Redondo (2016), Jackson (2019)). Like them, this paper assumes that individuals prefer to associate
with similar others. The difference is that this paper assumes that individuals care
about others’ conduct, as opposed to their identity.
This paper also speaks to the literature on diversity and social capital (see Putnam
(2000), Dasgupta and Serageldin (1999) and Portes and Vickstrom (2011)). According to Putnam (2000), there is an important distinction between bridging (inclusive) and bonding (exclusive) social capital. Bonding social capital networks are
inward-looking and tend to reinforce exclusive identities and homogenous groups.
1

In this paper, individuals cannot change their innate identities but we can think of their behavior
as an adopted identity.
2
“Birds of a feather flock together ” is attributed to Burton (1927, rep. 1651), but scholars have
described the pattern starting in the antiquity: “we love those who are like themselves ” (Aristotle
(1934)), or “similarity begets friendship” (Plato (1968)).

4

On the other hand, bridging social capital networks are outward-looking and include people across “diverse social cleavages.” This paper adds to this literature
the importance of intolerant individual as “bridging” agents.

3. Premises of the model

Individuals and Preferences:
Consider a population I consisting in a mass of size 1 of individuals i distributed
over the interval [0, 1]. Each individual has an ideal point ιi ∈ [0, 1], her identity.
This identity represents the person’s ideal code of conduct and is immovable. In
contrast, individuals select a code of conduct, a behavior, ai in the Euclidean space.
As will be described soon, individuals then form their social network.
Individuals value friendships, but also care about both their own conduct and
the behavior of the members of their social network. They judge all behaviors
in comparison with their identity. I assume that an individual’s utility strictly
decreases in the Euclidean distance of behaviors from her ideal point. Individual i
derives a utility vi (d(ιi , aj )) from a link to an individual j with behavior aj . The
link has a strictly positive value when ιi = aj but its value strictly decreases as
aj differs from i’s identity. Individuals have potentially heterogenous preferences
regarding the benefits they derive from a link and their tolerance for behaviors
that differ from their identity. Choosing a behavior that departs from one’s own
identity also comes at a cost, g(d(ιi , ai )) strictly increasing in d.
Consider an individual i with ideal point ιi , behavior ai and links with individuals
in S whose profile of behavior is given by aS . Her utility is expressed as:
Z
vi (d(ιi , aj )) − g(d(ιi , ai )),
(1)
ui (ai , aS ) =
j∈S

where d(ι, a) is the Euclidian distance between ι and a; vi is continuous, strictly
decreasing with 0 < vi (0) ≤ F for some finite F ; and g is continuous, strictly
increasing, and convex with g(0) = 0.
Note that this specification implies that utilities from friendships are additively
separable.

5

Individual i is said to compromise if her chosen behavior differs from her ideal
point d(ιi , ai ) > 0.
Define individual i’s tolerance level ti as the largest tolerable distance t, that is
ti = {max t ∈ R+ |vi (t) ≥ 0}.
Person i if happy to have a person j in her social group (or, at least, does not mind),
as long as j’s behavior is within a distance ti of i’s ideal point: d(ιi , aj ) ≤ ti .
An individual’s tolerance level reflects both how much the individual values a
friendship, and the extent to which she dislikes departures from her ideal behavior.
In this model, individuals are effectively characterized by two attributes: their
identity ιi or ideal code of conduct and their tolerance level ti which represents the
largest tolerable deviation from their ideal point. These are the two key attributes
of individuals for the main results.
Let’s define i’s tolerance window as ωi ≡ {a ∈ R|d(ιi , a) ≤ ti } and say that a
belongs to i’s tolerance window if a ∈ ωi . Figure 1 illustrates these concepts.

vi(d(ιi, aj))

ti
ιi

ωi

aj

Figure 1. Tolerance
Timing:
This is a two-stage game. In a first stage, individuals choose their code of conduct
(their behavior) and, in a second stage, they form their social network by choosing
with whom to be friends. When people choose their lifestyles they have in mind
this second-stage possibility, and may want to compromise in order to be accepted,
to “belong.”

6

This timing assumes that individuals are able to commit on a code of conduct
or adopted identity. If people chose their behavior after having formed a social
network, they would always choose their preferred behavior and compromise would
not be possible.
Network Formation:
There is no cost of forming a link, and the benefits of a link are additive. As a
result, network formation is trivial. Given a vector of behavior a in the population,
an individual i is happy to form a link with an individual j if and only if aj ∈ ωi .
Following most of the network literature, I consider networks that are pairwise
stable. Jackson and Wolinsky (1996) defined a network to be the pairwise stable if
(i) no player would be better off if he or she severed one of his or her links, and (ii)
no pair of players would both benefit from adding a link that is not in the network.
Assume that if both players are indifferent, they will form a link. Then, for any
given profile of action a, there is a unique pairwise stable graph G so that i and j
have a link gij = 1 if and only if aj ∈ ωi and ai ∈ ωj .

4. Examples
This section provides some intuition about the main results through simple examples with a discrete number of individuals. For these examples, I consider a
discrete version of the model and assume the following linear payoffs:
X
(2)
ui (ai , aS(i) ) =
[Fi − bi d(ιi , aj )] − gd(ιi , ai ),
g ≥ 0;
j∈S(i)

where Fi represents the intrinsic value of a friendship for i while bi captures her
aversion for behaviors that do not correspond to i’s ideal. In this case, i’s tolerance
level is given by
Fi
ti = .
bi
Observe that this formulation captures well the fact that one’s tolerance depends
on both the benefit that she derives from a friendship and her dislike of differences.

7

The more someone has to gain from social connections, the more she is willing to
befriend individuals who differ from her ideal point.

4.1. No Compromise with Homogeneity.
Assume that ti = t for all i. When tolerance levels are symmetric, then either both
individuals’ identities belong to the other’s tolerance window ιi ∈ ωj and ιj ∈ ωi
or both individuals’ identities lie outside of the other’s tolerance window ιi ∈
/ ωj
and ιj ∈
/ ωi .
In the first panel of Figure 2, i and j are sufficiently tolerant or sufficiently similar
that their ideal conducts already belong to the other’s tolerance window. They
therefore have no incentive to compromise, and can be friends in spite of their
differences.

v

v

a#=ι#"

a!=ι!"

a

a#=ι#"

a!=ι!"

Figure 2. a. i and j are not friends; b. i and j are friends

In contrast, the second panel of Figure 2 illustrates a situation where i and j do
not belong to each other’s windows though their tolerance windows do overlap.
The only way for them to become friends is for both to compromise. Since there
is no incentive to unilaterally compromise, there is clearly an equilibrium without
compromise. What this paper shows is that this equilibrium is unique. Since
compromise is costly, individuals have an incentive to “minimally compromise”: do
the least possible in order to be accepted. But this implies that their friendship
is not valuable to others who then have little incentive to compromise themselves.
Hence, two individuals cannot compromise for each other.
In both cases, all individuals choose their preferred actions and are friends only if
they belong to each other’s tolerance window.

a

8

4.2. Heterogeneity Enables Compromise.
To see how heterogeneity in tolerance levels enables compromise, take two individuals j and k who differ in tolerance levels. If j is more tolerant than k, a situation
/ ωk is possible. This is illustrated in the left panel of Figure
where ιk ∈ ωj but ιj ∈
3. Person j values a link to k even if k does not compromise. If such a link is worth
enough to j to compensate her for the disutility from compromising and becoming
acceptable to k, a link will be formed. If she compromises, j would clearly choose
the smallest compromise needed to be friends with k: the action aj in ωk that is the
closest possible to ιj as shown in the left panel of Figure 3. Hence, j compromises
and befriends k if
(3)

Fj − bj |ιj − ιk | − g|ιj − aj | ≥ 0.

v

v

a$=ι$"

a!" ι!"

a

ι#" a#" a$=ι$"a!" ι!"

Figure 3. Compromising for an Intolerant Person
It follows naturally that the presence of less-tolerant individuals can allow more
tolerant individuals to become friends. To show this, consider the example in
Figure 2 where i and j have the same tolerance levels and add a more intolerant
/ ωj and ιj ∈
/ ωi , as in
individual k between them so that ωk ⊆ ωi , wk ⊆ ωj , ιi ∈
Figure 3. If i compromises to be acceptable to k, she is attractive to j as well and
vice versa. Let ℓk and rk be, respectively, the left and the right extremities of k’s
tolerance window. There is an equilibrium where ai = ℓk , ak = ιk and aj = rk and
all three individuals are friends if the following two inequalities hold:
[Fi − bi |ιk − ιi |] + [Fi − bi |aj − ιi |] ≥ g|ιi − ℓk | &
Fi − bi |ιk − ιi | ≥ g|ℓk − ℓj |.
The first inequality requires the overall value of the compromise to be positive: the
value of the friendships with j and k exceeds the cost of compromise. In addition,

a

9

the second inequality guarantees that i prefers choosing ℓk and being friends with
both i and j, rather than choosing the left extremity of j’s tolerance window, ℓj ,
and being friends only with j. Both these constraints are satisfied for a sufficiently
low cost of compromise, g. This equilibrium is illustrated in the right panel of
Figure 3.

Example: Assume that i and j have ideal positions ιi = 0.2 and ιj = 0.8, and are
otherwise symmetric with bi = bj = 1 and Fi = Fj = 0.5, while k, who has an ideal
position in between, ιk = 0.5, is less tolerant bk = 5 and Fk = 0.5. With respect to
their own actions, they all have the same disutility from deviating from their ideal
point g = 1.1. Interestingly, it can be checked that i would not compromise for k
alone, but ai = ℓk = 0.4, ak = ιk and aj = rk = 0.6 is an equilibrium.

4.3. Compromises builds on Compromise.

v

ι$" a$"a =ι "a!" ι!"
# #

a

Figure 4. Compromise builds on compromise
As we have just seen, and as will be shown more generally below, compromise
originates with a individual who compromises to become friends with a less-tolerant
person. But it is worth noting that further compromise can be built from that
initial effort. Indeed, other high-tolerance individuals may compromise for the
initial compromiser.
This is illustrated in Figure 4, where i and j are high-tolerance, while k is a lowtolerance person. In this example, k does not compromise, i compromises for k
but j compromises for i who is now valuable to j. A complete network is achieved.

10

5. Main Results
After these illustrative examples, we return to our most general setup: a continuum
of agents with preferences represented by (1) and tolerance levels that can take
values in [t, t] with t ≥ t > 0.
5.1. The Limits to Compromise.
This section characterizes the limits to compromise. Before proceeding, I will
introduce some definitions that are useful for the proof and the rest of the paper.
Denote as Ii ≡ {a ∈ R|d(ιi , a) < t} the interior of i’s tolerance window. We shall
say that:
Definition 1. j is valuable to i if aj ∈ Ii .
Definition 2. i compromises for j if d(ιi , ιj ) > tj ≥ d(ai , ιj ).
Definition 3. i minimally compromises for j if i compromises for j and ai =
argminai ∈ωj d(ιi , ai ).
That is, an individual i is said to compromise for another one j if her ideal point is
outside of j’s tolerance window while her chosen behavior is inside of j’s window.
She is said to minimally compromise for j if she compromises for j while deviating
as little as possible from her ideal behavior. We now turn to our first proposition.
Proposition 1. An individual i with tolerance ti never compromises by more than
ti − t in equilibrium.
The proof of this proposition is in the Appendix. I’ll outline its underlying argument after presenting four direct implications of Proposition 1. The first corollary
of this proposition sets an upper limit to the compromise that can be observed in
a society.
Corollary 1. Individual compromise cannot exceed T = t − t in equilibrium.
Another straightforward but powerful corollary of Proposition 1 is that there cannot be any compromise when all individuals have the same tolerance levels (though

11

the underlying utility functions could differ). Only individuals who already belong
to each other’s tolerance window can be friends in equilibrium. This result generalizes the example of Section 4.1.
Corollary 2. If all individuals have the same tolerance, ti = t for all i,
[1] compromise is not possible in equilibrium,
[2] i and j are friends if and only if i ∈ wj and j ∈ ωi .
It also follows directly from Proposition 1 that the most intolerant individuals in
society never compromise.
Corollary 3. The least tolerant type never compromises in equilibrium.
Finally, bounds on compromise imply a maximal distance between the ideal points
of any two linked individuals.
Corollary 4. In equilibrium, |ιi − ιj | ≤ ti + tj − t for all pair ij ∈ G.
Indeed, it follows from Proposition 1 that d(ιi , ai ) ≤ ti − t and d(ιj , aj ) ≤ tj − t. If
i and j are friends d(ιj , ai ) ≤ tj and d(ιi , aj ) ≤ ti . Hence, d(ιi , ιj ) ≤ ti + tj − t.
The intuition for the proof of Proposition 1 is simple. Take homogeneous individuals and assume that the claim is wrong: an individual compromises. That person
must minimally compromise for a set of valuable individuals, otherwise she would
benefit from compromising a little bit less. Now, take the individuals in that set.
I show that they themselves must be compromising, and therefore must minimally
compromise for a different set of individuals valuable to them. Proceeding in this
manner gives us sequences of compromising individuals. The proof shows that
along these sequences, compromise must be ever-expanding and cannot converge.
This means that, along the sequence, compromise will at some point reach a level
such that individuals would be better off compromising less. The argument with
heterogenous individuals is similar. I show that if one individual compromises by
more than T = t − t, then it would imply the existence of sequences of individuals
m = 1, 2, .... who compromise and d(ιm , am ) − tm would be ever-increasing along
these sequences. Again, there must be a point along any of these sequences where
compromise becomes prohibitive and we reach a contradiction.

12

5.2. How Heterogeneity Helps Compromise.
The previous section showed that compromise is bounded. At the extreme, we
proved that no compromise is possible with homogenous tolerance levels. In contrast, the examples of Sections 4.2 and 4.3 demonstrated that heterogeneity in
tolerance levels makes compromise possible. This section goes further. Proposition 2 proves that if identities and tolerance levels are independently distributed,
and very small deviation from one’s ideal point are costless, then there is compromise in any equilibrium. Assume:
[I] Identities ιi and tolerance levels ti are independently distributed with nondegenerate interval support
Proposition 2. If [I] holds and g ′ (0) = 0, then there must be compromise in
equilibrium.

The proof (in the Appendix) builds on the intuition behind the example in Section 4.2. If there were no compromise in equilibrium, we could always find some
relatively tolerant individuals at an extremity who would have incentives to unilaterally compromise. This is because, while almost costless, a little compromise
allows a relatively tolerant person to become acceptable to a positive mass of more
intolerant individuals that she values, without loosing any friendships. Hence,
there will be compromise in equilibrium.
Assumption [I] requires that tolerance levels and ideal positions be unrelated. This
independence assumption could certainly be weakened, but a mix of types at the
extremities is crucial for the result in Proposition 2.
Now it is obvious that, in general, there will be many equilibria. A relatively
tolerant individual may compromise toward the center or the extreme depending on
the behavior of others. This means that adopted identities in the population could
change rapidly, from moderate to extreme positions for instance, without much
change in people’s innate identities. Characterizing the set of equilibria would
be difficult, though Proposition 1 and its corollaries help by limiting the range of
possible behaviors. Proposition 3 helps us further by identifying the necessity of a
bridge person in between any two individuals who compromise for each other.

13

Definition 4. Say that i and j reciprocally compromise if i compromises for j
and j compromises for i.
Proposition 3. If i and j (ιi ≤ ιj ) reciprocally compromise, then there be some
individual k in between (ιi < ιk < ιj ) such that ιk − tk or ιk + tk in Ωi ∩ Ωj .
Proposition 3 tells us that in between any pair of individuals who reciprocally
compromise, there must be a bridge: an individual with an edge to his tolerance
window at the intersection of the pair’s tolerance windows. This bridge individual
is necessarily strictly less tolerant than the most tolerant of the pair. It follows
that for two agents of the same tolerance level to compromise for each other, we
need a more intolerant person to serve as a bridge between them.
5.3. Tolerance and Extremism. In this section, I investigate what happens
when, in contrast to [I], tolerance and ideal points are systematically related.
Specifically, I assume that there is more intolerance at the extremes. Formally,
assume: [T ] There exists a deterministic mapping M : [0, 1] → R+ from identity to
tolerance, and M is single-peaked.
Proposition 4. Under [T ], reciprocal compromise is not possible in equilibrium.
The impossibility of reciprocal compromise implies that if two individuals are
friends, one person’s ideal point must lie within the other one’s tolerance window.
Corollary 5. If ij ∈ G and ti ≥ tj then ιj ∈ ωi .
It follows that more tolerant individuals compromise toward less-tolerant individuals.
If the mapping from identity to tolerance is continuous and strictly concave then
there is a unique i, t and j such that ti = tj = t and ιj = ιi + t. All individuals
at or to the left of ιi can only compromise to the left, ai′ ≤ ιi′ for all i′ such that
ιi′ ≤ ιi . Similarly all individuals at or to the right of ιj can only compromise to the
right, aj ′ ≥ ιj ′ for all j ′ such that ιj ′ ≥ ιj . Behaviors will be more polarized than
identities. In this sense, intolerance at the extremes leads to greater polarization.

14

6. Discussion
6.1. Welfare. It should not come as a surprise that compromise can be suboptimal
in equilibrium.
Take two individuals i and j with the same tolerance level, ti = tj = t. While
Corollary 5.1 tells us that no compromise is possible in equilibrium, it is easy to
show that compromise could benefit them both.
A necessary condition for compromise between two individuals i and j to be optimal
is that, for some behaviors, the gain in i’s utility as j moves toward her must be
higher than i’s loss as i moves away from her ideal position, and the same for j.
With linear payoffs as in (2), this is rather unlikely, as it requires individuals to be
more sensitive to the behavior of others than to one’s own behavior as they move
away from one’s ideal point (bi to be higher than g). Although some people are
stricter with others than with themselves – finding unacceptable behavior in others
that they themselves engage in – it may not be the majority.
However, one expects the cost of deviating from one’s ideal point to be convex.
In this case, it is easy to construct examples where compromise would be optimal
even if one’s deviations from one’s own ideal point by oneself are no less costly
than others’ deviations from that point.
Example: Take the discrete case of 2 individuals i and j. Assume their preferences
to be:
X
[F − bd(ιk , al )2 ] − gd(ιk , ak )2 ,
g ≥ b > 0.
(4)
uk (ak , aS ) =
l∈S

Let λ = g/b(≥ 1). It is easy to show that the Pareto optimum is given by
a∗i =
q

1+λ
t.
λ

ιj + λιi
1+λ

&

a∗j =

ιi + λιj
1+λ

In particular, if b = g then meeting in the middle is
√
optimal for i and j as long as d(ιi , ιj ) < 2t.
when d(ιi , ιj ) <

15

6.2. Non-monotonicity of payoffs in t. We can build on the previous example
to see that the payoffs to the tolerant individuals in a society are non-monotonic
in the tolerance of more intolerant individuals. Consider two individuals, i and j,
whose identities lie just outside of each other’s tolerance window, but for whom reciprocal compromise would be optimal. Now, introduce a relatively more intolerant
person, k, in between these two.

ι!"#!

ι%"#%

ι$"#$

ι!

#! ικ #$

ι$

Figure 5. Non-monotonicity of payoff in t

If k is almost as tolerant as i and j, as illustrated in the left panel of Figure 5,
no one compromises. Individuals i and k are within each other’s tolerance window
and so are friends. The same is true for j and k. As we reduce k’s tolerance level,
we first reach a point where k’s tolerance window lies just outside of i and k’s ideal
point. If compromise is not too costly, i and j will minimally compromise for k, and
further reductions in k’s tolerance level decreases i and j’s payoff. However, if we
keep on making k less tolerant, then at some point k’s entire tolerance window will
lie within i and j. At that point, compromising for k allows i and j to be friends
with each other (as shown on the right of Figure 5). By being more intolerant,
k brings the Nash equilibrium closer to the Pareto optimum and increases their
utility.
This is illustrated in Figure 6 for an example where ιi = 0.1, ιk = 0.5, ιj = 0.9 and
preferences are given by (4) with F = 0.5 and g = 1. Assume that bi = bj = 1
which correspond to a tolerance of t̄ = 0.7 for i and j. Steadily decreasing bk from
high values to 1 corresponds to an increasing tolerance level for k. This increase
in tolerance for k first hurts i and j, until the point where they are no longer able
to be friends. Then further increases in the tolerance of k benefits them.

16

Figure 6. Non-monotonicity of payoff in t
6.3. Uncertainty. One might think that some uncertainty about the other’s tolerance level would help individuals compromise for each other. However, it is not
clear how much it does help. At least, the same logic seen thus far applies.
Consider two individuals i and j with identities ιi < ιj (such as the two individuals
of Section 6.1). Suppose now that i and j’s tolerance levels ti and tj are private
information but known to be drawn from a distribution on [t, t̄].
Observation 1. If i and j’s tolerance levels ti , tj ∈ [t, t̄] are private information,
then no compromise arise if t̄ < d(ιi , ιj ) or t ≥ d(ιi , ιj ). Compromise can occur if
t < ιj − ιi < t̄.
Being uncertain about the tolerance of the other does not, by itself, allow individuals to compromise for each other. Observation 1 argues that, if t̄ < d(ιi , ιj ),
compromise is impossible, even with uncertainty regarding the other person’s tolerance level. The intuition is similar to the homogenous case (the proof is in
Appendix). Because bilateral compromise is needed, i and j are unable to become
friends.
If t ≥ d(ιi , ιj ) then i and j will be friends and do not need compromise to become
friends. Only if t̄ > d(ιi , ιj ) and t < d(ιi , ιj ), can we get i and j to compromise.
The logic is similar to the role of heterogeneity in Section 5.2. Compromise is

17

sparked by the willingness of a relatively high tolerance type to compromise for a
relatively low tolerance type, even if the latter does not compromise.

6.4. Compromise and population density. Another interesting question is
what happens to compromise when populations increase or new technology – such
as social networks – allow us to connect with new individuals? This section shows
that increasing the density of the population has a non-monotonic effect on compromise. To see this, consider the following example.
Take two individuals located at 0 and 1 with the following preference:
X
[F − bd(ιi , aj )] − gd(ιi , ai ),
ui (ai , aS(i) ) =
j∈S(i)

where g > 0 but is small. Their tolerance level is t = F/b < 1/2.
Now, introduce on the interval some relatively more intolerant individuals with
a level of tolerance t < t. I assume that these intolerant individuals are equally
n
for increasing
spaced in terms of identities: they are located at 21n , 22n ,... 2 2−1
n
values of n ∈ {1, 2, ..} raising the density of the population.
We know from Corollary 3 that the relatively intolerant individuals will not compromise. Consider individual i with identity ιi = 0. Clearly, if she compromises at
all, she must minimally compromise for a low-tolerance person: ai = 0 or ai = 2kn −t
for k ∈ {1, ...2n − 1}.
If k ≥ 1 (strictly so if 21n < t), it must be that the additional benefit from compromising for k compared to k − 1 dominates the cost, while it would not be the case
at k + 1.
g/b
≤ t−
2n
g/b
> t−
2n

k
2n
k+1
.
2n

increasing with n. This force, for small g, promotes compromises
Clearly t − g/b
2n
as the density of the population n increases.

18

On the other hand, it is easy to see that ai ≤ 21n + t must be true. Otherwise,
it means that, by compromising minimally for 2kn , i compromises so much that
she misses out on a friendship with 21n . By instead compromising minimally for
k−1
, she would have to compromise less, have as many friends and these would
2n
be more valuable to her. Hence, if i compromises, she compromises minimally for
k∗
≤ 21n + 2t. As n increases, the right-hand side of this inequality decreases,
2n
making this constraint more likely to bind. This tends to reduce compromise.
As n increases, these two effects play a role. Figure 7 illustrates an example where
going from n = 1 to n = 2 encourages i (and j) to compromise (g is assumed to
be small). However at n = 3, i would have a friend without compromising and
therefore return to her ideal behaviors. At a higher population density, n = 4,
i now can compromise in order to make two friends. This example shows how
non-monotonic compromise can be as the density of the population increases or as
new communication technology emerges.

(!%

(!#

ιi=ai!"

"

ιj=aj!#
#$%

! "

#$'

"

#$%

!

#$'

(!'

(!)

ιi=ai!"

ιj!#

aj

ιi=" a&

ιj=aj!#

a&

! "

aj

!

Figure 7. Compromise and density
This finding is related toRosenblat and Mobius (2004), who show that decreasing costs of communication allows heterogeneous agents to segregate along special
interests rather than by geography.

19

6.5. Externalities. To be sure, the assumption that individuals only care about
the behavior of individuals with whom they are linked is strong. We are affected
by others’ behavior even if we do not interact frequently with them. However, the
no-externality assumption can easily be relaxed to allow individuals to care about
everyone’s behavior, but more strongly about people to whom they are linked. The
results would not be affected.

7. Conclusion
This paper studies compromise in a model of social network formation. Individuals identities characterizes their preferred conduct for themselves and for others.
People derive utility from links to others whose conduct is within their tolerance
windows. Individuals first choose their conduct, and then form their social networks. They may choose to compromise in order to “fit in” and be acceptable to
others.
I show that compromise is strictly limited and that the bounds to compromise
decrease in the tolerance level of the most intolerant. When all individuals have the
same tolerance level, there cannot be any compromise in equilibrium. In contrast,
with heterogeneity, any equilibrium has to exhibit some compromise if tolerance
and identity are independently distributed. I also show the key role that relatively
intolerant bridge individuals play in compromise.
I further demonstrate that welfare and compromise are non-monotonic in the lowest level of tolerance in society, and in new opportunities for friendships due to
population growth or social media.
The emphasis of my research on innate and adopted identity has implications for
the measure of diversity and tolerance in a society. Looking at the identity of the
members of a person’s social network (for instance, counting the number of gay
friends that one has) overestimates the actual tolerance exhibited by that person.
The distance between a person’s identity and her friends’ behavior would be more
informative of her level of tolerance.

20

References
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2000. “Economics And Identity.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3):715–753.
Aristotle. 1934. “Rhetoric.” In Aristotle in 23 Volumes, vol. 22, edited by H. Rackham (Translator). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Austen-Smith, David and Roland G. Fryer. 2005. “An Economic Analysis of ‘Acting
White’.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (2):551–583.
Berman, E. 2000. “Sect, Subsidy, And Sacrifice: An Economist’s View Of UltraOrthodox Jews.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3):905–953.
Burton, Robert. 1927, rep. 1651. The Anatomy of Melancholy. New York: Farrar
and Rinehart.
Carvalho, Jean-Paul. 2013. “Veiling.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1):337–
370.
Cervellati, Matteo, Joan Esteban, and Laurence Kranich. 2010. “Work Values,
Endogenous Sentiments Redistribution.” Journal of Public Economics 94 (910):612–627.
Crick, Bernard. 1963, rep. 1971. Political Theory and Practice. London : Allen
Lane The Penguin.
Currarini, Sergio, Matthew O. Jackson, and Paolo Pin. 2009. “An Economic
Model of Friendship: Homophily, Minorities, and Segregation.” Econometrica
77 (4):1003–1045.
Currarini, Sergio, Jesse Matheson, and Fernando Vega-Redondo. 2016. “A simple
model of homophily in social networks.” European Economic Review 90 (C):18–
39.
Dasgupta, Partha and Ismail Serageldin. 1999. Social Capital: A Multifaceted
Perspective. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Jackson, Matthew O. 2019. “The Friendship Paradox and Systematic Biases in
Perceptions and Social Norms.” Journal of Political Economy forthcoming.
Jackson, Matthew O. and Asher Wolinsky. 1996. “A Strategic Model of Social and
Economic Networks.” Journal of Economic Theory 71 (1):44–74.
Lagunoff, R. 2001. “A Theory of Constitutional Standards and Civil Liberties.”
Review of Economic Studies 68:109–32.

21

Levy, Gilat. 2004. “A model of political parties.” Journal of Economic Theory
115 (2):250–277.
Marmaros, David and Bruce Sacerdote. 2006. “How Do Friendships Form?” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1):79–119.
McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M Cook. 2001. “Birds of a
Feather: Homophily in Social Networks.” Annual Review of Sociology 27 (1):415–
444.
Plato. 1968. “Laws.” In Plato in Twelve Volumes, vol. 11.
Portes, Alejandro and Erik Vickstrom. 2011. “Diversity, Social Capital, and Cohesion.” Annual Review of Sociology 37:461–79.
Putnam, Robert D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Rosenblat, Tanya and Markus Mobius. 2004. “Getting Closer or Drifting Apart.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119:971–1009.

22

Appendix: Proofs
Lemma 1. If i compromises in equilibrium then the largest set of individuals who
are valuable to i and for whom i minimally compromises, Xi , contains a positive
mass of individuals.
Proof If i compromises, d(ιi , ai ) > 0, then there must be a positive mass of
individuals who are valuable to i (in the sense of Definition 1) for whom i minimally
compromises (in the sense of Definition 3). To prove this claim, assume that there
was no such set. Since compromise is costly, there then would exist a small ε > 0
so that i can improve her utility by bringing her behavior ai closer to her ideal
point by ε while keeping all links to any valuable individual j (for which aj ∈ Ii )
and deleting all others.

Lemma 2. If i minimally compromises for j, then d(ιj , ai ) = tj and d(ιi , ιj ) =
d(ιi , ai ) + tj .
Proof By definition, if i compromises minimally for j, then d(ιi , ιj ) > tj and
ai = argminai ∈ωj d(ιi , ai ). The claim follows directly from these two facts.

Lemma 3. If i minimally compromises for j and j is valuable to i, d(ιj , aj ) − tj >
d(ιi , ai ) − ti .
Proof Indeed, if i minimally compromises for j, Lemma 2 tells us that
d(ιi , ιj ) = d(ιi , ai ) + tj ,
while aj ∈ Ii means that

d(ιi , ιj ) < d(ιj , aj ) + ti .

These two inequalities imply that
(5)

d(ιi , ai ) − ti < d(ιj , aj ) − tj .

23

Proof of Proposition 1. Assume that the proposition does not hold, so that
there is an equilibrium vector of behaviors a and an individual i whose behavior
differs from her ideal by more than ti − t: d(ιi , ai ) > ti − t.
Step 1. We first prove that this implies that there are sequences of compromising
individuals {xm } for m ∈ {1, 2, ...} originating in i (x1 = i) such that xm minimally
compromises for xm+1 and xm+1 is valuable to xm . Along this sequence, let’s denote
xm ’s ideal point ιm , her tolerance level tm , and her choice of action am .
The first thing to notice is that d(ιm , am ) > tm − t (something that we assumed
for x1 = i) means that xm compromises (since tm − t ≥ 0). Lemma 1 tells us this
implies the existence of a non-empty associated set Xm that is the largest set of
individuals who are valuable to m and for whom m minimally compromises. It
follows that we can select any element of Xm as the next individual, xm+1 , in the
sequence. It remains to show that xm+1 too compromises.
Lemma 3 tells us that d(ιm , am ) > tm − t implies d(ιm+1 , am+1 ) > tm+1 − t for
xm+1 ∈ Xm . Since tm+1 − t ≥ 0, xm+1 compromises.
Step 2. Denote as Si the set of all the sequences identified in Step 1 that originate
in i. Lemma 3 tells us that d(ιm , am ) − tm strictly increases along any sequence in
Si .
Now assume that, along one of the sequences in Si , {xm }m=1,2... , the distance
d(ιm , am ) − tm does not converge. Then there would exist n so that g(d(ιn , an )) >
vn (0). Even if compromising to an allowed xn to become friend with everyone and
if everyone chose her favorite behavior, it would not be worth such compromise.
This means that d(ιm , am ) − tm needs to converge along every sequence in Si . Pick
one of these sequence originating in i: {x1 , x2 , ...} ∈ Si . For each individual xm , let
Xm denote the largest associated set of individuals who are valuable to xm and for
whom xm minimally compromises and let µm denote the density of this associated
set. For any ε > 0 there exists n so that (d(ιy , ay ) − ty ) − (d(xn , an ) − tn ) < ε or
(6)

tn + d(ιy , ay ) − ty − d(ιn , an ) < ε

for all y ∈ Xn . Using the facts that d(ιy , ay ) ≥ d(ιn , ιy ) − d(ιn , ay ) (since y compromises for xn ) and that d(ιn , ιy ) = d(ιn , an ) + ty (since xn minimally compromises

24

for y) in (6), we get that, for any y ∈ Xn ,
tn − d(ιn , ay ) < ε.
It follows that
(7)

vn (d(ιn , ay )) < vn (tn − ε) ∀y ∈ Xn ,

where vn represent the utility Let η > 0 be the smallest compromise along the
sequence {xm }m=1,2... . We can pick ε to be such that vn (tn − ε) < g ′ (η). In which
case
g ′ (d(ιn , an )) > µn vn (tn − ε),
and xn would strictly increase her utility by choosing a behavior slightly closer to
her ideal point.
Proof of Proposition 2. Assume not. This implies that ai = ιi for all i. However
pick an individual i located at one extreme ιi = 0 with tolerance t0 > t. Let F
denote the distribution of ideal positions and G the distribution of tolerance levels.
If i does not compromise, he will be friends with all individuals j in his tolerance
window [0, t0 ] who tolerate him tj ≥ ιj : a proportion F (t0 )[1 − G(ιj )]. If he chooses
a code of conduct ai = ε > 0 instead, the individuals j in his tolerance window [0, t0 ]
who tolerate him are now such that tj ≥ ιj − ε: a proportion F (t0 )[1 − G(ιj − ε)].
Hence, the gain from compromising is given by
Z t0
vi (ιj )[G(ιj ) − G(ιj − ε)]F (j)
0

while the cost is g(ε) − g(0) = g(ε). Since g is continuous and g ′ (0) = 0, it must
be that for a sufficiently small ε > 0
Z t0
vi (ιj )[G(ιj ) − G(ιj − ε)]F (j) > g(ε).
0

Hence, compromise must arise in equilibrium.
Lemma 4. If ij ∈ G then ai (and aj ) ∈ Ωi ∩ Ωj .
Proof For j to accept i’s friendship it must be that ai ∈ Ωj . ai ∈ Ωi follows
directly from Proposition 1.

25

Proof of Proposition 3. Assume that the proposition is not true. There must
then exist individuals i and j (with ιi < ιj ) who reciprocally compromise but no
intermediary individual k with ιi < ιk < ιj and an extremity, either (ιk − tk ) or
(ιk + tk ), in (Ωi ∩ Ωj ).
Since i compromises, there must be a non-empty set Xi of valuable individuals for
whom i minimally compromises. For any k ∈ Xi , ai = ιk − tk so that Lemma 4
implies (ιk − tk ) ∈ (Ωi ∩ Ωj ). If ιk ∈ (ιi , ιj ), we have a contradiction. Hence, it
must be that ιk ∈
/ (ιi , ιj ). And since Lemma 4 tells us that ak ∈ Ωi , it means that
k compromises for i. Ωi ∩ Ωk ⊂ Ωi ∩ Ωj .
Using this logic repeatedly, we can show that there are sequences of compromising
individuals {xm } for m ∈ {1, 2, ...} originating in i, x1 = i (and we can do the same
for j), such that xm minimally compromises for xm+1 and xm+1 is valuable to xm .
Along this sequence, we denote xm ’s ideal point ιm , her tolerance level tm and her
choice of action am . If xm for m ≥ 2 compromises, then Xm is non empty (Lemma
1). Since am ∈ Ωi ∩ Ωj , any ℓ ∈ Xm has an extremity in Ωi ∩ Ωj and therefore
/ (ιi , ιj ). From Lemma 4 aℓ ∈ Ωm ∩ Ωm+1 ⊂ Ωi ∩ Ωj . Hence, xm+1 ∈ Xm
ιℓ ∈
compromises for m.
We can then now apply the second Step of Proposition 1 to reach a contradiction.

Proof of Proposition 4. Assume that the claim does not hold so that there is
a non empty set P of pairs of individuals (x, y), ιx < ιy , who engage in reciprocal
compromise. Next, select a pair (i, j) in P according to the following criteria :
(a) either i or j has the lowest level of tolerance among all members of P ;
(b) if multiple pairs satisfy (a), select among these pairs one where the most intolerant individual is closest to the extreme in the following sense: (i, j) minimizes
δ(x, y) defined as follows


 d(ιy , 1) if ty < tx
δ(x, y) =
d(ιy , 1) if ty = tx and tz ≤ ty ∀z s.t. ιz ≥ ιy


d(0, ιx ) otherwise;

26

(c) if multiple pairs satisfy (a) and (b), select one of these pairs with the largest
distance between the two individuals.
In what follows, assume that j is the least tolerant of the two. That is assume [J]:
either tj < ti or if tj = ti then tk ≤ tj for all k with ιk ≥ ιy . A symmetric argument
applies to the case where i is the least tolerant.
Step 1. Since i compromises, there must be a non-empty set Xi of valuable individuals for whom i compromises. Take any k ∈ Xi . If tk > tj , then
d(ιi , ιk ) = tk + d(ιi , ai ) > tj + d(ιi , ai ) ≥ d(ιi , ιj )
where the first inequality follows from Definition 2 and the last inequality follows
from the fact that i and j become friends and therefore ai must be in j’s tolerance
window. But this means that ιk > ιj while tk > tj : a contradiction to [T] if
tj < ti or to [J] if tj = ti . Now, if tk < tj then [T] implies that ιk > ιj and
d(ιi , ιk ) > d(ιi , ιj ). Since k is valuable to i, it must be compromising. But then
tk < tj contradicts the selection criterion (a). Hence, ιk = ιj and tk = tj for any
k ∈ Xi and any k ∈ Xi compromises. Either j ∈ Xi or j minimally compromises
for i.
Step 2. Take any k ∈ Xi ∪ j. Since k compromises, there is a non-empty set Xk of
valuable individuals for whom k minimally compromises. Take any l ∈ Xk . First,
we show that ιl ∈ [ιi , ιk ]. Since j compromises toward i, ιl < ιk , and if ιl < ιi
then l and k would be engaged in reciprocal compromise with d(ιl , ιk ) > d(ιi , ιk ),
in contradiction with part (c) of the selection. Next, following the same logic as
before, it must also be the case that tl ≤ ti . Otherwise it would imply that l
and k would be engaged in reciprocal compromise while d(ιl , ιk ) > d(ιi , ιk ), in
contradiction with part (c) of the selection. Hence, ιl ∈ [ιi , ιk ] and ti ≥ tl ≥ tk for
all l ∈ Xk (where the last inequality follows from [T]).
Step 3. Assume that tl < ti for some l ∈ Xk . To be valuable to k, l must
compromise (as tk ≤ tl ). Let Xl be the set of valuable individuals for whom l
minimally compromises and m ∈ Xl . If tm < tj then [T] implies that d(ιl , ιm ) >
d(ιl , ιj ) so that l and m would be engaged in reciprocal compromise while tm < tj :
a contradiction of selection criterion (a). Hence, tm ≥ tj . Since l is valuable to k,

27

it implies that
d(ιl , ιm ) = d(ιl , am ) + tm > d(ιl , ιj )
which implies that ιm > ιj . Since [T] means tm ≤ tj , it must be that tm = tj . But
then there is a pair of individuals (l, m), with the lowest-tolerance individual m
located more at the extreme than the pair (i, j). This directly contradicts criterion
(b) of the selection. It follows that tl = ti for all l ∈ Xk .
Step 4. Since tl = ti for all l ∈ Xk , ιk = ιi and d(ιi , ak ) = ti and this for all
k ∈ Xi ∪ j. None of the individuals for whom i compromises has an action in the
interior of i’s tolerance window: a contradiction.
Proof of Observation 1. Assume not. Then there must be some type of individual that compromises. Among the types who compromise, select i with type
ti be the agent (or one of the agents) with the largest compromise minus her
tolerance d(ai , ιi ) − ti . The same logic as before applies. Since i compromises,
she must be minimally compromising for some type of agent j, d(ai , ιj ) = tj
and that type of agent must be valuable to i, d(aj , ιi ) < ti . This implies that
tj + d(aj , ιi ) < ti + d(ai , ιj ). Since ιi ≤ ai , aj ≤ ιj , d(aj , ιi ) = d(ιj , ιi ) − d(aj , ιj )
and d(ai , ιj ) = d(ιj , ιi ) − d(ai , ιi ). Using these equalities in the previous inequality
yields tj + d(ιj , ιi ) − d(aj , ιj ) < ti + d(ιj , ιi ) − d(ai , ιi ). Rewriting the latter gives
d(ai , ιi ) − ti < d(aj , ιj ) − tj . Since j must compromise as well to be valuable, this
contradicts the selection of i.

