NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF PHOTO ID LAWS ON REGISTRATION AND TURNOUT:
EVIDENCE FROM RHODE ISLAND
Francesco Maria Esposito
Diego Focanti
Justine S. Hastings
Working Paper 25503
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25503

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019

We thank the RIPL team for making this project possible. We also thank the leadership team at
the Rhode Island Secretary of State for their support. We thank Gregory Huber, Steve D’Hondt,
Jesse Shapiro, Charles Stewart, Ebonya Washington, and attendants at the Brown Economics
Applied Micro seminar, and the Quantitative Methods Seminar at the Yale University Center for
American Politics for their comments. We thank the Laura and John Arnold Foundation and the
Smith Richardson Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Francesco Maria Esposito, Diego Focanti, and Justine S. Hastings. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Effects of Photo ID Laws on Registration and Turnout: Evidence from Rhode Island
Francesco Maria Esposito, Diego Focanti, and Justine S. Hastings
NBER Working Paper No. 25503
January 2019
JEL No. D72,K16,P16
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of photo ID laws on voting using a difference-in-differences estimation
approach around Rhode Island’s implementation of a photo ID law. We employ anonymized
administrative data to measure the law’s impact by comparing voting behavior among those with
drivers’ licenses versus those without, before versus after the law. Turnout, registration, and
voting conditional on registration fell for those without licenses after the law passed. We do not
find evidence that people proactively obtained licenses in anticipation of the law, nor do we find
that they substituted towards mail ballots which do not require a photo ID.
Francesco Maria Esposito
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and Research Improving People’s Lives
francescomaria_esposito@brown.edu
Diego Focanti
Research Improving People’s Lives
dfocanti@ripl.org

Justine S. Hastings
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and Research Improving People’s Lives
and also NBER
justine_hastings@brown.edu

1

Introduction

Voter ID laws require a person to show some form of identification, often a photo ID, to be able to vote at the
polls in an election. Proponents view these laws as potential tools to prevent voter fraud, while opponents
claim that such laws may disenfranchise voters. Eighteen states in the US require voters to show a valid
photo ID at the polls. In Rhode Island, in July 2011, State Law 17-19-24.2 came into effect and established
the requirement of showing a photo ID to cast a ballot at the polls starting on January 1st, 2014.
The impact of such laws is open to debate. US courts recently struck down voter ID requirements in
North Carolina1 and Texas2 , while they have upheld them in Virginia3 . A recent literature has measured
the impact of Voter ID laws and found mixed results. Many researchers have relied on aggregated data on
voter turnout (Hopkins et al. 2017) or surveys with self-reported data on past voting behavior (Alvarez et al.
2008). More recently, Hood and Bullock (2012) use administrative data on registered voters linked to DMV
records to measure the impact of Georgia’s voter ID law on voting among registered voters. In general, these
papers tend to find small negative effects of voter ID requirements on turnout and produce mixed results
when looking at subgroups such as minority voters.
We use anonymized administrative records from the State of Rhode Island housed in a secure facility.
Personally identifiable information has been removed from the data and replaced with anonymous identifiers
that make it possible for approved researchers to analyze records associated with the same individual while
preserving anonymity. We use these data to study the impact of the state’s photo ID requirement on turnout
(measured as a fraction of the voting age population), registration, and voting conditional on registration
(total votes as a fraction of registered voters) using a difference-in-differences approach. We measure how
voting changed after the law for those without licenses versus those with licenses. Individuals with and
without licenses, as well as those who are not registered to vote, exist in our data. This allows us to measure
the impact of the law on turnout and registration, in addition to voting conditional on registration. Rich
demographic information allows us to examine heterogeneous effects by key socioeconomic factors.4
We compare elections before to elections after the law came into effect. We measure the impact of
the law on turnout in midterm elections using the 2010 and 2014 elections, and we measure the impact in
1
North Carolina State Conference of the NAACP et al. v McCrory et al., US Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit No. 16-1468
(2016).
2
Veasey at al. v Abbot et al., US District Court, Southern District of Texas, Corpus Christi Division. Case 2:13-cv-00193
(2017).
3
Lee, Brescia and Democratic PArty of Virginia v Virginia State Board of Elections et al. US Court of Appeals for the 4th
Circuit No. 16-1605 (2016).
4
Note, we do not observe other valid forms of ID for voting, in particular State IDs. This omission should understate our
measured impacts of the law as some people with valid state ID’s will be counted in the “treated group” - i.e. those without a Photo
ID .

2

national elections using the 2012 and 2016 elections.5 We use either Double LASSO (Belloni et al. 2014)
or propensity score reweighting (Barsky et al. 2002; Imbens 2004) to flexibly control for observable factors
correlated with driver’s license status and the outcome variables of interest.
We find a significant decline in turnout, registration, and voting conditional on registration (for more
vulnerable groups of voters) in presidential elections after the law was implemented, and demonstrate that
these results are robust across specifications. We obtain smaller and mixed results in midterm elections, with
no significant impact on turnout in our preferred specification. In presidential elections, our difference-indifferences estimates suggest that the law led to a decline in overall registration of 7.6 percentage points,
no decline in voting conditional on registration, and a decline in turnout of 2.7 percentage points. These
estimates imply that overall votes declined by 0.42 percentage points as a result of the law6 .
We address several potential threats to identification. First, the photo ID law passed in 2011, allowing
people two and a half years to proactively obtain a license in anticipation of the law. If those without licenses
who vote regularly were more likely to obtain a license in response to the law, we may find that voting
decreased after the law for those without licenses because likely voters responded to the law by obtaining
licenses, rather than because the law decreased the likelihood that an individual without a license would
register or vote. We show that those without licenses in the pre-period were no more likely to get a license
before the law came into effect if they had a history of voting versus did not. We use data on whether someone
had a license in July 2011 (when the law was passed) as an instrument for whether they had a license at the
time of each election, and demonstrate that our results are robust. Selection bias due to pro-active license
acquisition in anticipation of the law is not driving our results.
Second, because we are comparing events that occur four years apart, the composition of eligible voters
and their characteristics may have changed over time in ways that are correlated with both their driver’s license
status and voting behavior. To control for unobserved differences in individuals, we estimate an individual
fixed effects specification. This within-estimator is only identified using individuals who remained in the
sample for the entire period and whose license status has changed. We find similar, or even larger, effects in
this specification.
Third, because we only observe one post-law election for midterm elections and presidential elections, we
may be concerned that there are coincident changes in other factors which influence voting and differentially
impact those with or without licenses. To address this concern, we conduct a series of placebo tests. We
run our difference-in-differences model, but use as dependent variables factors which should not have been
5

We add data from the 2006 and 2008 elections to the analysis as a robustness check that supports our main results.
Approximately 464,000 people voted in the 2016 election in Rhode Island according to the State of Rhode Island Board of
Elections. Available at https://www.ri.gov/election/results/2016/general election/
6

3

affected by the photo ID law such as enrollment in social safety-net programs or having a child. If there are
no differential, potentially confounding underlying trends in our data, we would expect to find zero impact
of the law on these placebo outcomes. We estimate statistically significant but economically small effects.
To test whether these small changes in other observables drive our results, we measure the potential
bias from differential demographic trends by performing a bounding exercise. We replace each individual’s
actual voting behavior with the behavior that is predicted by their observables. We estimate our difference-indifferences model with this predicted voting behavior as the dependent variable. Any change in this outcome
attributable to the law would mechanically come from only differential changes in demographics rather than
in voting behavior. We find near-zero or positive coefficients on the impact of the law, implying that our
results are not driven by differential trends in demographics or social program enrollment changes around
the time of the law.
Next, we use the Current Population Survey data and voter registration files from Allegheny County (PA)
to test whether confounding events associated with the 2016 election may influence our results. Using the
CPS we estimate our model separately for Rhode Island and the pool of Connecticut and Massachusetts, two
neighboring states that did not enact a similar reform in our period of analysis. We do not find evidence
of spurious effects in the neighboring states. We also re-estimate our voter-level model from Rhode Island
using Allegheny County data. We similarly find no evidence of spurious effects.
We conduct additional analyses to extend our main results. First, we estimate the model by socioeconomic status, minority status, age group, gender, and party affiliation. For presidential elections, we
find the largest decreases in turnout (when measured as a percentage of their baseline turnout) among young
and low SES voters. For midterm elections, we find mixed results with insignificant effects on turnout for
most subgroups.
Second, we examine differential impacts of the law by precinct, and their correlation with precinct political characteristics. We estimate our main specification separately for the state legislative districts whose
representatives and senators voted for or against the photo ID law. We observe larger effects in districts
where both representatives and senators voted against the law. These happen to be districts with a larger
fraction of people without a driver’s license and a lower baseline turnout. This suggests legislators forecast,
and considered the potential effects on their constituencies when voting on the law.
Finally, we measure the extent to which voters responded proactively to the law by using a mail ballot.
Our estimates would represent a lower bound on the law’s impact if many voters without photo IDs responded
to the law by casting votes by mail ballot instead of at the polls. We estimate our difference-in-differences
model only on the subsample of people who voted, and we use voting by mail as the dependent variable.
4

We find no significant overall impact on the likelihood that a registered voter chooses to cast their ballot by
mail. We do observe significant results for a few subgroups, but not all are significant in both IV and OLS
specifications. We conclude that mail ballots did not appear to be an effective substitute for voting at the
polls for those without photo IDs.
We add to a recent literature measuring the impact of voter identification laws on voting behavior. Few
other studies have attempted to estimate effects of voter ID laws on turnout using a difference-in-differences
framework.7 Closest to ours is Hood and Bullock (2012) who used linked DMV and voting administrative
data from the state of Georgia and also employed a difference-in-differences approach to measure the impact
of the law in Georgia on voting among registered voters. They find that, after the photo ID law was enacted,
registered voters without a driver’s license became 6.5 percentage points less likely to vote compared to
those with a license. This implies that turnout conditional on registration declined by 0.4 percentage points.
A limitation of this paper is that it only observes registered voters, so they cannot measure how the photo ID
requirement may impact the decision to register. Moreover, they can only observe a small set of covariates,
which limits their ability to examine impacts on subgroups and validate the difference-in-differences approach
using placebo tests. They also do not observe other aspects of voting behavior, such as mail and provisional
ballots.
Alvarez et al (2008) uses the voter supplement of the Current Population Survey to estimate a differencein-differences model comparing states that passed voter ID laws with states that did not. Their results are
mixed and they only find effects of up to two percentage points in turnout in the states that enacted the strictest
photo ID laws. However, CPS data is susceptible to overreporting of turnout (Hur and Achen, 2013) which
could lead to an underestimation of the effects.
Hopkins et al (2017) use precinct-level data from Virginia to estimate the relationship between precinctlevel demographics and the prevalence of provisional ballots due to lack of photo ID. They find that this
is higher in precincts with a larger fraction of voters without a driver’s license. They also find that turnout
is actually higher in these precincts, which they attribute to a targeted Department of Elections mailing
campaign. However, the aggregate nature of the data and the lack of information on ID status does not allow
the authors to identify changes in turnout for the population that is affected by the law.

7

Other studies use smaller scale surveys to ask whether people from different socioeconomic or ethnic groups are more or less
likely to have a valid ID to vote. Examples of this are Barreto et al’s (2009) phone survey in Indiana and Stewart’s (2017) nationwide
survey. These studies show that african-americans and hispanics are significantly less likely to possess a valid ID. Similar studies
approach the question of whether ID requirements are enforced differentially at the polls using similar surveys. Atkeson et al (2010)
use a letter survey in New Mexico and show that hispanic and male voters are more likely to be asked for an ID at the polls. Cobb et
al (2012) did an exit poll in the 2008 election in Boston and showed that african-american and hispanic voters were also more likely
to be asked for an ID at the polls.

5

2

Background

Voter ID laws have existed in some form in the US since 1950. The Commission on Federal Election Reform
(also known as the Carter-Baker Commission) was created following the 2004 presidential election and, in
2005, issued a series of recommendations that included uniform requirements of photo identification at the
polls. At the same time, some states independently established photo identification (ID) requirements, while
many others did not. Georgia and Indiana became the first states to pass a strict8 photo ID requirement for
voting in 2005 (NCSL, 2017a), with several states following suit. Currently eighteen states require a photo
ID at the polls (see table A.1 for details).
In July 2011, Rhode Island passed State Law 17-19-24.2 which required showing a photo ID at the polls
starting in January 2014. When a person who claims to be an eligible voter is unable to show one of the
accepted forms of ID, the poll worker is supposed to give them a provisional ballot.9 These ballots are kept
in a separate bag and attached to a form that the voter signs, in which the poll clerk must include the reason
why the voter received it. In the 2016 election in Rhode Island, 735 voters received a provisional ballot due
to lack of photo ID, which amounts to 0.17% of all ballots cast at the polls (see table A.2). These provisional
ballots are submitted to each municipality’s local board of canvassers (LBC) for review. The law mandates
that the LBC must check the signature on the provisional ballot form against the voter’s signature on their
voter registration form. Only if their signatures match, the provisional ballot is opened and counted. In the
2016 election, 85.7% of the provisional ballots given due to lack of a photo ID were counted.
Rhode Island’s photo ID law may be considered more lenient than similar laws in other states. For
instance, while states like Georgia and Indiana only accept a state-issued form of ID, Rhode Island accepts
a broader list of forms of photo identification that includes IDs issued by educational institutions in the US
and identification cards issued by the state and federal governments. The Secretary of State also offers a free
Voter ID Card that can be obtained by showing a proof of residence such as a utility bill or a bank statement.
In addition, voters who receive a provisional ballot due to lack of ID in Rhode Island do not need to take any
further steps to verify their identity and have their vote counted.10 This is different in states like Georgia,
Indiana or Virginia, where the voter is required to return to an election office with proof of identity at a later
date, or their vote is not counted (NCSL, 2017b).
8

A “strict” photo ID requirement is defined by NCSL as one were the voter who receives a provisional ballot due to the lack of
a valid ID must take further steps to have their provisional ballot counted, such as providing their board of elections with a proof of
identitiy at a later date.
9
It is possible that not all poll workers know of or abide by this rule. They may instead turn voters without an ID away without
giving them a provisional ballot.
10
The identity of these voters is verified directly by the Local Board of Canvassers, as described in the previous paragraph. A
very small number of voters need to meet additional requirements under federal law to have their provisional ballot counted.

6

Another relevant aspect of the elections system are mail ballot rules. Because the identity of a voter who
uses a mail ballot cannot be checked in person, alternative verification is required. The voter who wishes
to vote by mail first fills out and signs a mail ballot application. This signature and the voter’s registration
information are verified against the corresponding registration form by the Local Board of Canvassers. If
those signatures and the voter registration information match, the voter receives a mail ballot and an oath
envelope. The voter must also sign this oath evelope where their mail ballot is placed, and this signature
must be either notarized or witnessed by two people11 . When the complete ballot is returned, the Board
matches the signature in the oath envelope to the signature in the original application before opening and
counting the ballot. This means mail ballots allow voters without a valid photo ID to have their identity
verified and cast a vote. This is possible because voters do not need to provide an excuse to vote by mail in
Rhode Island.12 We will measure whether voters without a driver’s license are more likely to substitute in
favor of a mail ballot as a result of the photo ID law.

3

Data

To measure the impact of the photo ID law on turnout, we use Rhode Island state administrative records
housed in a secure facility. Personally identifiable information has been removed from the data and replaced
with anonymous identifiers that make it possible for researchers with approved access to join and analyze
records associated with the same individual while preserving anonymity. The database contains administrative records from many major government programs, including employment records from payroll taxes,
participation in social safety-net programs, indicators for whether the anonymized record is associated with
a driver’s license, records on interactions with the criminal justice system, as well as voter registration and
indicators for past voting history. The data do not indicate if a person has a State Photo ID instead of a driver’s
license. Voting data is available since 2006, and most other datasets in the database go back further.
Thus, the database contains anonymized records on all individuals who work in Rhode Island, have a
driver’s license or registration in Rhode Island, are registered to vote or voted in Rhode Island, or have
interacted with any social services program including giving birth at a hospital, receiving cash transfer programs, state-sponsored health insurance enrollment, or public education. Figure 1 plots the distribution of
individuals by age in the database versus the 2010 US Census for Rhode Island.13 The database contains
11

Voters who are absent from the state due to military service or living overseas do not face this requirement.
While nineteen other states require voters to present an excuse (such as working abroad or being physically impaired), most do
not impose such restrictions. Sevreal years ago Rhode Island also required this, but in 2011 the state changed the mail ballot law to
allow voters to simply state in their mail ballot form that they cannot be at the polls on the day of the election without attesting to a
specific reason as to why. This amounts in practice to establishing “no excuse” mail voting.
13
Figure A.1 replicates the same plot but adding a line for the distribution by age of only active people in the database.
12

7

approximately 18% more people than the Census does. The difference is largest for individuals in their 20’s
and 30’s. A main reason for this difference is that, while our database dentifies all individuals who interact
with government services, it does not have information on when people leave Rhode Island.
For example, if an individual registers to vote in Rhode Island, the Rhode Island database would record
them as living in Rhode Island, but if they moved, they would not be removed from the voter registration
records and therefore from our database until they are found to have moved out of state in a National Change
of Address update that is done in odd-numbered years, or if they are sent official election mail that is returned
as undeliverable and they do not vote in one of the subsequent two general elections, or if the state of Rhode
Island is notified that the voter registered in another state. The Rhode Island database and the Census count
numbers are the most different for young adults, the age group with the most geographic mobility, and closest
for older adults who are typically less geographically mobile.
We use social program enrollments to construct individual-level measures of low SES. We consider an
individual to be low SES if they have been enrolled in either SNAP, TANF, Medicaid, Supplemental Social
Security Income, Childcare Assistance Program, or General Public Assistance at any point since January
2004. We also use these data to construct placebo tests of whether differential changes in social program
enrollment or demographics may impact our estimates. Our identification strategy requires that there are no
differential changes in factors that could affect voting behavior between those with driver’s licenses and those
without which are coincident with the photo ID law.
While the Rhode Island database population count is higher than the census’, we will obtain unbiased
estimates of the law’s impact on voting as long as this difference is not a function of factors which change
differentially between those with and without driver’s licenses around the time of the photo ID law. In Section
5.1, we test for such differential changes in key measures of social program enrollment and demographic
characteristics. We find that all changes are small in magnitude and we demonstrate that they do not drive
our main results.
Finally, the Rhode Island data on voting includes several features not available in prior research. In
particular, we are able to measure not only dates of registration and voting but also who requested a mail
ballot form, to what address it was sent, what reason the voter gave for requesting it, and whether they
submitted the mail ballot. We also observe who received a provisional ballot, for what reason, and whether
each provisional ballot was accepted or not by the local board of canvassers.

8

3.1

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 shows registration and turnout rates in the different subpopulations of interest, as well as the percentage of people in each group with a valid driver’s license as of November 2012. Turnout is measured as votes
divided by the total population of voting age. Overall, 67% of people of voting age in our data are registered
to vote and 45% voted in the 2012 presidential election. These numbers are a slight underestimation of the
real values because, while we overestimate the population of voting age (as shown in Figure 1), we are not
overestimating either the number of people in the voter registry or the number of people who voted. Both
registration and turnout rates increase with age and socioeconomic status, and are higher for whites relative
to minorities (black or hispanic).
We also observe that 77% of voting-age individuals have a driver’s license, which means that the nolicense group is slightly over a fifth of the voting age population. Democrats, minorities and elderly voters
(over the age of 65) have the lowest proportions of people with a driver’s license, while males and whites
have the highest.

4

Empirical Model

Our main goal is to estimate the effect of the photo ID law on turnout, which can be decomposed into the
effect on registration, and the effect on voting conditional on registration.

14

We use a difference-in-differences research design to estimate the impact of the law on turnout (measured as a fraction of the total voting age population in the Rhode Island database), registration, and voting
conditional on registration (that is, total votes as a fraction of all registered voters). We assume that voters
who have a valid driver’s license at the time of an election are not affected by the requirement of showing a
photo ID at the polls (and therefore are a suitable “control group” conditional on observable characteristics).
We examine how our three measures of voting behavior change for those who lack a valid driver’s license,
relative to those who have one, before versus after the law. While this is not the only type of ID a voter can
show at the polls, it is the most prevalent one. We do not observe State ID cards.15 Thus, our results may be
14

Intuitively,
P r(V oted) = P r(Registered) · P r(V oted|Registered)

Taking a partial derivative with respect to the photo ID law, we obtain the following:
∂P r(V oted)
∂P r(Reg.)
∂P r(V oted|Reg.)
=
· P r(V oted|Reg.) + P r(Reg.) ·
∂(IDLaw)
∂(IDLaw)
∂(IDLaw)
15

A literature review from the Government Accountability Office (GAO, 2014) places estimates of the percentage of either
eligible or registered voters who have any valid photo ID for voting in the 80%-95% range. At the same time, a report from the US

9

biased towards zero since we count people with valid State ID’s among those without any photo ID to show
at the polls.
The main equation we estimate is the following:
0

Yit = α0 + α1 · P ostt + α2 · N oLicenseit + α3 · P ostt · N oLicenseit + X it β + it

(1)

where Yit is either turnout, registration to vote, or voting conditional on registration, and Xit is a vector of
controls selected by Double LASSO (Belloni et al 2014) from a set that includes a third degree polynomial in
age, dummies on sex, race, incarceration, and participation in social programs (e.g. SNAP, TANF, Medicaid,
SSI, CCAP and GPA), and all possible interaction terms.16
The coefficient of interest is α3 , and the identification assumption is that, conditional on Xit , there are no
underlying trends that differentially affect the outcomes of those without licenses versus those with licenses.
We estimate regressions separately for midterm and presidential elections since their average turnout is very
different. We use the 2010 midterm and 2012 presidential elections as our pre-reform periods and the 2014
midterm and 2016 presidential elections as the post-reform periods. We test our results including data for
2006 and 2008 in the robustness checks section. However, due to how infrequent elections are, we are unable
to estimate our results with more than one post-reform period for each type of election. As a robustness check
to Double LASSO-selected controls, we use propensity score reweighting (Barsky et al. 2002; Imbens 2004).
We compute weights in two different ways: by selecting the covariates that form the predicted propensity
score using traditional research intuition, and by selecting the covariates using Double LASSO to form the
propensity score. Our results are robust to all these alternative specifications.17
Because people may endogenously get a driver’s license as a result of the photo ID requirement to vote,
we include specifications in which we instrument for N oLicenseit with not having a driver’s license at the
time the law was passed (July 2011) . To do this we estimate equation 1 instrumenting for N oLicenseit
with N oLicensei,2011 , and P ostt · N oLicenseit with P ostt · N oLicensei,2011 . Hence, we estimate the

Federal Highway Administration (USDOT, 2017) shows that 85% of the driving age population in the US have a driver’s license.
Therefore, there does not appear to be a big difference between the fraction of adults who have a driver’s license and the fraction of
adults who have any kind of valid photo ID.
16
Having a high-dimension of data and an unknown functional form poses problems for inference due to variable selection
based on instinct alone, p-hacking, and overfitting. To overcome these challenges, new machine-learning algorithms have been
developed to allow researchers to systematically select (based on predetermined penalty functions) the control variables to include
which maximize predictive fit, thus avoiding p-hacking and overfitting. One such machine learning algorithm is the Least Absolute
Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO). LASSO is a regression method that selects variables by penalizing the size of their
coefficients. LASSO is a systematic method to select variables that provide the strongest predictive fit by shrinking the coefficients
on weak explanatory variable coefficients towards zero (Tibshirani 1996; Hastie et al. 2009; Belloni et al. 2014). See appendix B
for a list of the controls selected by LASSO in our estimation.
17
These results are shown in tables A.12 and A.13.

10

following two first-stage equations:

0

P ostt · N oLicenseit = γ0 + γ1 N oLicensei,2011 + γ2 · P ostt · N oLicensei,2011 + X it γ + vit

0

N oLicenseit = δ0 + δ1 · N oLicensei,2011 + δ2 · P ostt · N oLicensei,2011 + X it δ + uit

(2)

(3)

The validity of the instrument requires that an individual’s probability of registering to vote or voting is
only affected by their driver’s license status in 2011 through the effect this has on their driver’s license status
at the time of each election.
Additionally, to check for changes in the composition of our population over time, we estimate equation
1 with individual-level fixed-effects. In this specification, the impact of the law is identified within voter, and
only people who remain in the dataset for both the pre- and post-reform elections contribute to the result.
Finally, to look at heterogeneous effects of the law, we estimate equation 1 for the subpopulations of
registered voters, focusing on SES, age, gender, minority status, and political party affiliation.

5

Results

We estimate equation 1 for the whole population using turnout, registration, and voting conditional on registration, as the outcome variable of interest, Yit . We find significant impacts of the law on the first two
outcomes but not on voting conditional on registration. The IV estimates in column 2 of Table 2 suggest
that the law led to a decline in turnout of 2.7 percentage points, a decline in registration of 7.6 percentage
points, and no decline in voting conditional on registration. These results suggest that photo ID requirements can have a significant effect on the decision of whether or not someone registers to vote. This implies
that previous studies which only considered registered voters may have underestimated the effects of these
requirements.
Table 2 also shows we do not find significantly negative impacts of the law on turnout in midterm elections. While we find a decline of 5.1 percentage points in registration, we estimate a relative increase of
4.1 percentage points in voting conditional on registration. The total impact on turnout is not statistically
different from zero.

11

5.1

Robustness Checks

The results in column 1 may be biased if likely voters obtained licenses in anticipation of the law. Recall that
our difference-in-differences estimator relies on the assumption that, around the time the photo ID law passed,
there were no other factors which impacted the voting behavior of people without licenses versus those with
licenses. One way this assumption may fail is if those without licenses who vote regularly were more likely
to obtain a license in response to the law. The photo ID law passed in 2011, allowing people two and a half
years to proactively obtain a license in anticipation of the law. If likely voters without photo ID’s responded
to the photo ID law by getting ID’s at a greater rate than those without ID’s who were unlikely voters, we
may find that turnout decreased after the law for those without licenses because likely voters responded to
the law by obtaining licenses, rather than because the law decreased the likelihood that an individual without
a license would register or vote.
We use whether someone had a license in July 2011 as an instrument for whether they had a license at
the time of each election. Column 2 of Table 2 shows these results. While there are small changes in the
point estimates, the main results remain largely unchanged. The effect of 4.7 percentage points on voting in
presidential elections (using the OLS) is reduced to 2.7 percentage points, while we do not find a significant
effect on turnout in midterm elections.18 In Table A.3, we show that, among the people who did not have a
driver’s license at the time of the 2012 presidential election, only 6.4% of those who voted and 8.9% of those
who did not vote obtained a driver’s license by the time of the 2016 presidential election.
While in the previous tests we considered the issue of endogenous selection in driver’s license status postlaw, we now control for unobservable differences in individuals by estimating an individual fixed effects
specification. This within-estimator is only identified using individuals who remained in the sample for
the entire period and whose license status has changed. Table A.4 shows the difference in the means of
our observables between the full sample and the group we use in the exercise. While these differences are
statistically significant, they are economically small, meaning we do not end up with a fundamentally different
sample of voters. Results for the FE specification are in column 3 of Table 2. We find a slightly larger effect
of 6.5 percentage points on turnout, which is explained by a larger effect on voting conditional on registration.
From this, we conclude that our results cannot be explained by changes in the composition of the voting age
population over time. We also find a negative effect of 1.7 percentage points on turnout in midterm elections
when we used individual fixed effects.
Next, we conduct a series of placebo tests to examine if other socio-economic factors were changing
differentially around the time of the election between the license and the no-license groups. We run our
18

Tables A.5 and A.6 show the main coefficients of the first stage regressions and their F-statistics.

12

difference-in-differences model using as dependent variables factors which should not have been affected by
the photo ID law such as enrollment in social safety-net programs, being incarcerated or having a child. If
there are no differential, potentially confounding underlying trends in our data, we would expect to find zero
impact of the law on these placebo outcomes. Table 3 shows these results. Columns 1 presents the relevant
coefficients from table 2 and columns 2-6 report the placebo results. While we do find statistically significant
coefficients, they are economically small. The placebo effects on TANF and UI enrollments are close to half
a percentage point, and the effects on having a child, SNAP, and incarceration are even smaller.
Given the statistical significance of these results, we test whether these small changes in other observables
drive our results with a bounding exercise. We replace each individual’s actual voting behavior with the behavior that is predicted by their observables in a linear regression. We estimate our difference-in-differences
model with this predicted voting behavior as the dependent variable. Any change in this outcome attributable
to the law would mechanically come from only differential changes in demographics rather than in voting
behavior, so our desired outcome would be to find coefficients statistically equal to zero. A negative coefficient would mean that underlying changes in observables are making us overestimate our estimated effects,
while a positive coefficient might imply that we are under-estimating the effects of the law. Table 4 shows
the results of this exercise, which we performed for the OLS, IV, and FE specifications.
We find near-zero or positive coefficients on the impact of the law, implying that our results are driven by
changes in voting behavior resulting from the law, and not from differential trends in demographics coincident
with the law. Put together, these tests confirm that the voting law did not change coincidentally with other
factors which could impact voting differentially for those with or without licenses.
Our next test is related to the issue that we only include one election pre and post reform.19 Unfortunately,
given how infrequent elections are and that this reform is active since 2014, we are unable to incorporate data
for more post-reform years. We did include data for the 2006 midterm and 2008 presidential elections and
show these results in Tables A.7 and A.8. In these tables, we see that the estimated effect on turnout is similar
to that on Table 2 with a larger effect on registration.

20

Finally, because we only have data for one state and one post-reform election cycle, we are concerned
that confounding events associated with the 2016 election may influence our results. The Rhode Island
19
Also, in tables A.12 and A.13, we resport the results of estimating our model using propensity score rewieghting instead of
Double LASSO. In table A.9, we test whether clustering standard errors would change our conclusions. Since “treatment” depends
on driver’s license status and its enforcement occurs at the precinct level (Abadie et al 2017), we would like to cluster at the level of
precinct by driver’s license status. However, since we can only assign precincts to registered voters, we test this clustering only in the
equations where voting conditional on registration is the dependent variable. While we obtain larger standard errors, the change is
small and our results remain statistically significant. Also, note that we only perform this exercise for presidential elections because
the 2012 redistricting causes precincts to be different between the 2010 and 2014 midterm elections.
20
Figures A.3-A.2 show how turnout, for different subgroups, evolved over time. Observations are weighted according to the
probability of having a driver’s license.

13

database is not available in other states to measure if states with similar voting patterns to Rhode Island
experience the same measurable impacts on voting among those without licenses in the absence of a photo
ID law implementation. However, we can take two approaches to examine if our findings are indeed specific
to Rhode Island when the ID law was passed.
First, we can employ the Current Popolation Survey’s Voting and Registration Supplement to compare
voting patterns between Rhode Island and similar states (here, Connecticut and Massachusetts). This supplement is part of the November survey in even years and it includes questions of whether the respondent
voted and whether they were registered to vote at the time of the election. These questions are only asked to
people who are of voting age and US citizens.
One limitation of these data is that voting is self-reported (Hur and Achen, 2013). While in the Rhode
Island database 59.8% of registered voters voted in the 2016 election, which closely matches official results,
this number goes up to 89.2% in the CPS. If over reporting is constant over time across people with and
without licenses, we can still use the the CPS data to compare the impact of the law in Rhode Island relative
to its neighboring states. A second limitation of the CPS data is sample size. For reference, there are only
851 reported eligible voters in the CPS for the 2016 election in Rhode Island. A third limitation is the lack
of information on driver’s licenses or any other type of photo ID. We use Rhode Island data to predict the
probability that a person has a driver’s license based on their set of observable characteristics available both
in the CPS and in the Rhode Island Database. We use LASSO to generate the prediction, and use the resulting
coefficients to construct the probability that a respondent to the CPS has a driver’s license. We then convert
this predicted probability to a binary variable equal to one if the individual is above the 80th percentile in the
distribution of the predicted probability of not having a license.21
With these data, we estimate equation 1 separately for Rhode Island, and for the pool of Connecticut and
Massachusetts. The results are reported in Table A.10. The point estimates imply a decrease in voting and
registration for Rhode Island in presidential elections, but no such result in the neighboring states. However, given the small sample sizes, the standard errors are large and the point estimates are not statistically
significant for any state.
Second, we obtained voting data from Allegheny County in Pennsylvania, a county with similar sized
metropolitan center and demographics to RI in a state that was willing to share voter records for academic
research. These data do not include an indicator for individuals having a driver’s license, but do include
their address, age, gender, party affiliation, and race if they choose to report it (about 50% of individuals
21

This percentile is chosen to approximate the fraction of people without a license in the Rhode Island data. Our conclusions are
robust to using the 75th and 85th percentiles as well.

14

report race). We use block group level census data on income, education, employment status, commuting
time to work, and car ownership among others, together with individual demographics and party affiliation
in the RI to predict who has a driver’s license using LASSO. We then use this prediction to test if we find
similar results in RI when we use the predicted probability of having a driver’s license instead of the actual
driver’s license indicator. We confirm that we find similar results. Next, we use the same prediction model
to predict who has a driver’s license in Allegheny County, and run the usual difference-in-differences model
with voting conditional on registration as outcome variable to check whether we get analogous results where
no voter ID law was implemented. We do not find similar results in Allegheny County.
In particular, results from the above set of regressions are presented in Table A.11. The two rows refer
respectively to RI and Allegheny County. The first column reports the result of the difference-in-differences
model using the actual driver’s license indicator in RI. The second column replaces the actual indicator
for driver’s license with the predicted probability of having one. The third column trasforms the predicted
probability in a predicted indicator using a threshold which is selected with ROC analysis. While in RI the
coefficient estimated using the actual indicator is -.071, the one estimated using the predicted one is -.051.
In PA instead, the coefficient obtained using the predicted indicator falls down to -.012. Results using the
predicted probabilities also show that the coefficient estimated in PA is about 15 times smaller compared to
the one estimated in RI. Standard errors clearly show how precise our estimates are.
Thus we do not find impacts in our PA placebo that we find in RI, nor do we find similar effects in MA and
CT using CPS data. Both tests give us confidence that the main findings of this paper are most likely driven
by the voter ID law, rather than a spurious correlation with specifics of the 2016 election and subpopulations
less likely to have a driver’s license.

6

Extensions

6.1

Heterogeneity Across Subpopulations

A major aspect of the debate on photo ID laws is whether certain populations are affected more than others
because they lack valid photo IDs. We estimate our IV model separately for a number of subpopulations of
interest. Figures 2-7 plot our estimates for presidential and midterm elections respectively. In these figures,
the darker gray diamond shows the baseline mean of the dependent variable for each group22 , and the lighter
gray square describes that average plus our estimate of the impact of the law with its confidence interval. We
22

This baseline is the average of the variable in the pre-reform period. As explained in section 3.1, this turnout is slightly
understimated due to our overestimation of the population of voting age.

15

estimate the model by socio-economic status, minority status, age group, gender, and party affiliation. These
results are shown in the subsequent columns of each figure.23 For presidential elections, the largest impacts
are in low SES voters and the younger age groups. These are also the groups with the lowest baseline turnout
rates. For midterm elections, we find mixed results with insignificant impacts for most subgroups.
In Tables A.14 and A.15 we also repeat our bounding exercise from section 5.1 for all subgroups. Just
like in Table 4, we mostly observe zero or even slightly positive coefficients, meaning that, if anything, we
may be slightly underestimating the effects of the law. The exception to this is the group of young voters.
This is the group where we found the largest coefficient in Figure 2. This IV coefficient is larger (in absolute
value) than the OLS coefficient, suggesting that moving from not having a license to having one may be
negatively correlated with the likelihood of voting in this age group, rather than positively correlated. We
find some evidence that this may be the case. Table A.3 shows that, in the general population, 6.4% of people
without a license who voted in 2012 had a license by the 2016 election and 8.9% of people who did not vote
and did not have a license in 2012 had a license in 2016. This difference is much larger for the people who
are 22-25 years old in 2016. Within this group, 22% of those without a license who voted in 2012 had a
license by the 2016 election and 37% of those who did not vote and did not have a license in 2012 had a
license in 2016. Therefore, not only getting a new driver’s license is much more common in young people
but it is negatively correlated with having voted in 2012. While this may seem counterintuitive, given that
having a license is positively correlated with voting, one possible explanation is that young people who are
interested in voting are also more likely to get a driver’s license even before they are eligible to vote24 and
those who only acquire their first license after age 18 are less likely to vote. Thus, the negative coefficients
we observe in the first row of Table A.14 can partly explain why the effect of the law seems larger for young
voters in Figure 2.

6.2

Heterogeneity Across Precincts

We examine heterogeneous impacts of the law across precincts to examine if the impact of the law varies
with measures of local implementation of photo ID laws. In our data, we observe when poll workers gave
a voter a provisional ballot, for what reason they decided to do this, and what final decision the LBC made
on each provisional ballot. We use the fraction of voters in a given precinct who are given a provisional
ballot, and the fraction of those ballots that are accepted by the LBC. We use this as potential measures of
how rigorously voter requirements are administered locally. Ideally we want to observe whether poll workers
23

We do not include voters younger than 22 in our IV specification because those who were younger than 22 in 2016 were not
eligible for a driver’s license at the time the photo ID law passed. Therefore our instrumental variable is not available for them.
24
Rhode Island residents can apply for a limited provisional license by age 16.

16

turned voters away from the polls when they did not produce a valid photo ID. However, we cannot distinguish
a person who showed up at the polls and was denied a ballot by the officials from the individual who simply
chose to stay home.25 We use the fraction of voters using a provisional ballot and the fraction of ballots
accepted conditional on local demographic characteristics as a potential indirect measure of photo ID law
implementation.
Table A.2 shows an increase over time in the fraction of voters at the polls (that is, excluding mail ballots)
that received a provisional ballot from 0.28% in 2010 to 0.95% in 2016. Voters who received a provisional
ballot due to the lack of photo ID were just 18% of all provisional ballots. The main reason for a provisional
ballot is not being in the voter list for the precinct, which typically occurs either because the individual
went to the wrong precinct or because they did not register to vote before the deadline for that election.
Because of this, and the fact that a precinct is a relatively small unit, we extend this part of the analysis to all
voter requirements, not just the photo ID law, and we aggregate precincts to the representative district level.
Because a redistricting changed electoral precincts and districts in the state before the 2012 election, we only
conduct this exercise for presidential elections when all districts remain unchanged.26
Our main results are reported in Figures 8 and 9. In these graphs, the vertical axis shows the coefficient of
estimating equation 1 on voting conditional on registration in each district using our instrumental variables
specification, with its confidence interval. The horizontal axis shows the fraction of provisional ballots given
or accepted in each district, respectively. We conduct this exercise only on the group of registered voters
using voter conditional on registration as the dependent variable. We do this because electoral precincts
are assigned only to registered voters. We fit a linear prediction of our estimated effects of the law on our
measures of law administration rigidity, where districts are weighted by their population size. The negative
slope of this line in Figure 8 indicates that we do observe a stronger impact of the photo ID law in districts
where voters are more likely to receive provisional ballots. We do observe also a slightly negative correlation
in Figure 9 where the horizontal axis variable is the fraction of provisional ballots accepted. Thus, the effects
of the photo ID law seem to be correlated with the rigidity with which poll workers apply the voting rules or
with our measure of LBCs rigidity.
To check whether difference in voters across precincts drive these results, we first regress our measures
of implementation on the observable characteristics of voters in that district and we compute the residuals of
that regression. Then, we repeat our plots using the residualized measure of strictness. Figures A.7 and A.8
25
According to their training, poll workers are instructed that they must give a provisional ballot to any person who states they are
allowed to vote in their precinct. While there were reported anecdotal evidence that poll workers may have turn away some voters,
these instances are not directly observable in our data.
26
Figures A.5 and A.6 show substantial variation in the prevalence of provisional ballots and their acceptance rate across
precincts. This is the variation we exploit in this exercise.

17

show these results. The fitted line in Figure A.7 is slightly flatter than the one in Figure 8, suggesting that
the overall relationship is partially driven by observable differences.

6.3

State Legislators, Party Affiliation, and the Photo ID Law

The photo ID law was passed in Rhode Island’s state legislature by a margin of 54-21 in the House of
Representatives and by a margin of 28-6 in the Senate. We separate electoral districts in four groups according
to whether both the corresponding representative and senator voted for or against the photo ID law, and we
estimate equation 1 in each of these groups separately.
Figure 10 shows that districts where both legislators voted against the law had a larger fraction of people
without a driver’s license, a lower baseline turnout, and display an effect on the turnout of registered voters
more than twice as large as the effect in districts where both legislators voted in favor of the law. This suggests
legislators may have considered the potential effects on their constituencies when voting on the law.
Our final exercise consists of examining whether the previous results are correlated with the political
affiliation of voters in each district. In Table 5, we conduct a counterfactual exercise where we compute the
turnout among registered voters and dividing our sample by party affiliation and votes of state representatives
and senators.27 Focusing on presidential elections to compare our results with Figure 10, we can see that we
once again observe larger effects in districts where representatives and senators voted against the law, and
also that those differences in turnout are concentrated in effects on the turnout of registered Democrats.

6.4

Mail Ballots

Because the identity of a voter who uses a mail ballot cannot be checked in person, alternative verification
is required. The voter who wishes to vote by mail first fills out and signs a mail ballot application. This
signature and the voter’s registration information are verified against the corresponding registration form by
the Local Board of Canvassers. If those signatures and the voter regsitration information match, the voter
receives a mail ballot and an oath envelope. The voter must also sign this oath evelope where their mail ballot
is placed, and this signature must be either notarized or witnessed by two people28 . When the complete ballot
is returned, the Board matches the signature in the oath envelope to the signature in the original application
before opening and counting the ballot. This means the mail ballot could allow voters without a valid photo
ID to cast a vote and verify their identity in this alternative way. Thus registrants can vote by mail ballot
without a photo ID. Furthermore, Rhode Island voters can use mail ballots without the need to prove they
27
28

In Table A.16 we also compare predicted and actual turnout by party affiliation and legislator votes.
Voters who are absent from the state due to military service or living overseas do not face this requirement.

18

are unable to show up at the polls.
If voters without a photo ID understood that they could alternatively vote by mail ballot as described
above, we would expect that (i) more mail ballots were requested to addresses in Rhode Island, and (ii) that
voters without a driver’s license became relatively more likely to use a mail ballot without a specific excuse
for not being able to vote at the polls. To test whether this is the case, we obtained detailed mail ballot data
since 2012, which means we can only compare the 2012 and 2016 presidential elections. In these data, we do
observe a strong increase in the use of mail ballots over time (60% more mail ballots were received in 2016
vs 2012, see table A.17). Almost all of this increase is explained by voters who requested the mail ballot
be sent to an address in Rhode Island. Also, most of the increase is explained by voters who chose the “no
excuse” option to vote by mail. However, Figure A.9 shows the increase in the use of mail ballots is large for
both voters with and without driver’s licenses.
To test whether our no-license and license groups behaved differently in this regard, we estimate our
difference-in-differences model only on the subsample of people who voted, and we use voting by mail as
the dependent variable. Figure 11 shows the results. We find a small overall impact on the likelihood that a
registered voter chooses to cast their ballot by mail. We do observe significant results for a few subgroups,
but not all are significant in both IV and OLS specifications. While the point estimate for young voters is
not statistically significant in our IV specification, it is very similar in size and statistically significant in the
OLS specification. We conclude that mail ballots did not appear to be an effective substitute for voting at the
polls for those without photo IDs.

7

Conclusion

This paper provides new empirical evidence on the effects of photo ID laws on turnout, registration, and voting conditional on registration. In all presidential election specifications, we find a significant negative effect
of the photo ID requirement on the probability that people without driver’s licenses vote and the probability
that they register to vote. This suggests previous studies that only used data on registered voters may have
understated the effect of photo ID requirements.
We do not find compelling evidence that voters responded to the photo ID requirement by either proactively obtaining driver’s licenses, except potentially among very young voters. We also do not find that people
without photo IDs used mail ballots as a substitute for voting at the polls.
Finally, we do find evidence that heterogeneity in the estimated effect of the law is correlated with the
rigidity in which voter requirements are applied in local precincts. We also show the behavior of state legis-

19

lators is consistent with an anticipation of the effects of the law on their own constituencies.
These results contribute to the understanding of a relevant and currently open U.S. policy debate, and
suggests subgroups for which more outreach and education could help minimize any undesired impacts of
voter photo ID requirements while preserving the integrity of the electoral process.

20

8

References

Alvarez, R. Michael, Delia Bailey and Jonathan N. Katz (2008) “The Effect of Voter Identification Laws
on Turnout” California Institute of Technology Social Science Working Paper 1267R.
Atkeson, Lonna Rae, Lisa Ann Bryant, Thad E. Hall, Kyle Saunders, and Michael Alvarez (2010) “A
new barrier to participation: Heterogeneous application of voter identification policies” Electoral Studies
29, 66-73.
Barreto, Matt A., Stephen A. Nuno, and Gabriel R. Sanchez (2009) “The Disproportionate Impact of
Voter-ID Requirements on the Electorate - New Evidence from Indiana” Political Science and Politics, Volume 42, Issue 1, pp. 111-116.
Barsky, Robert, John Bound, Kerwin Ko’ Charles and Joseph P. Lupton (2002) “Accounting for the
Black-White Wealth Gap. A Nonparametric Approach” Journal of the American Statistical Association Vol
97, Issue 459, pp 663-673.
Belloni Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen (2014) “High-Dimensional Methods and
Inference on Structural and Treatment Effects” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 no. 2: 29-50.
Cobb, Rachel V., D. James Greiner, and Kevin M. Quinn (2012) “Can Voter ID Laws Be Administered in
a Race-Neutral Manner? Evidence from the City of Boston in 2008” Quarterly Journal of Political Science,
2012, 7: 1–33
Government Accountability Office (2014) “Elections. Issues Related to State Voter Identification Laws”.
Report to Congressional Requesters. GAO-14-634.
Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman (2009) “The Elements of Statistical Learning:
Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction” Springer: New York, NY.
Hood III, M.V. and Charles S. Bullock III (2012) “Much Ado About Nothing? And Empirical Assessment
of the Georgia Voter Identification Statute” State Politics & Policy Quarterly 12(4) 394-414.
Hopkins, Daniel J, Marc Meredith, Michael Morse, Sarah Smith and Jesse Yoder (2017) “Voting but for
the Law: Evidence from Virginia on Photo Identification Requirements” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies,
Vol 14, Issue 1.
Hur, Aram and Christopher H. Achen (2013) “Coding Voter Turnout Responses in the Current Population
Survey” Public Opinion Quarterly, Volume 77, Issue 4, pp. 985-993.
Imbens, Guido W. (2004) “Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity: a
review” Review of Economics and Statistics 86:4-29.

21

National Conference of State Legislatures (2017a) “Voter ID History” Last updated on 5/31/2017. Available at www.ncsl.org/research/elections-and-campaigns/voter-id-history.aspx accessed on November 1st, 2017.
National Conference of State Legislatures (2017b) “Voter Identification Requirements | Voter ID Laws”
Last updated on 6/5/2017. Available at www.ncsl.org/research/elections-and-campaigns/voter-id.aspx accessed on November 1st, 2017.
Stewart, Charles III (2017) “Voter ID: Who Has Them? Who Shows Them?” Oklahoma Law Review
Volume 66, Number 1.
Tibshirani, Rob (1996) “Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B 58(1): 267–88.
US Department of Transportation. Federal Highway Administration (2017) “Highway Statistics Series.
Licensed Drivers by Sex and Ratio To Population - 2015” Accessed on November 13th, 2017. Available at
https://fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/2015/dl1c.cfm

22

30k

Figure 1: State Population by Age (18+)

Population (+18) in Nov 2010 RI Database: 976180

5k

10k

Number of People
15k
20k

25k

Population (+18) in 2010 Census: 824526

20

30

40

50
Age

US Census
Notes: The population of age 85 and over is collapsed.

23

60

70
RI Database

80

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Voters in 2012
% Registered % Voted % with Driver’s License
All Voters

0.67

0.45

0.77

Young (22-25)

0.60

0.29

0.75

Adult (26-40)

0.58

0.31

0.74

Adult (41-64)

0.69

0.52

0.82

Elder (65+)

0.79

0.60

0.72

Low SES

0.50

0.30

0.74

High SES

0.75

0.53

0.79

Minority

0.47

0.28

0.68

White

0.64

0.43

0.84

Female

0.69

0.49

0.78

Male

0.63

0.42

0.81

Democrats

-

0.87

0.62

Republicans

-

0.75

0.86

Independents

-

0.64

0.81

Notes: In columns 1-3 we report respectively the fraction of people registerd to vote, the fraction of people that voted, and the
fraction of people having a driving license. The fraction of people that voted is computed over the entire voting age population.
These three fractions are reported for each subgroup of voters which we include in our analysis. We refer to the 2012 presidential
election year.

24

Table 2: Estimated Impact of the Photo ID Law
(1)

(2)

(3)

Fixed
Effects
Presidential Elections

Turnout
Registration
Voted|Reg

OLS

IV

-0.047

-0.027

-0.065

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.001)

-0.080

-0.076

-0.048

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.001)

-0.017

0.001

-0.050

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

Midterm Elections
Turnout
Registration
Voted|Reg

0.005

0.003

-0.017

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.001)

-0.055

-0.051

-0.033

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.001)

0.038

0.041

-0.009

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

Notes: The table reports the α3 coefficient in equation 1 for different model specifications in presidential and midterm elections.
The dependent variable is either being registered or voting. In column 2, having a driver’s license at the time of the election is
instrumented by having a license in July 2011. In column 3 we use individual fixed effects. Controls are selected using Double
LASSO. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.

25

Table 3: Estimated Placebo Effects of Photo ID Law
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Incarceration

Child

Dependent Variable
Turnout

SNAP

TANF

UI

Presidential Elections (Panel A)
OLS

IV

Fixed Effects

-0.0470

-0.0003

-0.0039

0.0069

-0.0001

-0.0023

(0.0014)

(0.0010)

(0.0003)

(0.0004)

(0.0000)

(0.0004)

[0.2115]

[0.1641]

[0.0111]

[0.0106]

[0.0001]

[0.0097]

-0.0275

0.0348

-0.0023

0.0115

0.0000

-0.0016

(0.0020)

(0.0014)

(0.0005)

(0.0004)

(0.0000)

(0.0005)

[0.2038]

[0.1667]

[0.0099]

[0.0055]

[0.0000]

[0.0062]

-0.0645

-0.0059

-0.0039

0.0127

-0.0002

0.0008

(0.0012)

(0.0008)

(0.0004)

(0.0004)

(0.0000)

(0.0004)

[0.2368]

[0.1765]

[0.0116]

[0.0054]

[0.0001]

[0.0079]

Midterm Elections (Panel B)
OLS

IV

Fixed Effects

0.0051
(0.0013)

-0.0016
(0.0010)

-0.0039
(0.0004)

0.0105
(0.0005)

-0.0000
(0.0000)

-0.0038
(0.0004)

[0.1422]

[0.1601]

[0.0143]

[0.0160]

[0.0002]

[0.0104]

0.0032

0.0146

-0.0033

0.0165

-0.0001

-0.0043

(0.0016)

(0.0013)

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

(0.0000)

(0.0005)

[0.1562]

[0.1653]

[0.0140]

[0.0104]

[0.0001]

[0.0094]

-0.0166

-0.0087

-0.0045

0.0222

-0.0002

-0.0002

(0.0011)

(0.0009)

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

(0.0000)

(0.0005)

[0.1691]

[0.1676]

[0.0141]

[0.0082]

[0.0001]

[0.0086]

Notes: We run our difference-in-differences specification using different dependent variables which should have not been affected
by the photo ID law. We show theα3 coefficient in equation 1. Controls are selected using Double LASSO. Robust standard errors
are reported in parenthesis. Averages of the dependent variable among voters belonging to the “treatment” group are reported in
brackets. The dependent variable in column 5 is being incarcerated at the time of an election. The dependent variable in column 6
is having a child born during the year of the election.

26

Table 4: Estimated Impact of the Photo ID Law on Predicted Voting
(1)

(2)

(3)

Fixed
Effects
Presidential Elections

Turnout
Registration
Voted|Reg

OLS

IV

0.0038

-0.0012

0.0007

(0.0002)

(0.0003)

(0.0000)

0.0059

0.0004

0.0009

(0.0002)

(0.0003)

(0.0000)

0.0028

-0.0011

-0.0010

(0.0001)

(0.0002)

(0.0001)

Midterm Elections
Turnout
Registration
Voted|Reg

0.0012

-0.0029

0.0032

(0.0002)

(0.0003)

(0.0000)

0.0032

-0.0013

0.0035

(0.0002)

(0.0003)

(0.0001)

0.0035

-0.0007

0.0010

(0.0002)

(0.0002)

(0.0000)

Notes: The table reports the α3 coefficient in equation 1 for different model specifications in presidential and midterm elections.
The dependent variable is either predicted registration or predicted voting from an OLS regression of actual registration or actual
voting on voters observable characteristics. In column 2, having a driver’s license at the time of the election is instrumented by
having a license in July 2011. In column 3 we use individual fixed effects. Controls are selected using Double LASSO. Robust
standard errors are reported in parenthesis.

27

% Voted
.4 .5 .6

.7

.8

.9

1

Figure 2: Turnout Estimates in Presidential Elections

0.007

−0.011

−0.009

−0.011

−0.010

−0.028

−0.027

−0.021

.3

−0.031

.2

−0.034
−0.057

−0.052

p
In

de

ep
R

D

em

al
e
M

e
al
m

hi
te

Fe

ity
or

M

in

W

S
SE

S
ig
H

Lo

w

h

SE

65

+

4

0

−6
41

−4

5
26

−2

22

Al
l

0

.1

−0.083

−0.065

Average

Estimate

.8

.9

1

Figure 3: Registration Estimates in Presidential Elections

% Registered
.4 .5 .6 .7

−0.064
−0.049
−0.090

−0.052

−0.067

−0.076

−0.078

.3

−0.150

−0.096

−0.065
−0.074

−0.032

−0.079

Average

28

Estimate

ep
In
d

ep
R

em
D

e
al
M

al
e
m

hi

te
Fe

W

ity

M

in

or

S

ig
h

SE
H

w

SE

S

+
65
Lo

−6
4
41

−4
0
26

−2
5

22

Al

l

0

.1

.2

−0.272

% Voted | Registered
.3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8

.9

1

Figure 4: Voting Conditional on Registration Estimates in Presidential Elections

0.014

0.021
0.013

−0.002

0.001

−0.003

0.008

0.024

0.010
−0.010

−0.036

−0.043
−0.029

p
de
In

ep
R

D

M

em

al
e

e
al
m

hi
te

Fe

ity
or

M

in

W

S
SE

S
ig
H

Lo

w

h

SE

65

+

4

0

−6
41

5

−4
26

−2

22

Al
l

0

.1

.2

−0.045

Average

Estimate

% Voted
.4 .5 .6

.7

.8

.9

1

Figure 5: Turnout Estimates in Midterm Elections

0.020

0.026
0.005

0.016

0.005
0.009

0.003

0.008

.3

0.009

0.003

.2

0.004

−0.000

0.026

Average

29

Estimate

ep
In
d

ep
R

em
D

e
al
M

al
e
m

hi

te
Fe

W

ity

M

in

or

S

ig
h

SE
H

w

SE

S

+
65
Lo

−6
4
41

−4
0
26

−2
5

22

Al

l

0

.1

−0.025

.8

.9

1

Figure 6: Registration Estimates in Midterm Elections

−0.052

% Registered
.4 .5 .6 .7

−0.033

−0.070

−0.070

−0.021

−0.043

−0.051

−0.032

−0.038
−0.047

−0.100

−0.045

−0.023

p
de
In

ep
R

em
D

M

al
e

e
al
m

hi
te

Fe

ity
or

M

in

W

S
SE

S
ig
H

Lo

w

h

SE

65

+

4

0

−6
41

5

−4
26

−2

22

Al
l

0

.1

.2

.3

−0.195

Average

Estimate

% Voted | Registered
.3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8

.9

1

Figure 7: Voting Conditional on Registration Estimates in Midterm Elections

0.038

0.030
0.055
0.037

0.041

0.045 0.052 0.032

0.042

0.046

0.044
0.058
0.009

Average

30

Estimate

ep
In
d

ep
R

em
D

e
al
M

al
e
m

hi

te
Fe

W

ity

M

in

or

S

ig
h

SE
H

w

SE

S

+
65
Lo

−6
4
41

−4
0
26

−2
5

22

Al

l

0

.1

.2

0.067

Figure 8: Correlation Between Impact of Photo ID Law and Provisional Ballots Given
.2

by Congressional District

−.1

% Voted | Registered
0
.1

Corr: −.154

0

.005
.01
.015
Strictness: Fraction of Provisional Ballots Given in 2012
Estimated Coefficient

.02

WLS

Notes: This graph shows the correlation (weighted by district population) between district strictness and the estimated effect of the
law at the district level. The coefficients plotted correspond to α3 in equation 1. We run IV regressions by district with controls
selected by Double LASSO. In all these regressions the dependent variable is voting conditional on registration. This graph drops
1 case for which the fraction of provisional ballots given is higher than 5%. The number of districts is 75.

31

Figure 9: Correlation Between Impact of Photo ID Law and Provisional Ballots Accepted
.2

by Congressional District

−.1

% Voted | Registered
0
.1

Corr: −.039

0

.2
.4
.6
Strictness: Fraction of Provisional Ballots Accepted in 2012
Estimated Coefficient

.8

WLS

Notes: This graph shows the correlation (weighted by district population) between district strictness and the estimated effect of the
law at the district level. The coefficients plotted correspond to α3 in equation 1. We run IV regressions by district with controls
selected by Double LASSO. In all these regressions the dependent variable is voting conditional on registration. This graph drops
1 case for which the fraction of provisional ballots given is higher than 5%. The number of districts is 75.

32

Figure 10: Impact of Photo ID Law by State Legislator Votes on the Law

.65

.8

in Presidential Elections

% Voted | Registered
.55
.6

0.005

−0.006

.5

.5

−0.017

.6
.7
% with a Driver’s License

0.009

Both No

Sen Yes

Rep Yes

Both Yes

Estimated Voting Conditional on Registration
Average Voting Conditional on Registration
% with Driver’s License (right axis)
Notes: This graph shows how the estimated impact of the law varied depending whether district legislators voted in favor of the
law or not. Precincts are grouped depending on how the senator and the representative voted. We run IV regressions by these four
precinct groups with controls selected by Double LASSO. In all these regressions the dependent variable is voting conditional on
registration. The number of precincts in which both legislators voted against the law are 31. The number of precincts in which only
the senator was in favor of the law are 89. The number of precincts in which only the representative was in favor of the law are 80.
Finally, the number of precincts in which both legislators voted in favor of the law are 221.

33

34
Yes
No
Yes
No

(3)

0.486
0.489
0.503
0.445
0.486

0.477
0.482
0.495
0.436
0.478

0.624

0.641
0.583

0.626
0.621

0.008
0.007
0.008
0.008
0.008

0.002

0.004
-0.002

0.002
0.002

(5)

(6)

0.672

0.686
0.610

0.668
0.685

0.005

0.005
0.004

0.005
0.006

0.533
0.561
0.556
0.471
0.541

0.522
0.551
0.547
0.451
0.530

0.012
0.009
0.009
0.020
0.011

2014 Election (Panel B)

0.677

0.691
0.614

0.673
0.690

Registered Republicans
Predicted Counterf. Difference
2016 Election (Panel A)

(4)

(8)

(9)

0.382
0.402
0.407
0.325
0.388

0.533

0.553
0.466

0.531
0.538

0.371
0.392
0.396
0.312
0.377

0.536

0.555
0.471

0.534
0.541

0.011
0.011
0.010
0.013
0.011

-0.003

-0.002
-0.005

-0.003
-0.003

Independents
Predicted Counterf. Difference

(7)

Notes: The table reports predicted voting conditional on registration, an estimated counterfactual without the photo ID requirement, and the difference between the two. Rows split
the sample according to whether state representatives or senators voted for or against the photo ID law. Predictions come from coefficients estimated with IV regressions. The
counterfactual is the predicted value when α̂3 is set to zero. Panel A shows the counterfactual results for 2016 (presidential elections). Panel B shows the counterfactual results for
2014 (midterm elections). Controls are selected using Double LASSO.

All

Senator Voted

Representative Voted

0.627

0.645
0.581

Yes
No

Senator Voted

All

0.628
0.624

Yes
No

Representative Voted

Districts where:

(2)

Registered Democrats
Predicted Counterf. Difference

(1)

Table 5: Counterfacual Analysis on Voting Conditional on Registration by Party Affiliation

−0.058

−0.009
−0.021
0.002

−0.023 −0.016

−0.003

0.017

−0.026 −0.017 −0.016 −0.031
−0.025
−0.024

Average

35

Estimate

p
de
In

ep
R

e

em
D

al
M

al
e
m

ity

hi
te

Fe

W

or

S
in
M

h
ig
H

w

SE

SE

S

+
65
Lo

4

0

−6
41

5

−4
26

−2

22

Al
l

0

% Mail | Voted
.025 .05 .075 .1 .125 .15 .175 .2

Figure 11: Impact of Photo ID Law on Mail Ballots in Presidential Elections

A

Online Appendix: Tables and Figures
Table A.1: State ID Law Comparison
State

Voter ID Required

Require Further Proof

Year of Current Law

Vote by Mail

Alabama

Photo ID

No

2003

Excuse Required

Alaska

Non-photo ID

No

1980

No Excuse

Arizona

Non-photo ID

Yes

2004

No Excuse

Arkansas

Photo ID

No

2017

Excuse Required

California

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

Colorado

Non-photo ID

No

2003

Everyone

Connecticut

Non-photo ID

No

2012

Excuse Required

Delaware

Non-photo ID

No

1996

Excuse Required

D.C.

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

Florida

Photo ID

No

1977

No Excuse

Georgia

Photo ID

Yes

2005

No Excuse

Hawaii

Non-photo ID

No

1970

No Excuse

Idaho

Photo ID

No

2010

No Excuse

Illinois

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

Indiana

Photo ID

Yes

2005

Excuse Required

Iowa

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

Kansas

Photo ID

Yes

2012

No Excuse

Kentucky

Non-photo ID

No

1988

Excuse Required

Louisiana

Photo ID

No

2011

Excuse Required

Maine

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

Maryland

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

Massachusetts

No ID required

—

—

Excuse Required

Michigan

Photo ID

No

2016

Excuse Required

Minnesota

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

Mississippi

Photo ID

Yes

2011

Excuse Required

Missouri

Non-photo ID

No

2002

Excuse Required

Montana

Non-photo ID

No

2003

No Excuse

Nebraska

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

36

Nevada

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

New Hampshire

Non-photo ID

No

2012

Excuse Required

New Jersey

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

New Mexico

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

New York

No ID required

—

—

Excuse Required

North Carolina

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

North Dakota

Non-photo ID

Yes

2017

No Excuse

Ohio

Non-photo ID

Yes

2006

No Excuse

Oklahoma

Photo ID

No

2010

No Excuse

Oregon

No ID required

—

—

Everyone

Pennsylvania

No ID required

—

—

Excuse Required

Rhode Island

Photo ID

No

2011

No Excuse

South Carolina

Non-photo ID

No

2011

Excuse Required

South Dakota

Photo ID

No

2003

No Excuse

Tennessee

Photo ID

Yes

2013

Excuse Required

Texas

Photo ID

No

2017

Excuse Required

Utah

Non-photo ID

No

2009

No Excuse

Vermont

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

Virginia

Photo ID

Yes

2013

Excuse Required

Washington

No ID required

No

2008

Everyone

West Virginia

No ID required

—

—

Excuse Required

Wisconsin

Photo ID

Yes

2016

No Excuse

Wyoming

No ID required

—

—

No Excuse

Sources: National Council of State Legislatures (NCSL), and state government websites.
Notes: A state is classified as “requiring further proof” if the voter who receives a provisional ballot due to the lack of a valid ID
must take further steps to have their vote counted, such as providing proof of identity to their board of elections at a later date.
The year indicated in the third column is when the ID law that is currently in effect was either passed or last amended.
Voting by mail requires an excuse when a voter must sign an affidavit and/or provide further evidence that they are physically
imparied or unable to be at the polls during the election. Colorado and Washington conduct their elections entirely by mail.
Iowa and West Virginia passed voter ID laws that will take effect in 2018.
Missouri established a photo ID requirement starting in 2017.
In North Carolina and Pennsylvania, photo ID laws have been struck down in court and are currently not in effect.
North Dakota’s ID law is enacted but currently blocked by a court decision.
Washington is usually qualified as a no ID required state because the entire states votes by mail as the norm. However, each district
opens one voting booth and there is a non-strict non-photo ID requirement for those who use them. In the 2016 presidential election,
12,576 voters out of 3.36 million used the voting booths.

37

Population (+18) in 2010 Census: 824526
Population (+18) in Nov 2010 RI Database: 976180

5k

10k

Number of People
15k
20k
25k

30k

Figure A.1: State Population by Age (18+)

20

30

40

50
Age

US Census
Active RI Database

60

70

80

RI Database

Notes: The population of age 85 and over is collapsed. We have added one line with respect to 1 of active people in the RI Database.
We define people active if, in a 12 months window around November 2010, they have been enrolled in any social program or have
registered a car at the DMV, or had a child, or have been incarcerated, or had a valid driver’s license, or received a wage in RI. Social
programs considered are: Medicaid, SNAP, TANF, TDI, UI, Supplemental SSI, GPA, and CCAP.

38

Figure A.2: Turnout by Election and Gender
Entire Population

Midterm Elections

Presidential Elections

.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

.6

Presidential Elections

.6

Midterm Elections

Female

2006

2010

2014

2008 2012 2016

Lic

2006

2010

No Lic

2014

2008 2012 2016

Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.083
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: .026

No Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.021
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: .008

Male
Presidential Elections

0

.2

.4

.6

Midterm Elections

2006

2010

2014

2008 2012 2016

Lic

No Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.011
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: .005

Figure A.3: Turnout by Election and Age
Age 22−25

Midterm Elections

Presidential Elections

.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

.6

Presidential Elections

.6

Midterm Elections

Age 26−40

2006

2010

2014

2008 2012 2016

Lic

2006

2010

No Lic

2008 2012 2016

Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.065
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: .004

No Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.01
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: .016

Age 41−64

Age 65+
Midterm Elections

Presidential Elections

.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

.6

Presidential Elections

.6

Midterm Elections

2014

2006

2010

2014

Lic

2008 2012 2016

2006

No Lic

2010

2014

Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: .007
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: .02

2008 2012 2016

No Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.057
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: 0

39

Figure A.4: Turnout by Election, SES, and Race Subgroups
Low SES

Midterm Elections

Presidential Elections

.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

.6

Presidential Elections

.6

Midterm Elections

High SES

2006

2010

2014

2008 2012 2016

Lic

2006

2010

No Lic

2014

Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.011
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: .005

No Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.052
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: −.025

Minority

White
Midterm Elections

Presidential Elections

.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

.6

Presidential Elections

.6

Midterm Elections

2008 2012 2016

2006

2010

2014

Lic

2008 2012 2016

2006

No Lic

2010

2014

Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.031
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: .009

2008 2012 2016

No Lic

IV coefficient for turnout in presidential elections: −.028
IV coefficient for turnout in midterm elections: .009

40

Table A.2: Provisional Ballots by Election Year and Category
Election Year
2010

2012

2014

2016

926

2272

2046

4092

(1)

Provisional Ballots Given:

(2)

No Category Selected

0

0

38

298

(3)

No ID Presented

5

92

401

735

(4)

Not on the Precinct Voting List

907

2094

1524

2904

(5)
(6)

Voter Identity Challenged
Already Voted by Mail

2
12

9
77

11
72

15
140

(7)

% Provisional Ballots:

0.28%

0.53%

0.65%

0.95%

(8)

No Category Selected

0.00%

0.00%

0.01%

0.07%

(9)

No ID Presented

0.00%

0.02%

0.13%

0.17%

(10)

Not on the Precinct Voting List

0.27%

0.49%

0.48%

0.67%

(11)

Voter Identity Challenged

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

(12)

Already Voted by Mail

0.00%

0.02%

0.02%

0.03%

(13)

% Accepted Provisional Ballots:

59.61%

45.55%

51.71%

50.71%

(14)

No Category Selected

0.00%

0.00%

76.32%

67.45%

(15)

No ID Presented

80.00%

79.35%

96.01%

85.71%

(16)

Not on the Precinct Voting List

58.88%

42.12%

37.47%

38.02%

(17)

Voter Identity Challenged

100.00%

100.00%

36.36%

53.33%

(18)

Already Voted by Mail

100.00%

92.21%

95.83%

94.29%

Notes: We report the number of provisional ballots by election year and by category. The columns refer respectively to the four
general elections held from 2010 to 2016. Row 1 reports the total number of provisional ballots given. The poll worker is required to
specify the reason why the voter is casting a provisional ballot. Rows 2-6 report the number of provisional ballots by category. Rows
7-12 report provisional ballots as a percentage of all valid votes. Rows 13-18 report the percentage of provisional ballots accepted
by the corresponding Local Board of Canvassers.

41

Table A.3: Fraction of People who Obtained a Driver’s License after Photo ID Law
Presidential Elections - Population Without a License in 2012
% with License in 2016

% with License and Voted in 2016

People who voted in 2012

0.0637

0.0432

People who did not vote in 2012

0.0886

0.0187

Midterm Elections - Population Without a License in 2010
% with License in 2014

% with License and Voted in 2014

People who voted in 2010

0.0368

0.0233

Perople who did not vote in 2010

0.0901

0.0099

Notes: Table shows the percentage of people with a valid drivers license at the time of an election after the photo ID
law was enacted, and the percentage of people who had a driver’s license and voted in the same election. In each panel,
the first row only includes people who voted without a license before the photo ID law was enacted, and the second
row only includes people who did notv have a driver’s license at the time of that election.

Table A.4: Characteristics of Voters across OLS and Fixed Effects Specifications
Presidential Elections
OLS

Fixed Effects

Difference

P-value

1112731

830175

282556

-

% with Driver’s License

0.755

0.789

-0.034

0.00

% Registered

0.704

0.727

-0.023

0.00

% Voted

0.446

0.481

-0.035

0.00

% Female

0.489

0.493

-0.004

0.00

% Minority

0.088

0.084

0.004

0.00

% Low SES

0.352

0.349

0.003

0.00

% Democrats

0.313

0.326

-0.013

0.00

% Republicans

0.092

0.096

-0.004

0.00

% Independents

0.595

0.578

0.017

0.00

Average Age

47.19

48.24

-1.05

0.00

Identifying Voters

Notes: We do not report means for the groups of Male, White, and High SES voters because their complements are
already included in the table. We also report average age instead of percentages of people in each age group.

42

43

131085
0.920
(0.001)
438973

-0.076
(0.002)
0.828
(0.001)
130816
0.920
(0.001)
438705

F-statistic
No License
(1st Stage n.2)
F-statistic

IV Coeff

-0.045
(0.017)
0.463
(0.007)
404
0.854
(0.003)
11465

-0.272
(0.014)
0.447
(0.006)
473
0.868
(0.003)
11606

471
0.869
(0.003)
11054

0.448
(0.006)

-0.083
(0.013)

(2)
Young

-0.029
(0.004)
0.779
(0.002)
44256
0.899
(0.001)
85337

-0.150
(0.003)
0.757
(0.002)
37466
0.911
(0.001)
125089

35338
0.911
(0.001)
120721

0.757
(0.002)

-0.065
(0.003)

(3)
26-40

0.014
(0.004)
0.909
(0.001)
158066
0.961
(0.001)
402964

-0.052
(0.003)
0.898
(0.001)
154691
0.958
(0.001)
441591

136722
0.957
(0.001)
397314

0.898
(0.001)

-0.010
(0.003)

(4)
41-64

0.021
(0.005)
0.884
(0.001)
90217
0.931
(0.001)
161194

-0.049
(0.004)
0.892
(0.001)
137761
0.901
(0.001)
235005

145502
0.928
(0.001)
228571

0.888
(0.001)

0.007
(0.004)

(5)
Elderly

(8)
Minority

6432
0.873
(0.002)
21330

0.672
(0.003)

-0.052
(0.007)

-0.090
(0.002)
0.906
(0.001)
346137
0.958
(0.000)
688672

-0.032
(0.008)
0.672
(0.003)
6343
0.867
(0.002)
21146

Registration (Panel B)

346137
0.958
(0.000)
688672

0.906
(0.001)

-0.011
(0.002)

Turnout (Panel A)

(7)
High SES

-0.078
(0.004)
0.787
(0.002)
29502
0.914
(0.001)
109767

26275
0.907
(0.001)
101781

0.787
(0.002)

-0.031
(0.004)

(9)
White

-0.043
(0.005)
0.705
(0.002)
8807
0.868
(0.002)
32864

0.013
(0.003)
0.900
(0.001)
324742
0.952
(0.001)
564217

-

0.872
(0.003)

-

-0.036
(0.010)
0.680
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.005)
0.795
(0.002)
22619
0.915
(0.001)
85058

Voting|Registration(Panel C)

-0.079
(0.004)
0.708
(0.002)
19229
0.877
(0.001)
78356

18161
0.877
(0.001)
74003

0.708
(0.002)

-0.057
(0.003)

(6)
Low SES

Table A.5: First Stage Results for IV Regressions in Presidential Elections

-0.002
(0.004)
0.831
(0.001)
40715
0.926
(0.001)
148975

-0.067
(0.003)
0.812
(0.001)
42954
0.928
(0.001)
165033

45389
0.920
(0.001)
177719

0.812
(0.001)

-0.028
(0.003)

(10)
Female

0.010
(0.004)
0.829
(0.002)
29400
0.931
(0.001)
104216

-0.065
(0.003)
0.810
(0.001)
28298
0.928
(0.001)
105373

28323
0.928
(0.001)
105702

0.810
(0.001)

-0.021
(0.003)

(11)
Male

0.008
(0.004)
0.845
(0.001)
70428
0.924
(0.001)
178126

-0.064
(0.002)
0.843
(0.001)
81726
0.927
(0.001)
216656

73594
0.921
(0.001)
200565

0.844
(0.001)

-0.011
(0.004)

(12)
Dem

0.024
(0.007)
0.864
(0.003)
23388
0.935
(0.002)
64903

-0.096
(0.003)
0.862
(0.003)
25953
0.937
(0.002)
77224

21919
0.934
(0.002)
67313

0.862
(0.003)

-0.009
(0.007)

(13)
Rep

Notes: Each panel corresponds to one of our dependent variables and each column to a different subpopulation. In each panel, we first report the second stage coefficient on
the interaction between P ostt and N oLicenseit . This is α3 in equation 1. Then, we report the main coefficient of interest in each of the first stage regressions. These are the
coefficient on P ostt · N oLicense2011 when the dependent variable is P ostt · N oLicenseit (γ2 in equation 2) and the coefficient on N oLicensei,2011 when the dependent variable
is N oLicenseit (δ1 in equation 3). We also show the F statistics for all first stage equations. Some of them are missing because the robust var-cov matrix is not of full rank. Robust
standard errors are reported in parenthesis.

No License * Post
(1st Stage n.1)
F-statistic
No License
(1st Stage n.2)
F-statistic

IV Coeff

0.001
(0.002)
0.844
(0.001)
140260
0.925
(0.001)
378082

0.828
(0.001)

No License * Post
(1st Stage n.1)

No License * Post
(1st Stage n.1)
F-statistic
No License
(1st Stage n.2)
F-statistic

-0.027
(0.002)

IV Coeff

(1)
All

-0.010
(0.003)
0.838
(0.001)
66174
0.924
(0.001)
184248

-0.074
(0.003)
0.813
(0.001)
67476
0.917
(0.001)
251434

65499
0.917
(0.001)
246030

0.813
(0.001)

-0.034
(0.002)

(14)
Indep

44

232001
0.935
(0.001)
702999

-0.051
(0.002)
0.882
(0.001)
242983
0.937
(0.001)
764852

F-statistic
No License
(1st Stage n.2)
F-statistic

IV Coeff

0.067
(0.007)
0.735
(0.004)
3082
0.892
(0.003)
31597

-0.195
(0.008)
0.700
(0.004)
2711
0.918
(0.002)
28221

2791
0.918
(0.002)
28691

0.700
(0.004)

0.026
(0.005)

(2)
Young

0.058
(0.003)
0.856
(0.001)
129061
0.916
(0.001)
287037

-0.100
(0.003)
0.851
(0.001)
76547
0.928
(0.001)
228151

72304
0.928
(0.001)
210769

0.851
(0.001)

0.004
(0.002)

(3)
26-40

0.038
(0.004)
0.937
(0.001)
223996
0.950
(0.001)
597394

-0.021
(0.003)
0.932
(0.001)
263458
0.955
(0.001)
771149

242242
0.954
(0.001)
711097

0.932
(0.001)

0.016
(0.003)

(4)
41-64

0.030
(0.005)
0.914
(0.001)
131865
0.919
(0.001)
195080

-0.033
(0.003)
0.921
(0.001)
210397
0.910
(0.001)
308301

203351
0.924
(0.001)
305867

0.919
(0.001)

0.020
(0.004)

(5)
Elderly

(8)
Minority

-0.070
(0.002)
0.934
(0.001)
591910
0.944
(0.001)
1313821
0.936
(0.002)

-

-0.023
(0.007)
0.774
(0.003)

-0.032
(0.004)
0.854
(0.002)
41961
0.935
(0.001)
117609

46835
0.932
(0.001)
128628

0.935
(0.002)

0.854
(0.002)

0.009
(0.003)

(9)
White

0.774
(0.003)

-0.025
(0.004)

Registration (Panel B)

534013
0.944
(0.001)
1194187

0.934
(0.001)

0.005
(0.002)

Turnout (Panel A)

(7)
High SES

0.044
(0.005)
0.801
(0.002)
19731
0.903
(0.002)
43124

0.037
(0.002)
0.927
(0.001)
528816
0.941
(0.001)
1124062

-

0.932
(0.003)

-

0.009
(0.008)
0.776
(0.004)

0.042
(0.005)
0.863
(0.002)
34507
0.924
(0.002)
84842

Voting|Registration (Panel C)

-0.045
(0.004)
0.803
(0.001)
30863
0.927
(0.001)
90916

26471
0.927
(0.001)
78015

0.803
(0.001)

-0.000
(0.002)

(6)
Low SES

Table A.6: First Stage Results for IV Regressions in Midterm Elections

0.045
(0.003)
0.885
(0.001)
83236
0.930
(0.001)
138051

-0.043
(0.003)
0.871
(0.001)
81429
0.937
(0.001)
158406

76663
0.937
(0.001)
149249

0.871
(0.001)

0.009
(0.002)

(10)
Female

0.052
(0.003)
0.881
(0.001)
58491
0.926
(0.001)
97380

-0.038
(0.003)
0.868
(0.001)
44930
0.937
(0.001)
92817

43671
0.935
(0.001)
88508

0.868
(0.001)

0.008
(0.003)

(11)
Male

0.032
(0.003)
0.894
(0.001)
139324
0.934
(0.001)
413244

-0.052
(0.002)
0.889
(0.001)
127347
0.937
(0.001)
372126

129577
0.934
(0.001)
381105

0.890
(0.001)

0.005
(0.003)

(12)
Dem

0.055
(0.007)
0.904
(0.002)
48848
0.921
(0.002)
115154

-0.070
(0.004)
0.902
(0.002)
48575
0.924
(0.002)
119925

36763
0.922
(0.002)
90766

0.903
(0.002)

0.026
(0.006)

(13)
Rep

Notes: Each panel corresponds to one of our dependent variables and each column to a different subpopulation. In each panel, we first report the second stage coefficient on
the interaction between P ostt and N oLicenseit . This is α3 in equation 1. Then, we report the main coefficient of interest in each of the first stage regressions. These are the
coefficient on P ostt · N oLicense2011 when the dependent variable is P ostt · N oLicenseit (γ2 in equation 2) and the coefficient on N oLicensei,2011 when the dependent variable
is N oLicenseit (δ1 in equation 3). We also show the F statistics for all first stage equations. Some of them are missing because the robust var-cov matrix is not of full rank. Robust
standard errors are reported in parenthesis.

No License * Post
(1st Stage n.1)
F-statistic
No License
(1st Stage n.2)
F-statistic

IV Coeff

0.041
(0.002)
0.893
(0.001)
237590
0.929
(0.001)
662207

0.882
(0.001)

No License * Post
(1st Stage n.1)

No License * Post
(1st Stage n.1)
F-statistic
No License
(1st Stage n.2)
F-statistic

0.003
(0.002)

IV Coeff

(1)
All

0.046
(0.003)
0.889
(0.001)
146786
0.926
(0.001)
395629

-0.047
(0.002)
0.874
(0.001)
134851
0.937
(0.001)
413216

-

0.937
(0.001)

-

0.874
(0.001)

0.003
(0.002)

(14)
Indep

Table A.7: Estimated Impact of Photo ID Law Using Years 2006-2016 in Presidential Elections
(1)

(2)

(3)

Turnout

IV
Registration

Vote|Reg

All Voters

-0.045
(0.002)

-0.119
(0.002)

0.007
(0.002)

Young (22-25)

-0.082
(0.013)

-0.366
(0.014)

-0.012
(0.017)

Adult (26-40)

-0.068

-0.213

0.019

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

-0.019

-0.074

0.019

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.003)

-0.009
(0.004)
-0.053
(0.003)
-0.042
(0.002)
-0.064
(0.006)
-0.025
(0.004)
-0.039
(0.003)
-0.035
(0.003)
-0.035
(0.003)
-0.024
(0.007)
-0.043
(0.002)

-0.068
(0.003)
-0.113
(0.004)
-0.136
(0.001)
-0.073
(0.007)
-0.109
(0.004)
-0.105
(0.002)
-0.112
(0.003)
-0.094
(0.002)
-0.132
(0.003)
-0.121
(0.002)

0.011
(0.005)
-0.013
(0.005)
0.010
(0.002)
-0.013
(0.009)
0.030
(0.005)
0.008
(0.003)
0.027
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.026
(0.007)
0.012
(0.003)

Adult (41-64)
Elderly (65+)
Low SES
High SES
Minority
White
Female
Male
Democratics
Republicans
Independents

Notes: The table reports the α3 coefficient in equation 1 for the IV specification by voters subgroups in presidential elections. The
dependent variable is either being registered or voting. Controls are selected using Double LASSO. Robust standard errors are
reported in parenthesis.

45

Table A.8: Estimated Impact of Photo ID Law Using Years 2006-2016 in Midterm Elections
(1)

(2)

(3)

Turnout

IV
Registration

Vote|Reg

All Voters

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.102
(0.002)

0.071
(0.002)

Young (22-25)

0.023
(0.005)

-0.307
(0.007)

0.122
(0.007)

Adult (26-40)

0.007

-0.171

0.124

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.003)

0.009

-0.052

0.052

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.003)

0.001
(0.004)
0.006
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.002)
-0.025
(0.004)
0.021
(0.003)
0.010
(0.002)
0.006
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.003)
0.018
(0.006)
0.007
(0.002)

-0.049
(0.003)
-0.082
(0.003)
-0.125
(0.002)
-0.073
(0.006)
-0.075
(0.003)
-0.088
(0.002)
-0.096
(0.003)
-0.088
(0.002)
-0.114
(0.003)
-0.100
(0.002)

0.016
(0.004)
0.079
(0.004)
0.064
(0.002)
0.050
(0.008)
0.090
(0.004)
0.078
(0.003)
0.092
(0.003)
0.046
(0.003)
0.075
(0.006)
0.094
(0.003)

Adult (41-64)
Elderly (65+)
Low SES
High SES
Minority
White
Female
Male
Democratics
Republicans
Independents

Notes: The table reports the α3 coefficient in equation 1 for the IV specification by voters subgroups in midterm elections. The
dependent variable is either being registered or voting. Controls are selected using Double LASSO. Robust standard errors are
reported in parenthesis.

46

Table A.9: Clustering Standard Errors
(1)

(2)

IV
Clustered

SE:

Robust

All Voters

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.004)

Young (22-25)

-0.045
(0.017)

-0.045
(0.019)

Adult (26-40)

-0.029

-0.029

(0.004)

(0.006)

0.014

0.014

(0.004)

(0.004)

0.021
(0.005)
-0.043
(0.005)
0.013
(0.003)
-0.036
(0.010)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.004)
0.010
(0.004)
0.008
(0.004)
0.024
(0.007)
-0.010
(0.003)

0.021
(0.005)
-0.043
(0.006)
0.013
(0.004)
-0.036
(0.010)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.004)
0.010
(0.004)
0.008
(0.005)
0.024
(0.007)
-0.010
(0.004)

Adult (41-64)
Elderly (65+)
Low Income
High Income
Minority
White
Female
Male
Democrats
Republicans
Independents

Notes: The table reports the α3 coefficient in equation 1 for different model specifications in presidential and midterm elections.
The dependent variable is voting conditional on registration. Column 1 shows robust standard errors while column 2 shows standard
errors clustered at the precinct by driver’s license status level. Hence, the number of clusters is equal to twice the number of precincts.

47

Table A.10: Estimated Impact of the Photo ID Law Using CPS Data
(1)

(2)

Connecticut
and Mass.
Presidential Elections

Rhode Island

Turnout
Registration
Voted|Reg

-0.048

-0.052

(0.049)

(0.032)

-0.051

-0.050

(0.041)

(0.028)

-0.009

-0.007

(0.040)

(0.024)

Midterm Elections
Turnout
Registration
Voted|Reg

-0.026

0.033

(0.054)

(0.037)

-0.033

0.044

(0.047)

(0.033)

-0.026

-0.003

(0.059)

(0.040)

Notes: The table reports the α3 coefficient in equation 1 using CPS data. The dependent variable is either being registered or voting.
Column 1 includes only Rhode Island and column 2 pools Connecticut and Massachusetts. Robust standard errors are reported in
parenthesis.

48

Table A.11: Estimated Impact of the Photo ID Law Using Out Of State Data
(1)

(2)

(3)

Actual Driver’s License
Indicator

Predicted Driver’s License

Predicted Driver’s License
Indicator

Presidential Elections
Rhode Island
Allegheny County (PA)

-0.071

-0.209

-0.051

(0.003)

(0.015)

(0.003)

-

-0.013

-0.012

-

(0.006)

(0.001)

Notes: The table reports the α3 coefficient in equation 1 using Rhode Island and Allegheny County (Pennsylvania) data. We
restrict the analysis to the subsample of voters for which we know their race since this is a main predictor for driver’s license. The
dependent variable is voting conditional on registration. Column 1 uses the actual driver’s license indicator. Column 2 uses the
predicted driver’s license variable when including predictors selected by LASSO. Column 3 uses instead an optimal threshold to
convert the predicted driver’s license variable in a predicted driver’s license indicator. The threshold is selected using ROC analysis.
All controls in equation 1 are also selected by LASSO and include individual demograohics, party affiliation, and several block
group variables as well as their interactions. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.

49

Table A.12: Robustness Checks Using Additional Specifications in Presidential Elections
(1)

(2)

(3)

OLS

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Propensity Score
with LASSO
Turnout
Reg
Vote|Reg

Propensity Score
with Logit
Turnout
Reg
Vote|Reg

Turnout

Reg

Vote|Reg

All Voters

-0.047
(0.001)

-0.080
(0.001)

-0.017
(0.002)

-0.060
(0.009)

-0.087
(0.008)

-0.014
(0.008)

-0.048
(0.004)

-0.086
(0.004)

-0.021
(0.004)

Young (22-25)

-0.045
(0.005)

-0.136
(0.005)

-0.025
(0.006)

-0.051
(0.010)

-0.094
(0.009)

-0.058
(0.018)

-0.052
(0.009)

-0.120
(0.009)

-0.062
(0.013)

Adult (26-40)

-0.056
(0.002)
-0.042
(0.002)
-0.029
(0.003)
-0.039
(0.002)
-0.054
(0.002)
-0.037
(0.004)
-0.053
(0.003)
-0.042
(0.002)
-0.048
(0.002)
-0.057
(0.003)
-0.056
(0.005)
-0.036
(0.002)

-0.130
(0.003)
-0.072
(0.002)
-0.040
(0.003)
-0.046
(0.003)
-0.101
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.061
(0.003)
-0.052
(0.002)
-0.053
(0.002)
-0.049
(0.001)
-0.080
(0.003)
-0.082
(0.002)

-0.032
(0.003)
-0.012
(0.003)
-0.010
(0.004)
-0.043
(0.004)
-0.015
(0.002)
-0.026
(0.007)
-0.027
(0.004)
-0.023
(0.003)
-0.020
(0.003)
-0.023
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.005)
-0.012
(0.002)

-0.038
(0.004)
-0.047
(0.013)
-0.030
(0.006)
-0.031
(0.002)
-0.075
(0.011)
-0.037
(0.004)
-0.058
(0.003)
-0.041
(0.002)
-0.051
(0.002)
-0.044
(0.013)
-0.048
(0.012)
-0.037
(0.009)

-0.124
(0.004)
-0.074
(0.013)
-0.042
(0.005)
-0.034
(0.003)
-0.134
(0.010)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.060
(0.003)
-0.049
(0.002)
-0.057
(0.002)
-0.049
(0.004)
-0.093
(0.018)
-0.078
(0.009)

-0.047
(0.012)
-0.005
(0.006)
-0.009
(0.005)
-0.034
(0.004)
0.003
(0.016)
-0.027
(0.007)
-0.033
(0.004)
-0.028
(0.003)
-0.027
(0.003)
-0.016
(0.009)
-0.009
(0.010)
-0.019
(0.011)

-0.047
(0.006)
-0.042
(0.006)
-0.031
(0.011)
-0.027
(0.003)
-0.068
(0.007)
-0.035
(0.005)
-0.058
(0.004)
-0.044
(0.002)
-0.049
(0.002)
-0.058
(0.006)
-0.062
(0.010)
-0.032
(0.006)

-0.124
(0.006)
-0.080
(0.005)
-0.046
(0.009)
-0.038
(0.003)
-0.120
(0.006)
0.005
(0.005)
-0.061
(0.004)
-0.062
(0.002)
-0.064
(0.002)
-0.059
(0.003)
-0.089
(0.007)
-0.079
(0.006)

-0.032
(0.008)
-0.008
(0.005)
-0.017
(0.009)
-0.038
(0.004)
-0.032
(0.006)
-0.038
(0.007)
-0.039
(0.005)
-0.026
(0.003)
-0.022
(0.003)
-0.022
(0.006)
-0.014
(0.010)
-0.018
(0.007)

Adult (41-64)
Elderly (65+)
Low SES
High SES
Minority
White
Female
Male
Democratic
Republicans
Independents

Notes: The table reports the α3 coefficient in equation 1 for different model specifications by voter subgroups in presidential elections. In columns 1-3 we run OLS regressions. In columns 4-9 we use a propensity score reweighting. While in columns 4-6 we
predict probabilities of having a driver’s license using LASSO, in columns 7-9 we use logit. Since logit does not convergence for all
subgrops of voters, in columns 7-9 we reduced the number of variables included considering only levels of demographics instead of
p̂
their interactions as well. The weights are equal to 1 for voters without a driver’s license and 1−
for voters with a driver’s license.
p̂
Controls are selected using Double LASSO. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.

50

Table A.13: Robustness Checks Using Additional Specifications in Midterm Elections
(1)

(2)

(3)

OLS

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Propensity Score
with LASSO
Turnout
Reg
Vote|Reg

Propensity Score
with Logit
Turnout
Reg
Vote|Reg

Turnout

Reg

Vote|Reg

All Voters

0.005
(0.001)

-0.055
(0.001)

0.038
(0.002)

-0.014
(0.006)

-0.049
(0.004)

0.043
(0.004)

-0.006
(0.005)

-0.065
(0.004)

0.027
(0.007)

Young (22-25)

0.006
(0.003)

-0.125
(0.005)

0.028
(0.005)

-0.012
(0.024)

-0.074
(0.023)

0.056
(0.014)

0.015
(0.008)

-0.119
(0.010)

0.039
(0.014)

Adult (26-40)

-0.000
(0.002)
0.004
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.003)
0.011
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.003)
0.010
(0.002)
0.015
(0.002)
0.004
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.003)
0.005
(0.005)
0.012
(0.001)

-0.091
(0.003)
-0.048
(0.002)
-0.023
(0.003)
-0.022
(0.003)
-0.070
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.005)
-0.027
(0.003)
-0.033
(0.002)
-0.035
(0.002)
-0.042
(0.002)
-0.064
(0.003)
-0.056
(0.002)

0.040
(0.003)
0.032
(0.003)
0.005
(0.004)
0.036
(0.004)
0.030
(0.002)
0.030
(0.006)
0.044
(0.004)
0.041
(0.003)
0.039
(0.003)
0.022
(0.003)
0.039
(0.005)
0.052
(0.002)

-0.021
(0.011)
0.012
(0.017)
0.002
(0.006)
0.015
(0.002)
-0.020
(0.007)
-0.008
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)
0.009
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.012
(0.008)
-0.000
(0.035)
0.002
(0.004)

-0.070
(0.011)
-0.023
(0.017)
-0.022
(0.004)
-0.013
(0.003)
-0.074
(0.007)
-0.011
(0.005)
-0.026
(0.003)
-0.037
(0.002)
-0.042
(0.002)
-0.034
(0.005)
-0.065
(0.012)
-0.056
(0.004)

0.014
(0.019)
0.026
(0.008)
0.005
(0.006)
0.035
(0.004)
0.025
(0.008)
0.032
(0.007)
0.033
(0.004)
0.033
(0.003)
0.031
(0.003)
0.013
(0.007)
0.023
(0.011)
0.043
(0.043)

-0.003
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.006)
0.010
(0.014)
0.017
(0.002)
-0.025
(0.007)
-0.008
(0.004)
0.000
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.008
(0.002)
-0.018
(0.007)
-0.018
(0.013)
0.007
(0.007)

-0.082
(0.006)
-0.058
(0.005)
-0.031
(0.011)
-0.019
(0.003)
-0.082
(0.006)
0.000
(0.006)
-0.034
(0.004)
-0.048
(0.003)
-0.050
(0.003)
-0.046
(0.004)
-0.069
(0.010)
-0.060
(0.007)

0.021
(0.009)
0.032
(0.006)
0.012
(0.012)
0.023
(0.004)
0.011
(0.007)
0.021
(0.008)
0.028
(0.006)
0.023
(0.003)
0.030
(0.003)
0.012
(0.008)
0.024
(0.014)
0.049
(0.013)

Adult (41-64)
Elderly (65+)
Low SES
High SES
Minority
White
Female
Male
Democratic
Republicans
Independents

Notes: The table reports the α3 coefficient in equation 1 for different model specifications by voter subgroups in midterm elections.
In columns 1-3 we run OLS regressions. In columns 4-9 we use a propensity score reweighting. While in columns 4-6 we predict
probabilities of having a driver’s license using LASSO, in columns 7-9 we use logit. Since logit does not convergence for all
subgrops of voters, in columns 7-9 we reduced the number of variables included considering only levels of demographics instead of
p̂
their interactions as well. The weights are equal to 1 for voters without a driver’s license and 1−
for voters with a driver’s license.
p̂
Controls are selected using Double LASSO. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.

51

Table A.14: Estimated Impact of the Photo ID Law on Predicted Voting by Subgroups Presidential Elections
(1)

(2)

(3)

Dep. Var.:

Turnout

IV
Registration

Vote|Reg

Young (22-25)

-0.055
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.000)
0.002
(0.001)
0.007
(0.001)
0.006
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.002
(0.000)
-0.003
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.001)
0.003
(0.000)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.000)

-0.063
(0.003)
-0.006
(0.001)
0.004
(0.001)
0.006
(0.001)
0.015
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.000)
0.007
(0.001)
0.004
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.004
(0.000)
0.001
(0.000)
-0.003
(0.001)

-0.031
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.000)
0.001
(0.000)
0.010
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.001
(0.000)
0.003
(0.000)
-0.009
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.000)
-0.003
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.000)

Adult (26-40)
Adult (41-64)
Elderly (65+)
Low SES
High SES
Minority
White
Female
Male
Democratics
Republicans
Independents

Notes: The depdendent variable is the predicted probability of voting or registering to vote. We report the α3 coefficient in equation
1 for the IV specification by voters subgroups in presidential elections. Controls are selected using Double LASSO. Robust standard
errors are reported in parenthesis.

52

Table A.15: Estimated Impact of the Photo ID Law on Predicted Voting by Subgroups in Midterm Elections
(1)

(2)

(3)

Dep. Var.:

Turnout

IV
Registration

Vote|Reg

Young (22-25)

-0.006
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.003
(0.001)
-0.005
(0.001)
-0.006
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.000)
-0.011
(0.001)
-0.007
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.000)
0.001
(0.000)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.005
(0.000)

-0.030
(0.002)
0.001
(0.000)
0.003
(0.001)
-0.007
(0.001)
-0.003
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.000)
0.014
(0.001)
-0.008
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.000)
0.000
(0.001)
0.003
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.005
(0.000)
0.002
(0.001)
-0.005
(0.000)
0.002
(0.000)
-0.009
(0.000)
-0.011
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.000)

Adult (26-40)
Adult (41-64)
Elderly (65+)
Low SES
High SES
Minority
White
Female
Male
Democratics
Republicans
Independents

Notes: The depdendent variable is the predicted probability of voting or registering to vote. We report the α3 coefficient in equation
1 for the IV specification by voters subgroups in midterm elections. Controls are selected using Double LASSO. Robust standard
errors are reported in parenthesis.

53

0

50

Frequency
100
150

200

250

Figure A.5: Provisional Ballots Given by Precinct

0

.02

.04
.06
Percentage of Ballots at the Polls

.08

.1

Notes: This graph shows the distribution by precinct of the fraction of provisional ballots given. We drop 5 precincts where the
fraction of provisional ballots is higher than 10%. The bin width is 0.1%.

0

50

Frequency
100
150

200

250

Figure A.6: Provisional Ballots Accepted by Precinct

0

.2

.4
.6
Percentage of Provisional Ballots

.8

1

Notes: This graph shows the distribution by precinct of the fraction of provisional ballots accepted. We drop 5 precincts where the
fraction of provisional ballots is higher than 10%. The bin width is 5%.

54

Figure A.7: Correlation Between Impact of Photo ID Law and Residualized Provisional Ballots Given

% Voted | Registered
0
.1

.2

by Congressional District

−.1

Corr: −.079

−.015
−.01
−.005
0
.005
.01
Residualized Strictness: Fraction of Provisional Ballots Given in 2012
Estimated Coefficient

WLS

Notes: This graph shows the correlation (weighted by district population) between residualized district strictness and the estimated
effect of the law at the district level. The coefficients plotted correspond to α3 in equation 1. We run IV regressions by district with
controls selected by Double LASSO. In all these regressions the dependent variable is voting conditional on registration. This graph
drops 1 case for which the fraction of provisional ballots given is higher than 5%. The number of districts is 75.

55

Figure A.8: Correlation Between Impact of Photo ID Law and Residualized Provisional Ballots Accepted
.2

by Congressional District

−.1

% Voted | Registered
0
.1

Corr: .043

−.4
−.2
0
.2
.4
Residualized Strictness: Fraction of Provisional Ballots Accepted in 2012
Estimated Coefficient

WLS

Notes: This graph shows the correlation (weighted by district population) between residualized district strictness and the estimated
effect of the law at the district level. The coefficients plotted correspond to α3 in equation 1. We run IV regressions by district with
controls selected by Double LASSO. In all these regressions the dependent variable is voting conditional on registration. This graph
drops 1 case for which the fraction of provisional ballots given is higher than 5%. The number of districts is 75.

56

57
0.486
0.489
0.503
0.445
0.486

0.485
0.488
0.502
0.447
0.486

0.637

0.652
0.600

0.638
0.634

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.680

0.693
0.619

0.676
0.689

0.533
0.561
0.556
0.471
0.541

0.528
0.553
0.550
0.466
0.535

2014 Election (Panel B)

0.677

0.691
0.614

0.673
0.690

0.382
0.402
0.407
0.325
0.388

0.533

0.553
0.466

0.531
0.538

0.382
0.402
0.405
0.328
0.388

0.544

0.563
0.484

0.543
0.548

Registered Republicans Registered Independents
Predicted
Actual
Predicted
Actual
2016 Election (Panel A)

(3)

Notes: The table reports predicted and actual voting conditional on registration. Rows split the sample according to whether state representatives or senators voted for or against the
photo ID law. Predictions come from coefficients estimated with IV regressions. The counterfactual is the predicted value when α̂3 is set to zero. Panel A shows the counterfactual
results for 2016 (presidential elections). Panel B shows the counterfactual results for 2014 (midterm elections). Controls are selected using Double LASSO.

All

Senator Voted

Representative Voted

Yes
No
Yes
No

0.627

0.645
0.581

Yes
No

Senator Voted

All

0.628
0.624

Yes
No

Representative Voted

Districts where:

(2)

Registered Democrats
Predicted
Actual

(1)

Table A.16: Predicted and Average Voting Conditional on Registration by Party Affiliation

Table A.17: Mail Ballots by Election Year, Address and Category
Election Year
2012

2014

2016

(1)

Total Forms Sent

28837

18878

45062

(2)

Total Ballots Received

26081

16571

41911

(3)

Emergency Ballots

5253

4685

14520

(4)

From In-State

20952

15547

35497

(5)
(6)

From Other States
From Abroad

3697
786

894
96

4945
1345

(7)

From Impaired Voters

4850

3249

6237

(8)

From Confined Voters

2429

1850

2824

(9)

From Absent Voters

1317

189

1917

(10)

No Excuse

17485

11283

30933

Notes: We report the number of mail votes by election year, by address and by category. The columns refer respectively to the three
general elections held from 2012 to 2016. Row 1 is the total number of mail ballots requested to the Board of Election. Row 2 is the
number of mail ballots casted by voters. Row 3 are mail ballots requested within 20 days of the election. Rows 4-6 are respectively
mail ballots sent to either in-state addresses, other US states, or abroad. We exclude from rows 4-6 124 mail ballots for which address
data are inconsistent or incomplete. Rows 7-10 classify mail ballots by the reason given by the voter who requested it. In 7 the voter
is incapacitated or impaired to go to the polls; in 8 the voter is confined to a health care institution; in 9 the voter is absent due to
employment or military service; and in 10 the voter is unable to go to the polls on election day without further excuse.

0

% of valid votes
.05
.1

.15

Figure A.9: Mail Ballots by Year, Address and License Status

Lic

No Lic

Lic

2012

No Lic

Lic

2014
Abroad
In−State

2016
NA
Other US States

58

No Lic

B

Online Appendix: Controls Selected by LASSO

In this paper, we use the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) to deal with the high
dimensionality of our data. LASSO is a regression method that selects variables by penalizing the size of
their coefficients. LASSO is a systematic method to select variables that provide the strongest predictive fit by
shrinking the coefficients on weak explanatory variable coefficients towards zero (Tibshirani 1996; Hastie et
al. 2009; Belloni et al. 2014). In all our specifications, LASSO picks from a set that includes the following:
a third degree polynomial in age, dummies on sex, race, incarceration, and participation in social programs
(e.g. SNAP, TANF, Medicaid, SSI, CCAP and GPA), and all possible interaction terms.
The set of controls selected by Double LASSO for the estimation of Table 2 with turnout as the outcome
variable are:
• Age * Incarcerated

• Male * Low SES

• Age * Hispanic

• Race Null * Low SES

• Age * Race Null

• Race Other

• Age * Black

• Male * Hispanic

• Incarcerated

• Race Other * Low SES

• Low SES

• Age

• Age * Low SES

• Age * Female

• Female * Race Other

• Age * Male

• Black * Low SES

• Black

• Hispanic * Low SES

• Low SES

• Male

• Female

• Male * Black

• Female * Hispanic

• Low SES * Incarcerated

• Hispanic

• Male * Race Null

• Race Null

59

