                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     EMPLOYMENT STRUCTURE AND THE RISE OF THE MODERN TAX SYSTEM

                                        Anders Jensen

                                      Working Paper 25502
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25502


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




I thank Oriana Bandiera, Tim Besley, Henrik Kleven and Emmanuel Saez for relentless support
on this project. I am grateful to David Autor, Alan Auerbach, Pierre Bachas, Michael Best, Lucie
Gadenne, Francois Gerard, Michael Keen, Asim Khwaja, Wojciech Kopczuk, Camille Landais,
Joana Naritomi, Paul Niehaus, Ben Olken, Torsten Persson, Jim Poterba, Dina Pomeranz, Roger
Gordon, Joel Slemrod, Johannes Spinnewijn, Stefanie Stantcheva, John Van Reenen, Hans-
Joachim Voth, Danny Yagan, Gabriel Zucman, as well as seminar participants at Chicago Harris,
Columbia, Harvard, HKS, IIES, MIT, Northwestern, Stanford, Toulouse School of Economics,
UC Berkeley, UC San Diego, UCLA, University of Michigan, University of Zurich, Warwick,
Yale, and ZEW, for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Anders Jensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Employment Structure and the Rise of the Modern Tax System
Anders Jensen
NBER Working Paper No. 25502
January 2019
JEL No. D31,H11,H21,H24,H26,H71,O15,O22

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies how the transition from self-employment to employee-jobs over the long run
of development explains growth in income tax capacity. I construct a new database which covers
100 household surveys across countries at different income levels and 140 years of historical data
within the US (1870-2010). Using these data, I first establish four new stylized facts: 1) within
country, the share of employees increases over the income distribution, and increases at all levels
of income as a country develops; 2) the income tax exemption threshold moves down the income
distribution as a country develops, tracking employee growth; 3) the employee share above the
tax exemption threshold is maximized and remains constantly high; 4) movements in the tax
exemption threshold account for the observed variation in tax collection across development.
These findings are consistent with a model where a high employee share is a necessary condition
for effective taxation and where the rise in income covered by information trails through
increases in employee shares drives expansion of the income tax base. To provide a causal
estimate of the impact of employee share on the exemption threshold, I study a state-led US
development program implemented in the 1950s-60s which shifted up the level of employee
share. The identification strategy exploits within-state changes in court-litigation status which
generates quasi-experimental variation in the effective implementation date of the program. I
find that the exogenous increase in employee share is associated with an expansion of the state
income tax base and an increase in state income tax revenue.


Anders Jensen
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
anders_jensen@hks.harvard.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25502
1   Introduction

Tax capacity grows as economies develop. This is true across today’s developing countries, and

historically within today’s advanced countries. In this paper, I show how the transition from self-

employment to employee-jobs explains growth in tax capacity. This increase in employee share is a

defining characteristic of changes to employment structure over the long run of development. Micro

evidence shows that transitions into employee-jobs are associated with improved compliance at the

individual level by creating third-party information trails (Kleven et al., 2011), but this evidence has

little to say about state tax capacity over the long run. Macro evidence provides correlations between

employee shares and tax take (Besley & Persson, 2014; Kleven, Kreiner & Saez, 2016), but this evi-

dence lacks clearly identified empirical channels. To build a bridge between the micro and macro con-

tributions, I propose a research design which combines descriptive evidence and quasi-experimental

evidence. In this design, I empirically identify a new channel through which employee share impacts

tax capacity along the development path. To implement the design, I construct a novel data-set with

micro-data for 100 countries at all levels of development and 140 years within the US (1870-2010).

    The novel channel explains decreases in the income tax exemption threshold through increases in

employee share that occur gradually further down the income distribution. To motivate the channel,

Panel A of Figure 1 shows four countries at increasing levels of development [India, Peru, South

Africa, US]. Within each country, it plots employee shares of employment across deciles of the income

distribution and the location of the exemption threshold above which earned income becomes liable

for taxes. In India, the exemption threshold is located in the top percentiles, the only part where

employee share is high. As countries reach higher levels of development, the threshold gradually

moves down as the employee-share goes up in deciles further down the income distribution. This

close co-movement is also observed within the US over time (Panel B, Fig 1). This paper explains the

co-movements as the impact of increases in employee share on the exemption threshold.

    I measure the size of the tax base as the share of the income distribution that lies above the exemp-

tion threshold. Figure 1 shows that the income tax base in the US is 45 times larger than in India (Panel

A). This large variation contrasts with the absence of variation in the income tax rate over develop-

ment (Figure 5), and suggests a potentially important role for the tax base in explaining the significant

variation observed in tax collection across development. In fact, I find that after controlling for the size

of the base, there is no remaining association between tax collection and development. In addition to



                                                     1
the channel identified in this paper, this general novel finding suggests that the tax base may be an

important channel through which other fundamental drivers of tax capacity impact tax collection.1

       My employment classification is based on whether the work-type generates derivative informa-

tion trails relevant for income tax enforcement. The existence of information trails, and the reporting

of such information directly to the tax authority by third-parties, has been found to dramatically im-

prove tax compliance in both developed and developing countries, and for both direct taxes (Kleven

et al., 2011; Best, 2014) and indirect taxes (Pomeranz, 2015; Naritomi, 2018). Theoretical work (Kleven,

Kreiner & Saez, 2016; Gordon & Li, 2009) has provided micro-foundations for the enforcement suc-

cess of information trails and third-party reporting. I classify as self-employed all work-types that do

not generate such derivative information trails for individual income taxation: own account workers,

family workers, unincorporated household enterprises, casual wage-laborers, and employers.

       I construct a micro database on employment structure and individual income using nationally

representative household surveys from 100 countries and within the US (1870-2010). Importantly, the

surveys capture all work-types that cover the production boundaries of the U.N. System of National

Accounts and all sources of income that can be subject to income tax. The selection of surveys ensures

all data is comparable across countries and within countries over time, with detailed dis-aggregation

of employment structure over the full income distribution of the economically active workforce.

       In a first part of the paper, I use the micro-database to provide four new stylized facts on employ-

ment and tax structures along the development path. Stylized fact #1 shows that within country the

employee-share of the economically active workforce is increasing through the income distribution,

and over development the employee-share is increasing gradually further down the income distri-

bution. Stylized fact #2 shows that the exemption threshold gradually moves down the income dis-

tribution, tracking increases in employee-share locally to its left. Stylized fact #3 documents that the

exemption threshold is systematically located such that it maximizes the employee-share above the

threshold, producing a tax base that is constantly saturated in its employee-composition. Stylized

facts #1-#3 are remarkably similar in both trends and levels when I compare US historical profiles

to profiles of current countries at similar levels of development. Stylized fact #4 shows a close asso-

ciation between size of tax base and level of income tax collection (relative to GDP), at all levels of

development. Residual collection, after controlling for size of base, is uncorrelated with development.
   1
    The location of the exemption threshold directly addresses the extensive margin of compliance of moving workers into
the tax base. As such, the importance of the base is consistent with a development policy literature which emphasizes the
extensive margin of compliance as an important driver of tax capacity (Keen, 2012).



                                                           2
   These stylized facts are consistent with employee-share proxying for enforceable income and in-

creases in employee-shares further down the income distribution causing tax collection to grow through

expansions of the enforceable tax base. I show that these facts also hold within Mexico over the long-

run (1960-2010), and are not confounded by redistributive or sectoral targeting. In a second part of the

paper, I complement this descriptive evidence with an identified estimate of the impact of employee-

share on tax base and collection. I study the impacts of a previously unexploited historical US state-led

development program, the Industrial Development Bonds (IDB) program, implemented in the 1950-

1960s. IDB used revenue-neutral debt-funding to expand industry in areas characterized by under-

employment among self-employed, acting as a positive level-shifter in employee-share.

   The identification strategy exploits the institutional details of IDB implementation. In particular,

the unusual funding scheme meant that the state House had to vote in a statute or constitutional

provision that exempted IDB from the ’public purpose’ provision, whereby a local government may

not enter the debt market for an otherwise private purpose. But given the lack of historical precedent,

this amendment, and by extension the IDB program, was considered legally uncertain until the state

supreme court would uphold its constitutionality in a leading court case. In 40% of IDB states, this

legal uncertainty persisted for more than 10 years. I show that the upholding decision effectively

acted as a binding constraint on IDB issuance. I use changes in court litigation status as the source of

identifying variation. I compare changes in outcomes before and after the upholding event to changes

before and after the vote-in event within the same state. My estimation is helped by the significant

cross-state variation in timing of upholding, and in the length of the vote-uphold lag. I provide two

pieces of evidence to support the identifying assumption that, conditional on vote-in, the timing of

the upholding event is uncorrelated with the error term. First, I find that the only determinants of the

time-lag are time-invariant, state-specific historical characteristics which previous studies have found

to impact the speed of supreme court litigation. Second, I confirm that the regression results are driven

by sharp upon-impact changes around the upholding event, with a clear break from a stable pre-trend.

   In a regression model that limits the estimation to short-run impacts, I find that the upholding de-

cision led to a significant transition from self-employment into employee-jobs, and an expansion of the

state income tax base and collection. I provide several pieces of evidence to support the interpretation

that the upholding event impacted the public finance outcomes directly through the employee-share.

First, I graphically show that the expansion of the base occurs with a short and precise lag to the in-

crease in the employee-share. Second, I find that the increase in employee-share occurred in deciles


                                                   3
below and locally to the left of the state exemption threshold. Third, I find no effect on collection in a

sub-group where there was an impact on employee-share but no impact on the tax base. Fourth, I find

no direct impacts of upholding on confounding determinants of tax base and collection.

   I shed light on the underlying mechanism in a heterogeneity analysis which exploits the staggered

implementation of co-operation agreements between individual state tax administrations and IRS. I

show that there is no employee-share impact on tax base expansions in the subset of IDB states that

effectively fully relied on the IRS for state tax enforcement purposes by the time of the upholding

event. This is consistent with the interpretation that fiscal administrative costs matter for base expan-

sion decisions, and that this cost depends on the enforceability differences between self-employed and

employees on the incremental base. This mechanism result increases the external validity of the US

identified estimate for the development context, where administrative costs are an important deter-

minant of tax policy (IMF, 2015). I further show that the levels of administrative costs are comparable

between US state tax administrations in the IDB period and national tax administrations in devel-

oping countries. External validity is also improved by the finding that the upholding event led to a

gradual shift leftward of the employee-share profile in the income-distribution and a local decrease in

the threshold, leaving the employee-share on the tax base saturated. These identified changes closely

replicate the descriptive changes documented in stylized facts #1-#3 along the development path.

   In a final section of the paper, I model the reform decision to incrementally lower the exemption

threshold. I provide formulae for the optimal location of the exemption threshold under different

objective functions, thereby contributing to the optimal tax literature which has hitherto focused on

tax rates. The full set of results are consistent with a simple revenue maximizing objective function and

an administrative enforcement cost of base expansion that depends negatively on the employee-share

on the incremental base. The theory implies that the elasticity of the base with respect to employee-

share below the threshold is a meaningful summary measure for the impact of employment structure.

I calculate this elasticity using the identified estimate in the US states section, and bring it to the

observed cross-country variation in employment structure. The estimated elasticity can account for

29.9% of the observed variation in size of base between low-income and high-income countries.

   The following section discusses related literature. Section III describes the micro database and

provides new stylized facts. Section IV provides an identified estimate of employee share on tax base

expansions. Section V provides a model to rationalize the results and quantify the employee-share

channel in the tax-base variation across countries. Section VI discusses implications and concludes.


                                                    4
2        Related literature

This paper is related to the micro and macro studies on information trails as a determinant of individ-

ual compliance and state tax capacity. Kleven, Kreiner & Saez (2016) show theoretically that collusive

behavior between employees and the employer is hard to sustain when there exist business records,

making third-party information reporting by firms a powerful tool of tax enforcement. Gordon & Li

(2009) show how information reporting by financial institutions can also improve tax enforcement.

These models are supported by empirical studies in both developed and developing countries that

show positive tax enforcement effects of information reporting. Kleven et al. (2011) use Danish ran-

dom audits to show that increases in information coverage associated with employee jobs dramatically

improves income tax enforcement. Best (2014) shows that third-party reporting also limits income tax

evasion in Pakistan. In Chile, Pomeranz (2015) shows that randomized audit threats have less impact

on transactions that are subject to double reporting from both buyers and sellers, indicating its eva-

sion deterrence effect. Bachas & Soto (2018) and Best et al. (2015) show, respectively in Costa Rica

and Pakistan, that taxes based on turnover can be a useful alternative to corporate profit taxation be-

cause sales are easier to observe than profits. Naritomi (2018) uses a Brazilian reform to find positive

enforcement effects of an increased availability of third-party information. Brockmeyer & Hernandez

(2018) find positive revenue impacts from a reform in Costa Rica which increased the withholding

rate while holding the reporting requirement constant. Carillo, Pomeranz and Singhal (2017) show

limits to third-party information effectiveness when taxpayers can adjust on non verifiable margins.

Tazhitdinova (2018) finds in the US context that even basic self-reporting requirements are effective

at reducing income tax evasion. This paper provides micro evidence on changes in information trails

related to employment structure and its impacts on tax structure along the full development path.

        The paper also relates to the literature on the determinants of government growth over develop-

ment (Besley and Persson, 2011; 2014).2 Demand side determinants include ’Wagner’s law’ whereby

public goods have a income elasticity above one (see e.g. Musgrave, 1966); and, democratization and

increased political power of the poor (Acemoglu & Robinson, 2000). This paper is more closely related

to supply side studies that show how changes in economic structure impact the capacity to supply

tax revenue (Bird & Oldman, 1964; Hinrichs, 1966; Kleven, Kreiner & Saez, 2016). I contribute by pro-

viding descriptive and identified evidence on a new tax policy channel, the income tax base, through

which economic structure affects the capacity to raise taxes.
    2
        See also Cage and Gadenne (2015) for a comprehensive study of revenues trends in developing and developed countries.


                                                               5
    The paper is related to the literature on changes in employment structure over development. Cur-

rent evidence focuses on the cross-country stylized fact that self-employment declines over devel-

opment (Banerjee & Duflo, 2007; Gollin, 2008 La Porta & Shleifer, 2014) This paper provides new

evidence on the decline of self employment over development in larger cross-country and longer time

series samples and at dis-aggregated levels over a country’s income distribution. Using a previously

unexploited US development program, I also contribute with identified evidence on the impact of

a place-based program on the transition out of self-employment. My self-employment category is

closely related to the informality concepts used in ILO (2009) and La Porta & Shleifer (2014).3 Thus,

this paper complements the macro literature on informality and development, with micro based evi-

dence on changes to informality over the income distribution along the development path. This paper

is more generally related to studies of informality’s impacts on efficiency and equity of public finances,

including Gerard & Gonzaga (2018) and Olken & Singhal (2011). Finally, this paper’s methodology re-

lates to studies of macro economic changes using newly constructed micro evidence (Gollin, Lagakos

& Waugh, 2013; Bicks, Fuchs-Schundeln & Lagakos, 2018; Feng, Lagakos, & Rauch, 2018).

    Finally, this paper relates to long-run studies of tax systems and development in US states. Baicker,

Clemens & Singhal (2012) document the growth of state budgets in the postwar period. Akcigit,

Grigsby, Nicholas and Stantcheva (2018) investigate the impacts of personal and corporate income

taxes on innovation over the 20th century. Serrato & Zidar (2018) study trends in state corporate tax

systems and their impacts on state tax collections, while Serrato & Zidar (2016) estimate the incidence

of changes to state corporate tax rates and apportionment rules. Dincecco & Troiano (2015) study the

revenue impacts of the introduction of the state individual income tax, and Troiano (2017) focuses

on the revenue and audit impacts of cooperation agreements between state administrations and the

IRS. This paper provides novel evidence on the determinants of state income tax base expansions and

its revenue impacts. Place-based economic development programs represent a significant share of

current US state and local government expenditure (Kline & Moretti, 2014). This paper contributes by

providing evidence on a previously unstudied historical place-based, state-led development program.

The IDB program sought to attract capital to specifically designated rural areas for the limited purpose

of industrial expansion, using revenue-neutral funding schemes. Relative to previously studied US

development programs, including the Tennessee Valley Authority (Kline & Moretti, 2013), IDB was

distinct in its channel of impact, its narrowness of scope, and its strong geographical targeting.
   3
     My classification of job-types as self-employed is also empirically close to the ’hard-to-tax’ groups, which was first
defined by Musgrave (1981).


                                                            6
3       Descriptive evidence on employment structure and tax structure along
        the development path

I first describe the survey data underlying the cross-country and US historical analysis. Next, I outline

the definitions and the methodology used to construct the key variables. I then provide novel stylized

facts on employment and tax structure along the development path.




3.1       Data


The micro database is constructed from nationally representative household surveys. The key advan-

tage of using household surveys, as opposed to firm surveys, is that our measure of employment is

not restricted to activities which generate a wage, but also include self-employed as well as family

workers. Relative to administrative data, the household surveys present the advantage of observing

income along the full income distribution, independently of the income tax exemption threshold.

        The database is limited to nationally representative household surveys which cover all types of

employment and provide continuous measures of total income. I was able to collect such data in 100

countries with a population of at least one million. The different parts of the worldwide income distri-

bution are almost equally represented, with 20 % from low-income countries; 28% from lower-middle

income countries; 21% from upper-middle income countries; and, 31% from high-income countries.4

For 44 countries, I was able to draw on harmonized data-sets, comprised of Luxembourg Income

Study (LIS, 36 countries), Economic Research Forum Micro Data Catalog (ERF; 6 countries), and Inter-

national Public-Use Micro-data Project (IPUMS, 2 countries). For the remaining 56 countries, which

are exclusively in the low-income and middle-income groups, I sourced the data directly from the

country’s national statistical agency. The database contains 93 living conditions surveys, 5 labor force

surveys, and 2 censuses. When multiple years were available, I choose the year closest to 2014; exact

years, data-sources, and sample sizes for all households are given in Appendix A.1.

        I construct the within country dimension of the database by combining new and previously used

micro sources from the US. I collect data between 1950 and 2010 from Census micro-data extracted

via IPUMS USA. Before 1950, the Census did not record work type and continuous measures of in-
    4
    I calculate the income classification of a country in the year for which I have survey data using the historical World Bank
Classification data.




                                                              7
come at the individual level. I use the 1935-36 Study of Consumer Purchases, which was considered

the precursor to the Census methodology of data on income at the individual level. 300,000 house-

holds were interviewed based on sampling units chosen to represent the “demographic, regional, and

economic characteristics of the United States” (ICPSR, 2009). Importantly, both the work type and in-

come categories in the 1935 survey are consistent with the later Census-based definitions. All national

surveys carried out in the late 19th century and the end of the 1920s focused on sampling the work

and living conditions of employed wage-earners. To construct a historical pre-1900 profile of employ-

ment structure, I use data resulting from a collective effort between Williamson & Lindert (2016) and

IPUMS USA. Williamson & Lindert use local tax assessments and occupational directories for ’regis-

tered occupations’ and local censuses for ’unregistered occupations’. Labor force counts using the 1

percent US Census sample were provided specifically for the data-project by IPUMS USA. I use the

Williamson & Lindert computations of gross earned income, which include wage income, farm in-

come and non-farm business income. However, unlike the surveys from 1935 onward which contain

harmonized employee and self-employed variables, the 1870 data required building types of employ-

ment categories. I use a text search algorithm which exploits the highly detailed work titles from the

enumerator instructions to the 1870 Census in order to construct self-employed and employee cate-

gories. Further details on the US historical data are in Appendix A.1.




3.2    Definitions and methodology


The aim of this section is to construct a distributional profile of employment structure in the individual

gross income distribution, and relate distributional employment changes to changes in the size of

the income tax base across countries and over time. In all surveys, I follow the same procedure to

construct the income distribution. I limit the sample to the economically active population, following

the definition of employment from U.N. System of National Accounts (SNA). This definition has been

used in recent cross-country studies of hours worked (Bicks et al., 2018) and unemployment (Feng et

al., 2018). To calculate individual gross income, I use a broad set of categories that are included in the

determination of individual income tax liability in countries around the world: employment income,

self-employment income, capital income, and miscellaneous income.5 I exclude two important sources
   5
    Not all countries tax all these sources of income on the individual income tax. I nevertheless maintain this broad mea-
sure to ensure comparability of the income distribution across all countries. As an alternative, I can construct the income



                                                            8
of income: social transfers, and non-monetary income. Social transfers are excluded because they

are not subject to income tax. In contrast, certain non-monetary payments in a work-setting can be

subjected to income tax, but I exclude this income source simply because I cannot consistently measure

it across all surveys.6 In 7 countries, I cannot calculate gross individual income with precision. In those

cases, I proxy for gross income using expenditure.7

    I code employment as self-employed versus employee on the basis of whether the work-type gen-

erates derivative information trails that can be used for income tax enforcement. Third-party coverage

of employee earnings through employer reporting and withholding has been found in both devel-

oped and developing countries to significantly improve income tax enforcement (Kleven et al., 2011;

Best, 2014).8 In developing countries where third-party coverage is limited, such information includes

paper trails generated by contractual arrangements such as written labor contracts. This information-

trails definition of employees is conceptually consistent with the contractual definition of employees

in Banerjee & Newman (1993). Based on this definition, I classify as self-employed: own account

workers, casual wage-laborers, contributing family workers, employers, and unincorporated house-

hold enterprises. This classification is very similar to ILO’s classification of informal labor (2002), with

the exception of domestic workers in private households, which I classify as self-employed and ILO as

employee. Note that both classifications are related to ’ex ante’ criteria with respect to the tax system

and which vary with development. They include economic risk of the job holder, authority within the

establishment, organizational scale, and complexity of production. This is conceptually distinct from

the classification of the underground economy (LaPorta & Shleifer, 2008), which is based on ’ex post’

tax registration and/or evasion status. As such, the observed variation in employment structure may

be related to structural, non-tax changes along the development path.9

    My classification is internationally comparable in surveys across countries and within the US over
distribution based on the (more narrow) earned income concept, which excludes capital income and miscellaneous income.
Results based on this alternative income definition are qualitatively and quantitatively similar.
   6
     The only exception is for respondents that are economically active, but report no monetary income - per example, family
workers in agriculture that fully consume their own output. For this limited sample of respondents, in a limited number
of countries, I impute an income based on answers to questions about the market-value of the own-consumed output. For
more details on the importance of non-monetary income for the main results, please see Appendix A.1.
   7
     This is mainly due to the inability to measure self employment income in the agricultural sector. See Appendix A.1 for
further details. Note that in these countries, I do not attempt to convert expenditure into gross income for the purpose of
locating the income tax exemption threshold in the income distribution.
   8
     Kleven, Kreiner, and Saez (2016) develop a three-tiered agency model, with a government, a firm, and workers, to
micro-found the success of third-party reporting.
   9
     Naturally, the ex ante criteria are plausibly endogenous to the tax system. The ex ante versus ex post distinction serves
the point that my employment classification is not mechanically and directly derived from a tax-based classification, unlike
the underground economy classification.




                                                              9
time. In all surveys I can clearly distinguish employees from employers and from both family and non-

family workers in household enterprises. As such, my classification is not confounded by a distinction

between firm of size 1 versus larger firms. In countries where seasonal wage-work is arguably most

important, I can distinguish such workers from contract-based employees. Since casual wage-work is

most prevalent at lower levels of development, any mis-classification would lead me to under-estimate

the true transition out of self-employment along the development path.10

       In all surveys, I code employment type based on the primary job in which the respondent spent

most hours working during a reference period. Many individuals have many jobs at the same time

(Banerjee & Duflo 2007), but this will affect the representativeness of my estimates only to the extent

that these jobs fall in different categories in my classification. An individual who contributes on the

family farm while being an own-account worker within the same reference period would be classified

as ’self-employed’ in either job. In surveys where the reference period is not yearly, there may be

bias in the measure of employment structure if the employment type in the reference period is not

representative of the entire year. This is likely to be important in developing countries, where there

is strong seasonality in job type. This introduces bias to the extent that the jobs at different periods

of the year fall in different employment structure categories. An individual that is a casual wage

laborer during the harvest season and is an own-account worker for the remainder of the year would

be classified as self-employed in any period of the year.

       The income tax base is defined as the share of the economically active population whose gross

income lies above the income tax exemption threshold. I define the exemption threshold as the mini-

mum level of gross income above which individuals become liable to pay some strictly positive income

tax.11 I consider a non-married filer without any dependants. Without any further assumptions on fil-

ing behavior, the exemption threshold for this filer equates to the standard deduction (or allowance).

This relief is most often universally and automatically available to all taxpayers as a fixed amount,

and is unrelated to any expenditures incurred by the taxpayer. I abstract from other features of the

tax system that vary across countries, such as the existence of individual credits, which can allow the
  10
     I can always distinguish between working for someone else for pay versus for in-kind payment, and I exclude the latter
from the employee category. As such, casual wage-laborers that receive in-kind payment are systematically classified as
self-employed. This leaves the group of casual workers that are not paid in-kind as the group that I potentially mis-classify
as employee, whenever the survey answers do not provide sufficient precision about the nature of the employee-work. I
discuss measurement-induced bias in Appendix Section A.6.
  11
     A very limited number of countries, many of which are located in Eastern Europe, have recently moved to the broadest
possible income tax base, where the exemption threshold is 0. The income tax system in all the countries in my sample
feature a strictly positive exemption threshold in the year of the survey data. A few countries feature a 0-th bracket, where
the filer still has to file an income tax return but the tax rate is 0; in this case, I define as the exemption threshold the value of
income above the 1st bracket where there is a strictly positive rate.


                                                                 10
filer to further reduce her final tax liability. I do this because it allows me to calculate the exemption

threshold in a simple way without having to make any behavioral assumptions about filing and credit

take-up (Benzarti, 2018). In addition, the simplicity of this threshold and its common existence means

that I can create a harmonized measure of the size of the income tax base that is internationally com-

parable across space and time. Finally, since the standard deduction constitutes a lower bound on the

true exemption threshold, my estimates will potentially understate the narrowness of the income tax

base in developing countries.12 To increase international comparability, I code values of the exemp-

tion threshold in all cross-country surveys from a unique source, namely the country tax reports of the

IBFD Tax Research Platform.13 I code the value of the threshold in the year of the survey. For the US

series, I use the historical IRS series on the personal exemptions between 1913 and 2012.

    I measure the distributional employment profiles by calculating the share of employees in the

economically active workforce in deciles of a country’s gross income distribution, using individual

weights. I locate the exemption threshold in every gross individual income distribution, and calculate

the income tax base as sum of percentiles above the exemption threshold. My employment classifica-

tion is consistent in the aggregate with the U.N. SNA, which means that all activities identified within

the SNA production boundary are captured in the employment estimates in every income decile in

every country. As such, the size of the income tax base can be interpreted as the share of the economi-

cally active population that is subject to income tax. I use expenditure-side real GDP at chained PPPs

in 2011 US$ from the same year as the country survey data.

    The selection of surveys and the construction of variables has been done to ensure that compara-

bility across countries and over time is as high as possible. All of my surveys are nationally represen-

tative and have detailed and consistent work-type classifications and continuous income categories

which allow me to measure the employee-share of the economically active workforce over deciles of

the gross income distribution. My measure of the income tax base is based on the standard deduction,

which universally features in all tax systems in my sample and which can be calculated without any

additional assumptions about tax filing behavior.


   12
      In the Appendix (Section A.6), I argue that this choice of measurement leads me to understate the importance of the tax
base as a determinant of tax collection.
   13
      IBFD is the primary data-source for the country-specific tax summaries produced by several international consultancies
(including Deloitte, KPMG, and PwC).




                                                             11
3.3     Results


In this sub-section, I present new stylized facts on changes to employment structure and tax structure

along the development path. To summarize findings in the cross-country section, I partition the sam-

ple of 100 surveys into ten development groups of 10 countries. In each group and decile of the gross

income distribution, I construct the unweighted average of employee-shares in all countries in that

group.14 I complement the cross-country evidence with time-series evidence from the US (1870-2010),

with a focus on understanding how the US looked like historically when it was less-developed. The

time-series spans almost as large an income range as the cross-country data: in 1870, the earliest year

of historical data, the US had a similar level of per capita income to India in the survey year.15

      Stylized fact #1: Within country employee share increases over the income distribution, and at

all levels of income as a country develops

      Figure 2 displays the employee distributional profiles in the 10 cross-country development groups.

The first stylized fact documents that within each country, the employee-share increases with income,

and that across development, the upward-sloping employee-profile moves leftward in the gross in-

come distribution. In other words, in each successive development group, the increase in employee

share is concentrated in deciles gradually further down the income distribution. In the poorest coun-

tries in the sample, such as Democratic Republic of the Congo, Niger, and Malawi, the employee-share

is effectively nil apart from a steep increase in the top percentiles of the income distribution. During

the transition from low to lower-middle income countries, such as India, Pakistan, Zambia and Bo-

livia, the growth in employee share is concentrated in the top three deciles. As the transition to upper-

middle income countries takes place, to countries including China, Brazil, South Africa, and Turkey,

the growth in employee-share occurs mainly in the four middle deciles (from the 4th to the 7th decile).

Finally, when going from upper-middle to high-income countries including the US, UK, Germany, and

Japan, the remaining growth in employee share is concentrated in the bottom three deciles.

      In Figure 3, I plot the US profiles between 1870 and 2000. In 1870, on the eve of its second industrial

revolution, the employee-share in the US was concentrated in the top decile. Over time, the employee-

profile gradually moves leftward in the income distribution. For every US historical profile, I construct

a ’synthetic’ cross-country profile, based on the average of profiles of countries with per capita income
  14
     As an alternative, I can construct weighted profiles, using the country’s population share in total population of the
development group as the country-specific weight. The results based on this weighting are very similar.
  15
     Shortly after the year of the survey, 2004, India graduated to the lower-middle income group. As such, the US historical
data spans development levels between the lower-middle income group and the high-income group.


                                                             12
within 10% of the US income in the historical year.16 I insert these synthetic profiles in Figure 3.

Interestingly, the patterns look very similar, both qualitatively and quantitatively, when comparing a

historical US profile to a cross-country profile at the same level of per capita income.

       Stylized fact #2: Over development, the tax exemption threshold moves down the income dis-

tribution in co-movement with increases in employee share

       The second stylized fact documents a strong co-movement over development between increases

in employee share occurring gradually further down the income-distribution, and decreases in the

exemption threshold. This is illustrated using four countries from the cross-section and four points

in time within the US in Figure 1. At lowest levels of development, the exemption threshold is sys-

tematically located in the top percentiles of the income distribution, generating a very narrow income

tax base between 1% and 5% of the workforce. Over development, we observe a close co-movement

between decreases in the location of the exemption threshold and growth in employee share locally

to its left. Given the gradual shifts in employee-share profile (fact #1), this co-movement generates

a gradual increase in the size of the income tax base over development, as documented in Panel B

of Figure 4. The income tax base is very narrow in low-income countries, taxing only 1-10% of the

economically active population. The base expands in middle-income countries to 30-50%, and reaches

90-95% in high income countries. Again, the patterns are similar when comparing the expansion of

the income tax base across countries to the historical expansion within the US over time.

       Stylized fact #3: Location of tax exemption threshold systematically maximizes the employee-

share on the income tax base

       When comparing the poorest to the richest countries in the cross-section, panel B of Figure 4 im-

plies that the income tax base expands by over 4500% over the course of development. The third styl-

ized fact shows that despite this large variation in size, the composition of income tax base remains

constantly maximized in employee-share over development. To show this, I calculate in all surveys

the percentile location of the exemption threshold which would maximize the employee-share on the

base, and the associated employee-share. I then calculate the employee-share on the real tax base, as

the employee-share above the actual exemption threshold. Finally, I divide the actual employee-share

by the maximized share, and plot the ratio, expressed as a percent, against GDP per capita in Panel C of

Figure 4. This ratio would be equal to 100 percent if a country locates its exemption threshold in the ex-
  16
    Per example, the US in 1870 had similar per capita income to India and Pakistan in their respective survey-years. The
US in 1935 was similar to Indonesia and Peru, and the US in 1950 was similar to Mexico and Uruguay.




                                                           13
act percentile which maximizes the employee-share on the income tax base. I find that on average, the

actual employee composition of the tax base achieves 95% of the maximized employee-composition.

What is more, this ratio is constant across all levels of development, both across countries and within

the US over time.17 This fact suggests a constant policy-rule regarding the employee-composition on

the tax base, despite large variation in both overall employee-composition (fact #1) and size of the base

(fact #2) over development.

    Stylized fact #4: Changes in income tax base accounts for variation in income tax collection

across development

    The final stylized fact shows that variation in the size of the income tax base can account for the

bulk of the observed variation in income tax collection (relative to GDP) across development levels.

In Panel A of Figure 5, I plot income tax collection, size of the income tax base, and the (top) marginal

statutory income tax rate, against GDP per capita, in the cross-country section. Since I am introduc-

ing a novel tax policy instrument, I benchmark it against the marginal rate which has hitherto been

the main proxy for government statutory tax policy in studies explaining variation in tax collection

across development (Gordon & Li, 2009; Besley & Persson, 2014). Panel A reveals a close association

between the size of the base and the level of income tax collection: both variables slowly increase

between low-income and lower-middle income countries, but witness strong growth during the tran-

sition from upper-middle to high-income countries. In contrast, there is essentially no variation in the

top marginal tax rate across development. In Panel B, I directly study the association between each

of the two statutory policy instruments and tax collection, while controlling for the other instrument.

This produces a strongly positive and linear relationship between the size of the base and tax collec-

tion, after controlling for the rate. In countries with the most narrow tax base (less than 10% percent),

tax collection is between 1% and 3% of GDP. Countries with a relatively more expanded base (between

40 and 60%) collect on average 8% of of GDP in income taxes. Finally, countries with the broadest base

(above 90%) have a collection level between 13% and 18%. On the other hand, once I control for the

size of the base, I find no direct association between the marginal tax rate and the level of collection.

Finally, I show that, once I remove the association between the base and the level of (income tax/GDP),

there is no remaining association between tax collection and development. In Panel C, I directly plot
  17
     The extent to which this ratio can deviate from 100% depends on the steepness of employee-share gradient in gross in-
come. Indeed, if the employee-share was uniform across the income distribution, then any arbitrary location of the threshold
would generate a ratio of 100%. As such, this test is informative of policy-rules in settings except for high-income countries,
where the employee-share is high and uniform across the income distribution (Figure 2 and 3).




                                                              14
the residual of (income tax/GDP), after a regression on the income tax base, against GDP per capita.

The residual displays a significant amount of variance, suggesting that there is meaningful variation

in collection left to explain. But the association between collection and development is now flat. As

a novel stylized fact, this result suggests that drivers of tax capacity over development, including the

employment structure channel studied in this paper, operate in large part through the tax base.



3.4      Robustness

In this sub-section, I provide robustness checks for the stylized facts. I first show that the stylized facts

also hold within Mexico over 50 years between 1960 and 2010. This time-series covers the lower levels

of per capita income in the cross-country data. In the Mexican time-series, I uncover the same stylized

facts: the employee-share profile is upward-sloping and gradually moves leftward in the gross income

distribution; the exemption threshold gradually moves down the distribution and expands the size of

the income tax base; the employee-composition on the tax base is constantly maximized.18

       In a second robustness check, I consider the possibility that the exemption threshold targets char-

acteristics which are correlated with employment structure. I code the value of the national poverty

line and the minimum wage for all countries in my sample in the years where I have survey data.19

These are thresholds set by the government and serve as the basis for most redistributive and anti-

poverty efforts. I use the IBFD summaries to show that in less than 5% of countries in the sample is

the exemption threshold explicitly defined in the tax code as either equal to, or a multiplicative of,

the national poverty line or the minimum wage. I further show in the appendix that there does not

either appear to be any implicit relationship between these two sets of thresholds, as countries with

similar levels of income and size of tax base display enormous variation in the ratio of the exemption

threshold to the poverty line or the minimum wage. This suggests that the exemption threshold is not

used to target social assistance and anti-poverty efforts in the income distribution.20

       In a third robustness check, I consider whether the exemption threshold is targeting sectoral, rather

than employment, structure. An earlier literature has focused on agriculture as a hard-to-tax sector

(Musgrave, 1981). This could suggest that the location of the threshold is set to exempt agriculture,
  18
     Details on the construction of the Mexican time-series can be found in Section A.2.
  19
     I collect the poverty lines that are set by the national government, rather than the international poverty lines defined by
the World Bank. Details on the data-collection can be found in Section A.3.
  20
     Of course, the exemption threshold redistributes through the tax system directly, as it is defined based on an individual’s
income. In Section 4, I provide an estimate of the impact of employee-share on the exemption threshold, in a setting where
income was constant.


                                                              15
rather than tax employees. I find limited evidence to support this hypothesis. First, only 12% of

countries in both low and middle income groups, and 5% of high-income countries, explicitly list

agriculture as a source of exempt income.21 Second, I code the sectoral composition of the work-

force in all countries, and investigate the distributional profiles.22 I show in the Appendix that in

low-income and lower-middle income countries, where the agricultural-share is steeply downward-

sloping in the income distribution, virtually all of the agricultural workforce is self-employed. At the

same time, between upper-middle and high-income countries, where agriculture is much less quanti-

tatively important, there continues to be an important transition from self-employment to employees,

which occurs outside of the agricultural sector, and which is associated with continuous decreases in

the threshold. I also show that the exemption threshold does not appear to target “easy-to-tax” sec-

tors, such as manufacturing or the public sector. In the Appendix, I show that the income-profiles of

the sectoral composition of employees does not support this hypothesis. Neither manufacturing nor

the public sector profiles are upward-sloping in the income-distribution and leftward-shifting over

development, in a way that could explain movements in the exemption threshold.

       In a final robustness check, I use a regression setting to investigate the robustness of the employee-

income slope to controlling for different characteristics. I study the impacts of sector (4 industry dum-

mies), geography (urban dummy), and education (three levels of educational completion dummies),

all measured at the individual respondent level. If controlling for one characteristic fully eliminates

the employee-income slope, this could suggest that the exemption threshold is targeting this partic-

ular characteristic, rather than employment structure. At the same time, a partial reduction in the

magnitude of the employee-income gradient upon inclusion of a control would be informative about

the characteristics which quantitatively contribute to the slope. I find that the basic income-slope in

employee-likelihood is not confounded by any one characteristic (education, sector, geography) that

the government could implicitly or explicitly target. However, I find that jointly, these three character-

istics can account for the bulk of difference in employee-income slopes across levels of development.

       Finally, note that unobservable increases over development in the capacity to detect under-reporting

of self-employment earnings would appear as a decrease in the employee share. Underlying growth

in enforcement capacity thus works against my finding of gradual increases in employee share along

the development path. I discuss other potential biases in Appendix Section A.6.
  21
     This includes India and Pakistan. I code this in the IBFD country reports. I only count instances where agricultural
income is entirely exempt. There are cases where self-employed operating in agriculture may deduct specific costs to deter-
mine their tax liability, but I do not include such instances. More details are found in Appendix Section A.4.
  22
     I discuss the sector classification in Appendix Section A.4.


                                                            16
4     Direct estimate of impact of employment structure on the tax base and

      tax collection

In this section, I provide direct evidence of employment structure’s impact on tax structure, using the

setting of US states over time. I first provide background, data, and program details. I then discuss

the identification strategy. I present graphical evidence and regression-based results, before providing

results on the underlying mechanism and robustness checks.




4.1   Background and program details


Background and data


US states represent a potentially compelling setting to study development of tax systems. Each state

chooses which sources of income to tax, including individual income taxes, and is responsible for the

associated collection and enforcement costs. State tax administrations make investments in enforce-

ment capacity, including in filing, withholding, and auditing processes, that are similar in nature to

investments made by national administrations across countries (Snavely, 1988). As a measure of en-

forcement ’capacity’, the cost of collecting state taxes in the average state tax administration was 4.3%

of taxes collected in the early 1960s.23 This is comparable to the average cost of collection of national

tax administrations in low-income countries today, which is 3.8% (Jensen & Lagakos, 2019). Histori-

cally, the growth in state tax-to-GDP ratios has been largeley driven by an increase in personal income

taxes, as seen in Panel A of Figure 6.24 The rise of the modern income tax system in individual states

matches the key tax capacity stylized fact (Besley & Persson, 2014; Kleven et al., 2016). In parallel to the

rise of the modern income tax, individual states also witnessed large changes in employment struc-

ture over time. Panel B of Figure 6 shows the employee-share of total employment along the income

distribution of the average state over time between 1950 and 1980. The employee-share is increasing

in the income distribution, and over time the employee share increases in all income deciles. This is

consistent with stylized fact #1. Panel B shows the state exemption threshold gradually moves down
  23
     The cost is measured as the sum of the capital outlays and the payroll of the state’s financial administration. The 1962
ediction of the Book of the States is the earliest year where I can construct this cost measure. More details are found in
Appendix Section B.1.
  24
     The change in state tax structure is discussed in detail in Wallis (2000).



                                                             17
the income distribution in co-movement with increases in employee share locally to its left, consistent

with stylized fact #2. Finally, the employee-share above the threshold remains constant and high, con-

sistent with stylized fact #3. Taken together, these facts increase the external validity of the US-states

direct evidence for the cross-country setting.

      I combine data from several sources to construct variables that are as comparable as possible to

the cross-country section. I calculate employment structure in the active workforce using decennial

Census data between 1940 and 2010. The ’class of worker’ category in the Census data allows me

to classify respondents as either self-employed or employee in a manner that is consistent over time

within US states and with the cross-country classification. The advantage of the Census data is that it

provides a measure of employee-share of the workforce. The disadvantage is that it is not yearly. I in-

terpolate the numerator and denominator between Census years using a natural cubic spline (Herriot

& Reinsch, 1973). As an alternative, I use the employee-share of income, which is measured continu-

ously on a yearly basis by BEA, and find similar results. I rely on the US historical state tax calculator

1900-2007, constructed by Bakija (2009), to construct measures of the state-year income tax structure.

In particular, I calculate the tax exemption-threshold for an individual single earner who claims the

standard deduction. This definition of the exemption threshold matches the definition used in the

cross-country setting. One important selection is that I limit the sample to all years before 1980. That

is because from the 1980’s onward, states began to index their exemption threshold to inflation. In the

pre-1980 period, I can directly assess if changes to employment structure lead to active government

decisions to change the nominal value and location of the threshold. To construct tax collection levels,

I use state government finance publications between 1929 and 2010 published by the US Census. I

express tax collection as a fraction of total state personal income, from the historical BEA series.25




Program details


To establish a direction of causality from employment structure to the income tax base, I exploit

variation in the effective implementation date of the Industrial Development Bonds (IDB) program.

Through the IDB program, sub-state government units (most often counties and boroughs) issued

bonds to finance the acquisition or construction of facilities and equipment for lease to private firms

(Cobb, 1993). Importantly, IDB issuances were revenue bonds, which are secured exclusively by the
 25
      The construction of the variables is discussed in detail in Appendix Section B.1.


                                                               18
revenues of the project. This is in constrast to general obligation bonds, which are secured by the

credit of the issuer - in this case, the local government (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1978). This

distinction implies that there is not a direct relationship between the issuance under the IDB program

and increased tax revenue due to a need to solidify the local government’s funding capacity.

    According to an early Federal definition, the IDB program was intended to attract industrial plants

to rural communities characterized by under-employment among self-employed (Area Redevelop-

ment Administration Commission (ARA), 1962), where the IDB would act as a positive level-shifter

in employee-share. The dominant justification for government intervention was that inadequate local

credit for industrial firms constituted the barrier to expansion in rural communities (ARA, 1968).

    Financing of the IDB program was directly incompatible with the ’public purpose’ provision,

whereby government debt may only be issued for public purpose. Implementation therefore required

the state House to vote in a legal statute which exempted IDB from the public purpose provision.

In the cases where the public purpose provision was directly written in the state Constitution, the

vote-in led to a constitutional amendment. But there was no legal historical precedent to such de-

velopment program. The voted statute or amendment, and by extension any bond issuance, would

therefore remain legally uncertain until the highest state court would litigate to uphold its constitu-

tionality through a specific court case (Abbey, 1965; Cobb, 1993; Pinsky, 1972; Rollinson, 1976). The

court case would most often be triggered by any of the administrative steps that the local government

was required to fulfill, such as the set-up of local administrative units devoted to handling the IDB

issuance process. The fact that IDB were issued as revenue bonds, rather than general obligation, was

often the basis of the argument for not violating the ’credit for public purpose’ doctrine. In the case

of Wayland v. Snapp, the Arkansas Supreme Court “(...) chose to uphold the issuance of the revenue

bonds by invoking the doctrine that revenue bonds do not violate a credit clause because they are

retired through lease revenues of the project, not out of tax funds” (Yale Law Journal, 1961).

    I code the year of vote-in and the year of upholding from both legal reviews and government pub-

lications. I find very little deviation between sources in the major cases cited as the leading case which

upholds the IDB program.26 The time-lag between the vote-in and the upholding events is substantial.

The lag has mean of 6.67 years and standard deviation of 6.77. In 40 percent of cases, the time-lag ex-

ceeds 10 years. I digitize archived Moody’s state financial records on issuance of IDB debt, and show

below that upholding acts as a necessary condition for IDB issuance. I limit the estimation sample to
 26
    In those few cases where there exists a deviation between sources, I pick the earliest case as the year of the upholding.
Details on the sources and timing of vote-in and upholding events are in Appendix Section B.2.


                                                             19
the 28 states that have upheld the IDB program before the implementation of a major IRS reform in the

early 1970s. This reform significantly widened the scope of projects approved under municipal bond

projects, and shifted the nature of funding from rural industrialization towards public-goods projects

in infrastructure and environmental conservation. The narrower scope of the program in the pre-1971

states arguably eases the interpretation of the main effects and limits the set of potential confounders.




4.2      Identification strategy


The legal uncertainty surrounding the IDB program suggests that the vote-in event would be a fuzzy

treatment. Instead, I center the program impact around the court upholding event. I limit the sam-

ple to upholding states, since states that never implement the program are likely to be fundamentally

different from implementing states in ways that are hard to control for. To account for the possibility

that the decision to implement the program may be endogenous to changes in the political and eco-

nomic environment, I include a dummy variable for the intermediary period between the vote-in event

and the upholding event. This control captures any state-time varying observable and unobservable

shocks to the political and economic environments which occur around the time of the endogenous

policy-decision to to vote. This includes deciding to vote-in the program in response to shocks to

employment structure, and deciding to vote-in based on changes in ’need’ or ’taste’ for revenue.

       This discussion motivates the estimation of the following regression




                        yst = β + α1 (Vote-in)st + θ1 (Upheld)st + λXst + µs + γt + εst                                     (1)


       where s denotes state, t denotes time, 1 (Vote-in)st is a dummy taking a value of 1 when the state

has voted in the IDB program but it has not been upheld in the state court system, and 1 (Upheld)st

is a dummy taking on a value of 1 when the state supreme court court has upheld the legality of the

constitutional amendment. Exogenous control variables in Xst include dummies for election years,

and the first-stage variables used in Besley, Persson, and Sturm (2010) to instrument for political com-

petition and tax and expenditure policies.27 All standard errors are clustered at the state level to allow
  27
     The first stage instruments measure the share of the state population which are subject to either a literacy test or a poll
tax (or both), and which were abolished after the 1965 Voting Rights Act. In the Appendix (Table B.3), I show that the main
estimates are robust to including additional (potentially endogenous) control variables which vary at the state-year level: a



                                                              20
for correlation over time within a state. The estimation in 1 assesses program impacts by comparing

changes in outcomes before and after the upholding event, relative to changes before and after the

vote-in event within the same state. Variation to estimate θ comes both from the within-state timing

of the upholding event relative to the vote-in event, and from the cross-state variation in timing of the

upholding event and in length between the vote-in and the upholding events.

    To interpret the coefficient on 1 (Upheld)st as the causal impact of the IDB program requires the

identifying assumption that, conditional on the vote-in and the included controls, the timing of the

court upholding decision is uncorrelated with the outcome variable. I provide two pieces of sup-

porting evidence. First, in the following sub-section, I show that the regression effects are driven by

sharp upon-impact changes following the upholding event. Outcomes are trending in a stable manner

throughout the intermediary period between vote-in and upholding. Groups with differing length of

lag between vote-in and upholding are on parallel trends prior to the upholding event, suggesting

that groups with longer lag constitute a valid counterfactual for groups with shorter lag.

    The second supporting evidence is that the only significant predictors of the time lag are state-

specific, time-invariant historical characteristics. Table 1 reports the results from non-parametric Cox

proportional hazards models. These models use state time-varying and time-invariant regressors to

predict the conditional probability of the upholding event occurring, conditional on the vote in event

having occurred. A civil law dummy significantly predicts a higher conditional probability of uphold-

ing. This variable is drawn from Berkowitz & Clay (2005), and codes a state with civil law origins if, by

the time of American acquisition, its colonizers had a civil law legal system (as opposed to a common

law system).28 The faster time to uphold associated with civil law states is consistent with studies

across US states (Berkowitz & Clay, 2005) and across countries (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes & Shleifer,

2008).   29   States that experienced defaults in the 19th century on debt issued for railroad-funding un-

der a private-public scheme similar to the IDB take longer to uphold, conditional on voting in. This

finding is consistent with a legal literature which argues that the ’public purpose’ doctrine was more
dummy for whether the state has right to work laws, a dummy for the existence of a state corporate income tax, the firm-size
coverage of state unemployment insurance, and log per capita income.
  28
     Ten of the continental American states were settled by France, Mexico or Spain and had civil law legal systems by the
time of the American Revolution. These ten states are: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Florida, Louisiana, Missis-
sippi, Missouri, New Mexico, Texas. The 38 other had a common law system or were unsettled. Note that an additional five
states - Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin - were also originally settled by a civil law country, but were acquired
by Great Britain prior to the American Revolution.
  29
     One interpretation of this result, drawing on Berkowitz & Clay (2005), is that civil law produces a Constitution with more
statutory components, rather than framework provisions, and that the existence of statutory laws created more frequent
demand for constitutional change among affected groups as the political and economic climates change over time. This
explanation is consistent with the difference in IDB-litigation procedures observed across states: civil law origins states
were more likely to vote in statutes, as opposed to Acts, which was likely to being revised more quickly.


                                                              21
entrenched in the states that had witnessed the adverse outcomes of IDB-type funding schemes in the

past. The historical default experience is coded from Sbragia (1996). Importantly, none of the political

variables or economic variables are significant predictors of the timing of the upholding decision, once

these two historical state-specific variables are included. I consider a broad set of potential political

factors which vary at the state-level, including: a dummy for whether state supreme court judges are

appointed; a dummy for election year, a dummy for whether a neighboring state has upheld; the size

of the population; a dummy for whether voting restrictions are in place; and, a dummy for whether a

state has right to work laws. I also consider a broad set of state-varying economic factors, including:

the labor force share of counties in a state that were considered to be eligible for IDB funding by the

Federal administration; the growth rate of the labor force; the growth rate of manufacturing employ-

ment; the employee-share of employment; log of income per capita; the size of the state income tax

base; the ratio of income tax to GDP; and, the ratio of total tax to GDP. As state-specific time-invariant

variables, the civil law and historical default determinants of the time-lag should be absorbed in the

state fixed effect in 1. Notwithstanding, I show in the Appendix (Table B.3) that the main results are

robust to allowing both groups of states to be on non-parametric time-paths over the sample period.

   I center the sample in every state around the year of the upholding event, in a time-window which

ranges from 5 years prior to the vote-in event to 5 years following the upholding event. Consequently,

θ will only pick up any ’short-run’ impacts of the upholding decision, as suggested by the sharp

upon-impact changes in the graphical evidence below. The main disadvantage of this sample decision

is that my estimates cannot contribute to a meaningful, long-term evaluation of the overall economic

impacts of IDB. The main advantage is to help increase the likelihood of capturing the isolated, direct

impact of IDB on employment and tax structure. Indeed, any long-run estimate of θ is likely to be

composed both of the direct impact of the court upholding decision and endogenous policy-responses

to this court decision (Besley and Case, 1994). The short-run time-window increases the likelihood

of excluding indirect economic impacts in θ, including sectoral spill-over and agglomeration effects,

which have been found in long-run studies of place-based development programs (Kline and Moretti,

2013; 2014).




                                                   22
4.3      Graphical results


Before turning to the regression results, I provide graphical event-study evidence. I study outcomes in

two groups: those with a time-lag from vote-in to upholding that is between 5 and 10 years, and those

with a time-lag that is larger than 10 years.30 To replicate the estimation strategy described above, I

show outcomes in each group over five years prior to the vote-in, the full intermediary period, and a

limited period after the upholding event. In each group, I take the raw means of outcome variables,

and index it to equal 1 in the year of the upholding event. This event-study allows me to graphically

illustrate the estimation strategy in 1, and to flexibly visualize the patterns of outcomes relative to both

the upholding and the vote-in events directly in the primary data.

       The results are displayed in Figure 8. Panel A studies the impacts on issuance of IDB debt. I code

the full set of IDB issuances in every state and year, using the historical series of Moody Municipal

and Government Manual, and plot the cumulative volume of issuance. Panel A displays a very large

increase in issuance in the two first years immediately following the upholding event. In contrast,

there is no change in trend leading up to the upholding event. This suggests that the upholding

event was not fully anticipated by investors. I do not find either any significant increase in issuance

following the vote-in event. This suggests that legal uncertainty following vote-in was an effective

constraint on the actual implementation of the program. Finally, the trends are parallel between the

long time-lag and the short time-lag groups around the year of the vote-in for the short-lag groups.

This suggests that states where the time-lag is longer constitute a potentially valid counterfactual for

the change in outcome of the states with shorter time-lag.

       In Panel B, I consider the impacts on employment structure. I use the employee-share of earned

income rather than employment.31 I do this because it is available on a yearly continuous basis before

and after both the vote in and upholding events. In the regressions, I find similar impacts of upholding

on both measures of employment structure. I find a sharp upon-impact increase in the employee-

share, immediately in the years following the upholding event. Both groups appear to be on a stable

trend in the pre-upholding period, with no discernible change in trend around the vote-in event.

Again, the longer time-lag group appears to be a valid counterfactual for the short time-lag group.
  30
     Together, these two groups constitute 60 percent of the full set of IDB states. See Appendix Figure B.1 and Section B.2.
for more details.
  31
     This variable excluded all transfers received from Federal and state government. The denominator contains all sources
of earned income: employee farming, employee non-farming, self employed farming, self-employed non-farming. The
denominator excluces all sources of non-earned income, such as dividends and interest payments.




                                                             23
      In Panel C, I study whether the upholding event is associated with changes in state tax policy. I

first code every year in which I observe a change in the state tax code to the nominal value of the

exemption threshold. I then construct the cumulative number of reforms over time, and plot it in

the left hand graph of Panel C. This measure proxies for the likelihood of observing a reform to the

exemption threshold, while controlling for differences in reform-frequency across states. With a short

lag to the upholding event, I find an strong increase in tax reform decisions. This suggests that state

policy-makers actively responded to the upholding event by changing the value of the threshold. The

right hand side graph plots the location of the threshold in the state’s income distribution. Withi a

similar spaced lag to the upholding event, I observe a sharp decrease in the relative location. These

two results suggest that policy-makers actively responded to the upholding event by lowering the

nominal value of the exemption threshold in the income distribution and expanding the tax base.




4.4     Regression results


I now turn to a regression-based estimate of the IDB impacts, using 1. Results are displayed in Table 2.

In column (1), I find that there is a 1.7 percentage point increase in the employee-share of employment

in the short-run period of 5 years following the upholding event. In contrast, I find no impact of the

vote-in event on employment structure. Column (3) shows that the upholding event led to a significant

reduction in the value of the exemption threshold relative to per capita income. As I will show in

the robustness section below, the upholding event did not lead to a change in per capita income.

Consistent with the sharp graphical impacts in the previous sub-section, I interpret the decrease in

this ratio as consistent with a decrease in the nominal value of the exemption threshold.

      These results are consistent with a reduced-form impact of employment structure on the income

tax base. I now study the distributional impacts. Specifically, I estimate 1 separately for the employee-

share in every decile of the state income distribution.32 I plot the decile-specific coefficient on the

upholding event, θbj , against the ten deciles j = 1, ..., 10 in Figure 8, where I also demark the aver-

age percentile location of the exemption threshold in the pre-vote period. The figure reveals that the

upholding event led to a statistically significant increase in the employee-share in the middle of the

income distribution, between the third and the sixth decile.33 Given the upward-sloping employee-
  32
     I construct the employee-share in every decile in every state, using the decennial Census records. I then interpolate
between years, using a natural cubic spline (Herriot & Reinsch, 1973).
  33
     This is consistent with qualitative descriptions (Cobb, 1993), which highlights that the plants opened under IDB were


                                                           24
share profile in the average state (Figure 6), this distributional impact implies a leftward shift of the

profile, consistent with patterns observed under stylized fact #1. At the same time, the IDB-induced

increase in employee-share occurs strictly in deciles locally to the left of the pre-IDB location of the

threshold. This is consistent with the patterns observed in stylized fact #2, suggesting that the thresh-

old moved down the income distribution in response to (IDB-induced) increases in employee-share

that occurred locally to its left. Finally, the employee-share in the tax base remains high after the ex-

pansion of the tax base, consistent with stylized fact #3. The close match-up between the IDB-induced

distributional impacts and the stylized facts observed over development increase the external validity

of the directly estimated evidence for the cross-country development setting of Section 3.




4.5     Mechanism


Both the stylized facts in Section 3 and the direct evidence from the previous sub-section are consistent

with lowering of the exemption threshold caused by gradual increases in employee-share below the

threshold. As the model in the following section highlights, there are several channels through which

movements into employee-jobs can cause a lowering of the exemption threshold. In this sub-section,

I provide results to suggest that employment structure impacts the decision to expand the base by

changing the fiscal enforcement cost.

      I leverage the interactions between the state tax administrations and the Federal Internal Revenue

Service (IRS). Between the early 1950s and the mid 1970s, states would sign Exchange of Information

Acts (EoI) with the IRS. The signing of the act formalized Federal involvement in the enforcement

of state income taxes by creating a systematic forwarding of results from individual audits of federal

tax returns to state tax authorities. Penniman (1980) documents qualitatively how states’ audit tax

collections increased in the period following the signing of an EoI. The signing of an EoI is therefore

likely to have significantly decreased the state’s cost of income tax enforcement.34 This interpretation

is consistent with the results on income tax collection in Troiano (2017).35

      Under the assumption that passing an EoI allows state tax administrations to effectively outsource
predominantly in low-skill industries.
   34
      The Federal IRS cost of collection was over four times smaller than the average IDB state administration’s cost of collec-
tion in 1962 (Jensen & Lagakos, 2019). This suggests that the EoI provided the state with valuable enforcement information
from an institution with significantly higher administrative capacity.
   35
      As Troiano (2017) notes, it is also possible that the EoI led to an increase in the flow of audit information from state tax
authorities to the Federal IRS, but there is no systematic data to suggest this is the case.



                                                               25
enforcement costs to the IRS, we can test whether the IDB-induced employee increase causes states to

move the exemption threshold only when their administration bears the enforcement cost of this base

expansion.36 Formally, I estimate


        yst = β + α1 (Vote-in)st + θ1 (Upheld)st + σ1 (Upheld)st × 1 (EoI)st + λXst + µs + γt + εst                             (2)


       where 1 (EoI)st takes a value of 1 if state s has signed an EoI with the IRS in year t. A compelling

feature of the EoI is that its implementation is staggered across states over time, spanning the period

of IDB implementation. This leads upholding states to be well-balanced across EoI status, with 57%

of states having signed an EoI by the time the upholding event occurred.37

       In Column 4 of Table 2, I find that the expansion of the income tax base is concentrated among

states that had not signed an EoI by the time of the upholding event. In contrast, in states where the

EoI preceded the upholding event, there is no reduced-form impact of upholding on the location of the

exemption threshold (p-value of the F-test is 0.230). This is despite the fact that the upholding event

increased the employee-share by a similar amount in both sets of states (Column 2, Table 2). This

suggests that there exists an association between increases in employee-share (below the threshold)

and reforms to lower the threshold only when the reform incurs a fiscal enforcement cost. In turn, this

is consistent with the interpretation that employees differ from self-employed in cost of enforcement,

and that a higher share of employees on a potential income segment lowers the enforcement cost of

expanding the tax base to this new segment.

       The final column of Table 2 studies the impact on income tax collection. I find a significant and

positive impact of upholding only in the subset of non-EoI states. The p-value of the F-test in EoI

states is 0.481. This result has two implications. First, the positive impact on collection is limited to

the same sub-group where I also found an expansion of the base, suggesting that the expansion of

the base drives the increase in collection. Second, there is no impact on collection in EoI states, even

though there is a positive impact on employee-share in that sub-group. This suggests that, in this

particular setting, the main impact of a change in employment structure on tax collection is through

the expansion of the tax base.

       The evidence in Table 2 thus provides direct evidence on a fiscal cost mechanism linking em-
  36
     This heterogeneity analysis derives from a conversation with Roger Gordon, and I am grateful to him for the discussion.
  37
     In results not reported, I find that neither the vote-in nor the upholding events led to a significant change in the likelihood
of signing an EoI.




                                                                26
ployment structure to income tax base expansion and collection. Table 3 pursues a complimentary

approach, by providing evidence against other mechanisms. I do this by constructing proxies for con-

founding determinants of the income tax base and tax collection, and then study changes to these

proxies over the upholding event. I allow for heterogeneity across EoI states. The results are reported

in Table 3. In Panel A, I investigate public finance outcomes. In Columns (1) to (3), I find that there

was no impact of upholding on any other source of tax revenue: corporate income tax, general sales

tax, property tax. This suggests the upholding decision did not coincide with a change in the state’s

general ’need’ or ’taste’ for revenue. Related, I also do not find any impact on income tax rates. The

absence of non-income tax revenue impacts further alleviates concerns that issuing of IDB bonds led

to an increase in revenue pressure, since the pressure would have to only be met by an increase in

personal income tax and only in non-EoI states.38 I proxy for changes in enforcement capacity in two

ways. First, a decrease in the number of tax departments responsible for collecting distinct sources

of tax revenue can reflect improved administrative capacity to centralize and cross-check information

sources in order to enhance enforcement. Second, the introduction of withholding on wage income for

remitting of state income taxes has been found to significantly improve income tax collection (Dusek

and Bagchi, 2017). I do not find an impact on the court upholding decision on either of these two en-

forcement proxies. Interestingly, I also do not find an impact of the vote-in event, which suggests there

is no substitution between revenue-enhancing tax policies when the upholding decision is delayed.

       In Panel B of Table 3, I consider alternative confounding determinants of the income tax base.

In Column (1), I first show that the upholding event did not lead to an economically important nor

statistically significant change in income. The largest positive impact is found in the EoI states, where

the upholding event is associated with a $36 increase in per capita income. Relative to a pre-treatment

mean income of $7641, this small magnitude implies that changes in income cannot account for the

expansion of the base and the increase in collection.39 In the Appendix, I estimate a county-level

empirical model of the local IDB impacts to explore the reasons why the program did not deliver any

economically meaningful change in per capita income. I find no evidence to suggest that the IDB

program led to sectoral spill-overs or agglomeration effects in the short run at the local level. This

is consistent with the Federal description of the IDB program as being highly targeted and local in

nature, while being narrow in scope (Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, 1962).40
  38
     This confounding channel is also made less plausible by the fact that the personal income tax was a minor source of
revenue collection, in the pre-vote period.
  39
     I show in the Appendix Table B.2 that this result is robust to using alternative measures of per capita income.
  40



                                                          27
In Column (2), I find no impacts of the upholding event on income inequality. The next two columns

study the impact of IDB on the generosity of social assistance, and on labor laws. I find no impacts on

either. The final two columns proxy for political competition and demand for redistribution. Here, the

EoI states in the upholding period are found to lean marginally more Democratic (p-value of 0.098),

but I found no impact on the income tax base and collection in that subset of states.

    I explore the robustness of the main results in the Appendix (Section B.3 and Table B.3). I find

similar results in a regression which removes 1 (Vote-in)st and uses only the cross-sectional difference

in timing of upholding as a source of variation. I find that results remain unchanged when allowing

civil law and historical default states, the only determinants of the vote-uphold time-lag, to be on

independent and fully non-parametric time paths. I show that results are robust to the inclusion of

a linear trend interacted with cross-sectional difference in pre-vote per capita income. This control

alleviates concerns that my main specification does not adequately capture differential convergence

patterns in employment structure over time across states. Finally, I show that the results are robust

to excluding the set of IDB states which were implementing the Tennessee Valley Authority program

(Kline and Moretti, 2013), a concurrent Federal place-based development program.

    Taken together, these results provide evidence on a direct impact of employment structure on

income tax base expansion and collection. Potential threats to this interpretation remain, but the con-

founding state-year variation would have to cause a sharp, upon-impact change in the short-run fol-

lowing the upholding event; not be captured by any of the proxies in Table 3; and, only impact tax

structure in the non-EoI states. The IDB-induced distributional impacts were found to match closely

the patterns in the cross-country stylized facts, which increases the potential external validity of this

direct evidence based on US states in the cross-country setting. Heterogeneity analysis suggests that

the fiscal enforcement cost is an important channel through which employment structure impacts tax

base expansions. In the following section, I derive a model which is consistent with this set of results.




5    Model

In this section, I provide a characterization of the reform decision to move the exemption threshold

and derive formulas for the optimal size of the individual income tax base. The characterization of
 This stands in contrast to previously US place-based redevelopment programs (including Kline and Moretti, 2013), which
were broader in scope and which generated long-run income impacts through agglomeration effects.




                                                          28
the threshold is novel in the optimal income tax literature, which has so far focused on the schedule

of marginal tax rates (Piketty and Saez, 2012; Saez and Stantcheva, 2016).41 I study the conditions

under which a small increase in the tax base is welfare improving, given an initial location of the

threshold and a specified objective function. This local model-environment approximates well the tax

reforms observed in reality of incremental changes to the nominal value of the exemption threshold.

The agent environment is strongly simplified, because the aim of this section is to illustrate some of

the main channels through which employment structure impacts the costs and benefits of local base

expansions. At the end, I use the model to interpret the mechanism results in the US states and to

quantitatively relate the US estimated elasticity to the cross-country variation in size of base.




5.1       Setup and empirical prediction


I consider a fixed distribution of income z across workers with pdf h (z ) and cdf H (z ). I assume

exogenous employment shares of self-employed and employees at each income level, denoted respec-

tively ϕz and 1 − ϕz . I do not model the development process that leads to changes in employment

shares, but assume it follows the patterns documented in stylized fact #1.

        If the agent reports income z ≥ K, then she is liable to pay τ (z − K ). Otherwise, she is not liable

for income tax. K is the exemption threshold and τ is the marginal tax rate. I assume linear utility

to abstract from income effects. I assume agents have access to an evasion technology which allows

them to pay c in order to report income at K and fully evade taxes. This evasion technology generates

bunching of reported income at K, in line with large set of evidence on evasion behavior. The cost is

assumed to be infinite for employees: cE (z ) = ∞. For self-employed, the cost depends flexibly on

total income z (due perhaps to a visibility effect) and on the distance between income and the threshold

z − K such that cSE = c (z, z − K ) > 0. The cost is assumed to be increasing and convex in z. In this

setting, there will exist a marginal buncher at income z̄ who is indifferent between bunching and full

compliance : z̄ − c (z̄, z̄ − K ) = K + (1 − τ ) (z̄ − K ). All self-employed with income z : K ≤ z ≤ z̄

will under-report and bunch at the threshold. An increase in τ unambiguously leads to more evaders:
∂ z̄
∂τ     > 0. An increase in the threshold will lead to less evaders if the marginal gain from compliance is
   41
    In the indirect tax design literature, Yitzhaki (1979) and Wilson (1989) derive optimal tax formulae for the number of
taxable commodities, while Keen & Mintz (2004) focus on the optimal threshold for a value-added tax.




                                                           29
larger than the marginal gain from under-reporting after the threshold decrease, that is

                                              ∂ z̄
                                                   < 0 if τ > cK (z̄, z̄ − K )                                           (3)
                                              ∂K

   I will assume the condition in 3 holds. The revenue base reflects evading self-employed between

K and z̄:
                        Z                                     Z
                   R=              τ (z − K ) ϕz dH (z ) +               τ (z − K ) (1 − ϕz ) dH (z )
                            z≥z̄                                  z≥K

   Consider a reform which locally decreases the threshold: dK < 0. This reform will have two effects

on revenue: a mechanical gain and a behavioral loss. The mechanical gain, dM , reflects the increase

in revenue collected on the inframarginal agents, assuming no behavioral responses

                              Z                                     Z                                        
              dM = −dKτ                    τ (z − K ) ϕz dH (z ) +             τ (z − K ) (1 − ϕz ) dH (z )              (4)
                                    z≥z̄                                 z≥K

                  ≥ 0 if dK < 0


   The behavioral loss, dB, reflects loss in revenue due to behavioral responses of the marginal agents

                                                       ∂ z̄
                                              dB = −        dKτ (z̄ − K ) ϕK                                             (5)
                                                       ∂K
                                                  ≤ 0 if dK < 0


   where I have used the local approximation that ϕK ≈ ϕz̄ , which is plausible if the last buncher is

not located too far above the threshold. At the revenue maximizing optimum, K Rev , it must be that

dB + dM = 0. This yields the characterization for the location of the threshold

                                    K Rev                     1
                                          =                                                                          (6)
                                      z̄             Mech gain                  −1
                                                  1+              · [εz̄,K ϕK ]
                                                      Beh loss

                        R                                    R
   where Mech gain =        z≥z̄
                                   τ (z − K ) ϕz dH (z ) +       z≥K
                                                                        τ (z − K ) (1 − ϕz ) dH (z ) , Beh loss = h (z̄ ) z̄,

and where εz̄,K denotes the elasticity of the marginal buncher with respect to the threshold. By chang-

ing the mass of agents who respond to the local reform, the model predicts the main empirical result




                                                            30
Empirical prediction: An increase in employee share locally around the threshold leads to an expansion of the

income tax base through lowering of the threshold


                                                           ∂K Rev
                                                                     <0                                   (7)
                                                        ∂ ( 1 − ϕK )


Extension: administrative costs


A policy literature in developing and developed countries (summarized in IMF, 2015) discusses differ-

ences in administrative costs between reconstructing information trails for self-employment earnings

and aggregation of employee information trails by employers. I model the administrative cost of tax-

ing an income segment z as an increasing function of the self-employed share on the income segment,

c (z ) = c (ϕz ). This unit cost is constant for all segments. Revenue net of administrative costs equals

                           Z                                    Z
                     R=               τ (z − K ) ϕz dH (z ) +             τ (z − K ) (1 − ϕz ) dH (z )
                               z≥z̄                                 z≥K
                           Z
                       −              c (ϕz ) dH (z )
                               z≥K


   The local threshold decrease dK < 0 will lead to an additional administrative marginal cost dC =

dK · c (ϕK ) < 0 if dK < 0. The revenue maximizing threshold now equals

                         K AdminRev                                       1
                                    =                                                                 (8)
                             z̄                     Mech gain−dC (ϕK )                 −1
                                                 1+                      · [εz̄,K ϕK ]
                                                        Beh loss

   where the threshold is now predicted to increase due both to behavioral distortions and adminis-

trative costs that increase as the self-employed share goes up.




Discussion: objective functions


The stylized facts and main US states reduced-form results results are consistent with an objective

function of revenue maximization over the exemption threshold. An extension to the objective func-

tion which is also consistent with this evidence is to include a social preference for a ’fair tax base’.

Discussed especially in a setting of low enforcement capacity countries, fairness relates to the idea

that the tax base should not discriminate against particular groups in terms of compliance (Brautigam,


                                                              31
Fjeldstad & Moore, 2008). On the income tax base, such fairness would imply that a group’s share in

effective contribution to tax revenue should be equal to its share in statutory contribution. This can be

formalized by modeling a mis-representation index, given by the ratio of employee-share of income

on the statutory income tax base to the ratio of employee-share of income on the compliant income

tax base. Society faces social loss with parameter µ from any deviation of this index from a situation

of perfect representation (with index value 1)

                                                                                                           
                                         Employee-share on statutory income tax base
             Horizontal inequity = µ 1 −                                                                               (9)
                                         Employee-share on compliant income tax base

       So long as self-employed evade more than employees, the inequity cost associated with a lowering

of the income tax threshold, dE, will always be smaller when the employee-share at the local threshold

is larger. This horizontal equity channel delivers a non-trivial prediction for movements in exemption

threshold driven by gradual increases in employee share (stylized fact #2) and for constant employee

share above the threshold (stylized facts #2 & #3) in the simplest possible setting of costless full evasion

by self-employed (unlike the behavioral distortions channel and the administrative cost channel).42

Future work is required on the existence and importance of horizontal equity concerns for tax policies.




5.2      Relating theory to US states direct evidence and cross-development stylized patterns


The objective of the previous sub-section has been to show that the basic empirical prediction 7 is

consistent with a range of objective functions and mechanisms through which employment structure

impact the decision to expand the income tax base. I now discuss how the evidence from the US states

is consistent with one simplified version of 8, in which the only fiscal cost of a threshold reform is the

administrative cost, which depends positively on the self-employed share locally around the thresh-

old. I model the existence of an EoI as a cost-function which is independent of the employee-share:

cEoI (z ) = c (z ). This could be because the EoI provides the state tax authority with the enforcement

results of all relevant income sources, including findings on evaded income of the self-employed ver-

sus employees, such that the state tax authority did not need to duplicate the enforcement effort across

employment-types. In non-EoI states, the tax authority has to incur the cost of uncovering evasion dif-
  42
    In a setting where agents differ in skill level and in cost of avoidance, Kopczuk (2001) derives conditions under which
high marginal tax rates can exacerbate horizontal inequity.




                                                            32
ferences between self-employed and employees: cN on−EoI (z ) = c (ϕz ). This set-up predicts

                                         ∂K N on−EoI           ∂K EoI
                                                     < 0 and             =0
                                         ∂ (1 − ϕK )         ∂ (1 − ϕK )

    which is consistent with the negative impact of employee-share on the threshold empirically found

in non-EoI states and the absence of an impact in EoI states (Table 3).

    The theory suggests that an appropriate elasticity to summarize the impact of changes in employ-

ment structure on the tax base is ε[1−F (K )],[1−ϕz |z<K ] . This elasticity indicates the percent increase in

the size of the base, 1 − F (K ), following a 1 percent increase in the employee-share beneath the thresh-

old, 1 − ϕz |z < K. I derive a value of 3.89 for this elasticity, using the identified evidence in the US

states.43 I then investigate what share of the variation in size of the base across countries (Panel B,

Figure 4) can be accounted for by combining the observed cross-country variation in employee-share

(below the threshold) and the US states-based value of the elasticity. I find that the elasticity-based

predicted change in base can account for 29.9% of the difference in size of the tax base between a

typical low-income country, India, and the US. The estimated elasticity can account for 68.3% of the

variation between a typical lower-middle income country, Peru, and the US.44




6    Conclusion

This paper has provided evidence and supporting theory to show that transitions into employee jobs

over development explains the rise of the modern tax system. I empirically identify a new channel,

in which movements from self-employment into employee jobs occurring gradually further down

the income distribution cause broadening of the tax base through lowering the exemption threshold.

In a novel research design in taxation and development, I combine micro-descriptive with quasi-

experimental evidence. The descriptive evidence is derived from a micro data-base covering 100

countries at all levels of development and the US over 140 years (1870-2010), and which allows me
   43
      Using the evidence from Figure 8, the upholding event led to a 3.6 percent change in the employee-share beneath K.
Using the regression results from column 3 in Table 2, the upholding event led to a 14 percent increase in the size of the base.
This implies an elasticity value of 14/3.6 = 3.89.
   44
      Using Figure 1, between India and the US, there is a 347% increase in the employee-share beneath the 98th percentile
(the location of the Indian exemption threshold). Using the elasticity estimate, the implied increase in the size of the tax base
is 1349%, while the actual increase in size of the base between India and the US is 4500% (moving from the 2nd to the 92nd
percentile of the gross income distribution). Using Figure 1, between Peru and the US, there is a 117 percent increase in the
employee-share beneath the (Peruvian) threshold, which implies a predicted increase in the size of the base by 455%. The
actual variation in size of the base between Peru and the US is 666%.



                                                               33
to measure employment-type, sources of income and tax structure in a consistent manner across space

and time. The identified evidence is based on exploiting variation in the effective implementation

date of a previously un-studied state-led development program implemented across US states in the

1950-1960s. To bridge the descriptive and identified evidence, I show that the identified changes in

employment and tax structure replicate the stylized facts underlying the descriptive evidence, and

that the mechanism uncovered in the US states is plausible in the cross-development setting.

   The evidence suggests the importance of studying jointly the drivers of development and their

impacts on taxation. A robust finding has been the close match between less developed countries and

currently advanced countries at similar levels of development. This suggests that a small income tax

base in a developing country reflects the same factors which lead to a low employee share. Future

work is needed to reconcile current models of structural change with the finding that transitions into

employee-jobs occur gradually further down the country’s income distribution.

   The existence of a constrained income tax base violates the assumptions underlying the Atkinson-

Stiglitz (1976) theorem and has implications for the optimal mix in developing countries. The inability

to redistribute flexibly through the income tax system suggests it may be optimal to provide redistri-

bution through indirect taxes. This provides a normative redistributive role for indirect tax systems

in developing countries (Bachas, Gadenne & Jensen, 2019), when its prominence has previously been

justified on the positive grounds of its favorable revenue performance (Keen & Lockwood, 2009).

   My research design has highlighted the usefulness of building micro evidence to answer macro

questions. Micro evidence on enforcement gains derived from sales connections between firms (Pomer-

anz, 2015) can be combined with macro-development evidence on growth in interconnectedness be-

tween firms (Carvalho & Tahbaz-Salehi, 2018), to explain sales tax structure over development.




                                                  34
References

 [1] Abbey, A. [1965]. “Municipal Industrial Development Bonds”, Vanderbilt Law Review, 19.

 [2] Acemoglu, D., J. Robinson [2000]. “Why did the West Extend the Franchise? Democracy, Inequal-
     ity, and Growth in Historical Perspective”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4).

 [3] Akcigit, U., J. Grigsby, T. Nicholas, S. Stantcheva [2018]. “Taxation and Innovation in the 20th
     Century”, NBER Working Paper Series, No. 24982.


 [4] Area Redevelopment Administration [1963]. Records of the Office of Planning and Research. Several
     volumes. Washington D.C: Department of Commerce and National Archives.

 [5] Area Redevelopment Administration [1961]. Statistical Profiles for Rural Redevelopment Areas. All
     states . Washington D.C: Department of Commerce and National Archives.

 [6] Atkinson, A., J. Stiglitz [1976]. “The Design of Tax Structure: Direct versus Indirect Taxation”,
     Journal of Public Economics, 6.


 [7] Bachas, P., M. Soto [2018]. “Not(ch) Your Average Tax System: Corporate Taxation Under Weak
     Enforcement”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, No.8524.

 [8] Bachas, P., L. Gadenne, A. Jensen [2019]. “Informal Consumption and Indirect Tax Design: Evi-
     dence from Consumption Diaries around the World”, Working Paper, Harvard Kennedy School.

 [9] Baicker, K., J. Clemens, M. Singhal [2012]. “The Rise of the States: U.S. Fiscal Decentralization in
     the Postwar Period”, Journal of Public Economics, 96.


[10] Bakija, J. [2009]. “Documentation for a Comprehensive Historical U.S. Federal and State Income
     Tax Calculator Program”, Working Paper, Williams College.

[11] Banerjee, A., E. Duflo [2007]. “The Economic Lives of the Poor”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
     21(1).

[12] Banerjee, A., A. Newman [1993]. “Occupational Choice and the Process of Development”, Journal
     of Political Economy, 101(2).

[13] Benzarti, Y. [2018]. “How Taxing is Tax Filing? Using Revealed Preferences to Estimate Compli-
     ance Costs”, NBER Working Paper Series, No. 23903.


[14] Best, M. [2014]. “The Role of Firms in Workers’ Earnings Response to Taxes: Evidence from Pak-
     istan”, Working Paper, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research.

[15] Best, M., A. Brockmeyer, H. Kleven, J. Spinnewijn, M. Waseem [2015]. “Production versus Rev-
     enue Efficiency with Limited Tax Capacity: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan”, Journal of Po-
     litical Economy, 123(6).

[16] Besley, T., A. Case [1994]. “Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence of Endogenous
     Policies”, NBER Working Paper Series, No. 4856.



                                                   35
[17] Besley, T., T. Persson [2011]. Pillars of Prosperity: The Political Economics of Development Clusters.
     Princeton University Press.

[18] Besley, T., T. Persson [2014]. “Why Do Developing Countries Tax So Little?”, Journal of Economic
     Perspectives, 28(4).

[19] Besley, T., T. Persson, D. Sturm [2010]. “Political Competition, Policy and Growth: Theory and
     Evidence from the US”, Review of Economic Studies, 77(4).

[20] Berkowitz, D., K. Clay [2005]. “American Civil Law Origins: Implications for State Constitu-
     tions”, American Law and Economic Review, 7(1).

[21] Bicks, A., N. Fuchs-Schundeln, D. Lagakos [2018]. “How do Average Hours Worked Vary with
     Development? Cross-Country Evidence and Implications”, American Economic Review, 108(1).

[22] Bird, R., O. Oldman [1964]. Readings on Taxation in Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins University
     Press.

[23] Brautigam, D., O. Fjeldstad, M.Moore [2008]. Taxation and State-Building in Developing Countries:
     Capacity and Consent. Cambridge University Press

[24] Brockmeyer, A., M. Hernandez [2018]. “Taxation, Information, and Withholding: Evidence from
     Costa Rica”, Working Paper, World Bank Group.


[25] Cage, J., L. Gadenne [2018]. “Tax Revenues and the Fiscal Cost of Trade Liberalization, 1792-
     2006”, Explorations in Economic History, 70.

[26] Carillo, P., D. Pomeranz, M. Singhal [2017]. “Dodging the Taxman: Firm Misreporting and Limits
     to Tax Enforcement”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(2).

[27] Carvalho, V., A. Tahbaz-Salehi [2018]. “Production Networks: A Primer”, Annual Review of Eco-
     nomics, forthcoming.

[28] Cobb, J. [1993]. The Selling of the South: the Southern Crusade for Industrial Development 1936-1990.
     University of Illinois Press.

[29] Council of State Governments [years between 1939 and 2009]. Book of the States, all Parts. Wash-
     ington DC: The Council of State Governments.

[30] Dincecco, M., U. Troiano [2015]. “Broadening the State: Policy Responses to the Introduction of
     the Income Tax”, NBER Working Paper No. 21373.

[31] Dusek, L., S. Bagchi [2017]. “Third-Party Reporting, Tax Collections, and the Size of Government:
     Evidence from Withholding”, Working Paper.

[32] Feng, Y., D. Lagakos, J. Rauch [2018]. “Unemployment and Development”, Working Paper, UC
     San Diego.


[33] Gallman, R. [2000]. “Economic Growth and Structural Change in the Long Nineteenth Century”,
     in S. Engermand & R. Gallman (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of the United States: Volume
     II: The Long Nineteenth Century. Cambridge University Press.

[34] Gerard, F., G. Gonzaga [2018]. “Informal Labor and the Efficiency Cost of Social Programs: Evi-
     dence from the Brazilian Unemployment Insurance Program”, NBER Working Paper No. 22608.

                                                    36
[35] Gollin, D. [2008]. “Nobody’s Business But My Own: Self-employment and Small Enterprise in
     Economic Development”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(2).
[36] Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, M. Waugh [2013]. “The Agricultural Productivity Gap”, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 129(2).
[37] Gordon, R., W. Li [2009]. “Tax Structure in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles and a Possible
     Explanation”, Journal of Public Economics, 93(7-8).
[38] Haines, M. [2006]. Cost of Living of Industrial Workers in the United States and in Europe. ICPSR study
     7711. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
[39] Herriot, J. C. Reinsch [1973]. “Algorithm 472: Procedures for Natural Spline Interpolatation (E1)”,
     Communications of the ACM, 16(12).


[40] Hinrichs, H. [1966]. A General Theory of Tax Structure Change During Economic Development. The
     Law School of Harvard University.
[41] ICPSR based on US Department of Labor [2009]. Study of Consumer Purchases in the United States,
     1935-1936. ICPSR study 8908. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Inter-university Consortium for Political
     and Social Research.
[42] ICPSR based on US Department of Labor [1986]. Cost of Living in the United States, 1917-1919.
     ICPSR study 8299. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
     Research.
[43] International Labour Organization [2002]. “Report VI: Decent Work and the Informal Economy”,
     in International Labour Conference 90th session. Geneva: International Labour Office.
[44] International Labour Organizaion [2009]. “International Definitions and Prospects of Underem-
     ployment Statistics”, Working Paper Series, ILO Bureau of Statistics.
[45] International Monetary Fund [2015]. “Current Challenges in Revenue Mobilization - Improving
     Tax Compliance”, IMF Policy Paper.
[46] Jensen, A., D. Lagakos [2019]. “Government Productivity in Tax Collection”, Working Paper, Har-
     vard Kennedy School.


[47] Keen, M. [2012]. “Taxation and Development - Again” IMF Working Paper 12/220.
[48] Keen, M., B. Lockwood [2009]. “The Value-Added Tax: Its Causes and Consequences”, Journal of
     Development Economics, 92.
[49] Keen, M., J. Mintz [2004]. “The Optimal Threshold for a Value-Added Tax”, Journal of Public Eco-
     nomics, 88(3).
[50] Kleven, H., M. Knudsen, C. Kreiner, S. Pedersen, E. Saez [2011]. “Unwilling or Unable to Cheat?
     Evidence from a Randomized Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark”, Econometrica, 79(3).
[51] Kleven, H., C. Kreiner, E. Saez [2016]. “Why Can Modern Governments Tax So Much? An Agency
     Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries”, Economica, 83.
[52] Kline, P. E. Moretti [2014]. “People, Places, and Public Policy: Some Simple Welfare Economics of
     Local Economic Development Programs”, Annual Review of Economics, 6.


                                                    37
[53] Kline, P., E. Moretti [2013]. “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies and the
     Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority”, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 129(1).

[54] Kopczuk, Wojciech [2011]. “Redistribution when Avoidance Behaviour is Heterogeneous”, Jour-
     nal of Public Economics, 81(1).

[55] La Porta, R., A. Shleifer [2014]. “Informality and Development”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
     28(3).

[56] La Porta., R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer [2008]. “The Economic Consequences of Legal Ori-
     gins”, Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2).


[57] Lindert, P., J. Williamson [2016]. Unequal Gains: A New History of American Growth and Inequality.
     Princeton University Press.

[58] Moody’s Investor Service [1974]. Municipal and Government Manual of Issuers. New York: Moody’s
     Investor Service Inc.

[59] Musgrave, R. [1966]. Fiscal Systems. New Haven: Yale University Press.

[60] Musgrave, R. [1981]. “Income Taxation of the Hard-to-Tax Groups”, in R. Musgrave (editor),
     Fiscal Reform in Bolivia, Harvard University Press.


[61] Naritomi, J. [2018]. “Consumers as Tax Auditors”, Working Paper, London School of Economics.

[62] Olken, B., M. Singhal [2011]. “Informal Taxation”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
     3(4).

[63] Penniman, C. [1980]. State Income Taxation. Johns Hopkins University Press.


[64] Pinsky, D. [1972]. “State Constitutional Limitations on Public Industrial Financing: an Historical
     and Economic Approach”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 111(3).

[65] Pomeranz, D. [2015]. “No Taxation without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in the
     Value Added Tax”, American Economic Review, 105(8).

[66] Rollinson, M. [1976]. Small Issue Industrial Development Bonds. Capital Publishing Corporation.

[67] Saez. E., T. Piketty [2012]. “Optimal Labor Income Taxation”, NBER Working Paper Series, No.
     18521.

[68] Saez, E., S. Stantcheva. [2016]. “Generalized Social Welfare Weights for Optimal Tax Theory”,
     American Economic Review, 106(1).

[69] Sbragia, A. [1996]. Debt Wish: Entrepreneurial Cities, U.S. Federalism, and Economic Development.
     University of Pittsburgh Press.

[70] Serrato, J.C., O. Zidar [2016]. “Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local Labor Mar-
     ket Approach with Heterogeneous Firms”, American Economic Review, 106(9).

[71] Serrato, J.C., O. Zidar [2018]. “The Structure of State Corporate Taxation and its Impacts on State
     Tax Revenues and Economic Activity”, Journal of Public Economics, 167.


                                                  38
[72] Snavely, K. [1988]. “Innovations in State Tax Administrations”, Public Administration Review, 48(5).

[73] Tazhitdinova, A. [2018]. “Reducing Evasion through Self-Reporting: Evidence from Charitable
     Contributions”, Journal of Public Economics, 165.


[74] Troiano, U. [2017]. “Intergovernmental Cooperation and Tax Enforcement”, NBER Working Paper
     Series, No. 24153.

[75] US Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations [1963]. Industrial Development Bond Fi-
     nancing: A Commission Report. Washington D.C., US: Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental
     Relations.

[76] US Internal Revene Service [years between 1945 and 2000]. Statistics of Income: Individual Income
     Tax Returns. Washington DC: Department of the Treasury.

[77] Wallis, J. [2000]. American Government Finance in the Long-Run: 1790 to 1990”, Journal of Eco-
     nomic Perspectives, 61-82.

[78] Wilson, J. [1989]. “On the Optimal Tax Base for Commodity Taxation”, American Economic Review,
     79(5).

[79] Yale L.J. [1961]. “The Public Purpose of Municipal Financing for Industrial Development”, Yale
     Law Journal, 70(5).


[80] Yitzhaki, S. [1979]. “A Note on Optimal Taxation and Administrative Costs”, American Economic
     Review, 475-480.




                                                   39
F IGURE 1: E MPLOYEE SHARE OVER INCOME DISTRIBUTION AND DECREASE IN INCOME TAX EX -
EMPTION THRESHOLD

                                                                                              Panel A: cross country
                                                                                   India                                                                                     Peru
                         0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100




                                                                                                                    0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100
                             Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                        Employment share (%)
                                                           1   2    3      4       5     6       7     8   9   10                                     1   2   3      4       5     6       7     8   9   10
                                                                        Deciles of income distribution                                                            Deciles of income distribution

                                                                              South Africa                                                                             United States
                         0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100




                                                                                                                    0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100
                             Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                        Employment share (%)




                                                           1   2    3      4       5     6       7     8   9   10                                     1   2   3      4       5     6       7     8   9   10
                                                                        Deciles of income distribution                                                            Deciles of income distribution


                                                                                               Employee                                                   Self−Employed

                                                                   Panel B: within country over time US 1870-1960




Notes: These graphs plot the employment-shares of employees and self-employed over deciles of the income-distribution,
for different countries (Panel A) and within the US over time (Panel B). The share of each work-type is defined as the share
of total employment in the decile of the income-distribution. Employees are defined as individuals working in jobs whose
activity generate information trails that can be leveraged for income tax enforcement (Section 3.2). In each graph, the black
solid denotes the location of the personal income tax (PIT) exemption threshold, which is the value of gross income above
which a tax-filer becomes liable to pay income taxes (Section 3.2). Each graph is constructed from nationally representative
micro surveys. Source: Section 3.2 and Appendix Section A.1.




                                                                                                                40
                 F IGURE 2: E MPLOYEE SHARE : REPRESENTATIVE DEVELOPMENT PROFILES
                            Profile for average country at $1065 pc [LHS] and $2226 pc [RHS]




                                          90 100




                                                                                                                              90 100
                                30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                    30 40 50 60 70 80
                                Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                    Employment share (%)
                                          20




                                                                                                                              20
                                          10




                                                                                                                              10
                                          0




                                                                                                                              0
                                                       1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10                          1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10
                                                                   Deciles of income distribution                                                      Deciles of income distribution

                                                                   Employee                Self−Employed                                               Employee                Self−Employed




                            Profile for average country at $3239 pc [LHS] and $5796 pc [RHS]
                                          90 100




                                                                                                                              90 100
                                30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                    30 40 50 60 70 80
                                Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                    Employment share (%)
                                          20




                                                                                                                              20
                                          10




                                                                                                                              10
                                          0




                                                                                                                              0
                                                       1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10                          1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10
                                                                   Deciles of income distribution                                                      Deciles of income distribution

                                                                   Employee                Self−Employed                                               Employee                Self−Employed




                           Profile for average country at $8826 pc [LHS] and $11257 pc [RHS]
                                          90 100




                                                                                                                              90 100
                                30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                    30 40 50 60 70 80
                                Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                    Employment share (%)
                                          20




                                                                                                                              20
                                          10




                                                                                                                              10
                                          0




                                                                                                                              0




                                                       1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10                          1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10
                                                                   Deciles of income distribution                                                      Deciles of income distribution

                                                                   Employee                Self−Employed                                               Employee                Self−Employed




                           Profile for average country at $17141 pc [LHS] and $27960 pc [RHS]
                                          90 100




                                                                                                                              90 100
                                30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                    30 40 50 60 70 80
                                Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                    Employment share (%)
                                          20




                                                                                                                              20
                                          10




                                                                                                                              10
                                          0




                                                                                                                              0




                                                       1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10                          1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10
                                                                   Deciles of income distribution                                                      Deciles of income distribution

                                                                   Employee                Self−Employed                                               Employee                Self−Employed




                           Profile for average country at $38224 pc [LHS] and $53878 pc [RHS]
                                          90 100




                                                                                                                              90 100
                                30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                    30 40 50 60 70 80
                                Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                    Employment share (%)
                                          20




                                                                                                                              20
                                          10




                                                                                                                              10
                                          0




                                                                                                                              0




                                                       1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10                          1   2   3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10
                                                                   Deciles of income distribution                                                      Deciles of income distribution

                                                                   Employee                Self−Employed                                               Employee                Self−Employed



Notes: These figures plot the employment-shares of employees and self-employed over deciles of the income-distribution, for representative
countries at different levels of per capita income. The share of each work-type is defined as the share of total employment in the decile of
the income-distribution. Employees are defined as individuals working in jobs whose activity generates information trails that can be
leveraged for income tax enforcement (Section 3.2). To construct this graph, I partition the cross-country sample into ten groups of ten
countries, based on their level of per capita income. Within each group, I calculate the unweighted average of the employee-share and the
self-employed share profiles across the 10 countries. I plot this average profile for every group, and indicate the average per capita income
of the group. I use expenditure-side real GDP at chained PPPs in 2011 US$ from the same year as the country-survey year. Source: Section
3.2 and Appendix Section A.1.



                                                                                                               41
 F IGURE 3: E MPLOYEE SHARE : WITHIN US AND PAIRED SYNTHETIC CROSS - COUNTRY PROFILES
                                                                  US 1870 profile [LHS] and US 1935 profile [RHS]




                        20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                                                                                20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                       Employee share of employment (%)




                                                                                                                               Employee share of employment (%)
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                10
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                          1   2   3         4        5       6         7      8       9   10                                      1   2   3         4        5       6         7      8       9   10
                                                                           Deciles of income distribution                                                                          Deciles of income distribution

                                                                      United States             Synthetic cross−country                                                       United States             Synthetic cross−country



                                                                  US 1950 profile [LHS] and US 1960 profile [RHS]
                        20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                                                                                20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                       Employee share of employment (%)




                                                                                                                               Employee share of employment (%)
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                10
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                0


                                                          1   2   3         4        5       6         7      8       9   10                                      1   2   3         4        5       6         7      8       9   10
                                                                           Deciles of income distribution                                                                          Deciles of income distribution

                                                                      United States             Synthetic cross−country                                                       United States             Synthetic cross−country



                                                                  US 1970 profile [LHS] and US 1980 profile [RHS]
                        20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                                                                                20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                       Employee share of employment (%)




                                                                                                                               Employee share of employment (%)
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                10
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                0




                                                          1   2   3         4        5       6         7      8       9   10                                      1   2   3         4        5       6         7      8       9   10
                                                                           Deciles of income distribution                                                                          Deciles of income distribution

                                                                      United States             Synthetic cross−country                                                       United States             Synthetic cross−country



                                                                  US 1990 profile [LHS] and US 2000 profile [RHS]
                        20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                                                                                20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                       Employee share of employment (%)




                                                                                                                               Employee share of employment (%)
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                10
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                0




                                                          1   2   3         4        5       6         7      8       9   10                                      1   2   3         4        5       6         7      8       9   10
                                                                           Deciles of income distribution                                                                          Deciles of income distribution

                                                                      United States             Synthetic cross−country                                                       United States             Synthetic cross−country



Notes: These panels plot employee-shares over the income distribution in the US between 1870 and 2000, in comparison
to employee-profiles based on current countries at similar levels of per capita income. In every graph, the solid red line
indicates the employee-share of economically active employment across deciles of individual gross income in the US, in the
indicated year. In every graph, the hollow and dashed line indicates the employee-share of economically active employment
across deciles of individual gross income in a synthetic country based on the cross-country sample. This synthetic country is
constructed as the average of the countries in the contemporaneous cross-country sample which have real per capita income
that lies within 10% of the per capita income of the US in the historical year. As an example, the synthetic country for the US
in 1870 includes contemporaneous India and Pakistan, while the synthetic country for the US in 1935 includes Indonesia and
Peru. I use the expenditure-side real GDP at chained PPPs in 2011 US$ from Penn World Tables to construct the synthetic
country profiles. Source: Section 3.2-3.3 and Appendix Section A.1.



                                                                                                                          42
   F IGURE 4: E MPLOYEE SHARE , SIZE AND EMPLOYMENT- COMPOSITION OF INCOME TAX BASE
                                                                                             Panel A: employee share across development


                                            100




                                                                                                                                                            100
                Employee share of employment (%)




                                                                                                                                 Employee share of employment (%)
                                           80




                                                                                                                                                            80
                                   60




                                                                                                                                                    60
                          40




                                                                                                                                           40
                 20




                                                                                                                                  20
                                            0




                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                  6      7            8           9            10          11                                                          6   7            8           9            10          11
                                                                                      Log GDP per Capita                                                                                                Log GDP per Capita

                                                                         Cross−Country Obs           Local poly + 95% CI                                                                   Cross−Country Obs    US time−series (1870−2010)


                                                                      Panel B: expansion of personal income tax base base across development
                                                        100




                                                                                                                                                                         100
                Income tax base share of employment (%)




                                                                                                                                 Income tax base share of employment (%)
                                                80




                                                                                                                                                                 80
                                        60




                                                                                                                                                        60
                              40




                                                                                                                                               40
                     20




                                                                                                                                      20
                                            0




                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                  6      7            8           9            10          11                                                          6   7            8            9           10          11
                                                                                      Log GDP per Capita                                                                                                Log GDP per Capita

                                                                         Cross−Country Obs           Local poly + 95% CI                                                                   Cross−Country Obs    US time−series(1870−2010)


                      Panel C: constant, maximized employee share on income tax base across development
            Employee share of income tax base, standardized (%)




                                                                                                                                 Employee share of income tax base, standardized (%)
                                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                  80




                                                                                                                                                                       80
                                         60




                                                                                                                                                     40      60
                                40




                                                                                                                                           20
                     20




                                                                                                                                  0
             0




                                                                  6      7            8           9            10          11                                                          6   7            8            9           10          11
                                                                                      Log GDP per Capita                                                                                                Log GDP per Capita

                                                                         Cross−Country Obs           Local poly + 95% CI                                                                   Cross−Country Obs    US time−series (1870−2010)


Notes: These figures document changes in employment and tax structure across development, using the 100 countries in the
cross-country micro-database. In each panel, the left-hand scatter-plot is based on the full cross-country sample, while the
right-hand scatter-plot overlays the US historical series onto the cross-country plot. Income per capita in the cross-country
sample and in the US historical sample is measured with expenditure-side real GDP at chained PPPs in 2011 US$ from
Penn World Tables. In the left-hand plot, the dashed lines indicate a local polynomial fit with 95% confidence bands. Panel
A plots the employee-share of employment against per capita income. Employee-jobs are defined as those which activity
generate information trails that can be used for income tax enforcement . Employment is the total number of individuals in
the economically active workforce, following the definition of the U.N. System of National Accounts. Panel B plots the size
of the income tax base against per capita income. The size is defined as the sum of percentiles in the gross individual income
distribution that lie above the income tax exemption threshold, and represents the share of the economically active workforce
that is liable to pay income taxes. See Section 3.2 for more details on the measurement of employee-jobs and the exemption
threshold. Panel C plots the employee-share composition of the tax base. This is constructed as the employee-share of
employment whose gross income lies above the exemption threshold. This share is expressed relative to the saturated share,
which is calculated as the highest possible employee-share that can be obtained by locating the threshold anywhere in the
gross income distribution. The ratio of the actual to the saturated share will therefore be equal to 1 if the actual location of
the threshold maximizes the employee-share above the threshold in every country’s income distribution. Source: Section
3.2 and Appendix Section A.1.

                                                                                                                                43
            F IGURE 5: I NCOME TAX BASE , RATE AND COLLECTION ACROSS DEVELOPMENT
                                                              Panel A: PIT base, rate and collection across development




                                                                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                              Income tax size of base and rate (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ratio IncomeTax/GDP (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                          40        60




                                                                                                                                                                                                               6         8
                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                     6       7             8           9                                  10           11
                                                                                                                                           Log GDP per capita

                                                                                                                         Income tax rate           Income tax base                             IncomeTax/GDP


                             Panel B: conditional association between PIT collection and base [LHS], rate [RHS]
                         20




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                   15




                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                    Beta=.088 (.006)                                                                                                                    Beta=.000 (.025)
             Ratio IncomeTax/GDP (%)




                                                                                                                                                        Ratio IncomeTax/GDP (%)
                        10




                                                                                                                                                                   10
            5




                                                                                                                                                       5
                         0




                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                            0           20            40           60                                         80           100                                     20          30           40           50                  60    70
                                                                   Income tax base size (%)                                                                                                                  Income tax rate (%)


                                  Panel C: collection across development, conditional on PIT base [LHS], rate [RHS]
                         20




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                   15




                                                                                                                                                                              15




                                                Beta=.000 (.002)                                                                                                                        Beta=.022 (.002)
             Ratio IncomeTax/GDP (%)




                                                                                                                                                        Ratio IncomeTax/GDP (%)
                        10




                                                                                                                                                                   10
            5




                                                                                                                                                       5
                         0




                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                        6              7               8            9                                            10           11                                   6            7            8            9                   10        11
                                                                       Log GDP per Capita                                                                                                                    Log GDP per Capita


Notes: All graphs use the 100 countries contained in the cross-country micro data-base. Panel A plots the evolution of PIT
collection, base, and rate across development. Each line corresponds to a local polynomial fit between log GDP per capita:
income tax to GDP (red solid line); size of income tax base (blue short dash line); and, top marginal income tax rate (MTR,
green long dash line). The size of the income tax base in a country is defined as the sum of percentiles in the gross individual
income distribution that lie above the income tax exemption threshold, and represents the share of the economically active
workforce that is liable to pay income taxes. Panel B plots the conditional association between income tax to GDP and income
tax base (MTR), controlling for MTR (income tax base). Per example, to construct the right-hand side figure, I first regress
both [income tax/GDP] on income tax base on MTR, and calculate residuals. I then group observations into fifty equal-sized
(2 percentile-point) bins based on the tax base residuals, and scatter the means of [income tax/GDP] and tax base residuals
within each bin, adding back the sample mean of each variable to ease interpretation. Panel C plots the association between
residual income tax and development, after regressing income tax on PIT base (left-hand graph) or MTR (right-hand graph).
In Panels B and C, the solid line shows the best linear fit, estimated on the underlying cross-country data. Source: Section
3.2. and Appendix Section A.1.




                                                                                                                                                    44
    F IGURE 6: R ISE OF INCOME TAX , TAX BASE EXPANSION AND EMPLOYEE SHARE : US STATES
                         Panel A: State income tax share of total taxes: all states 1939-2010




                                                                              .8
                                                              Individual Income Tax/Total Tax
                                                                                                      Beta=.1758 (s.e.=.0025)


                                                                    .2        .4
                                                                              0         .6




                                                                                                8.5                     9               9.5          10           10.5                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                 Lg per capita constant real income

                                                                                                                        State−Year obs                                                             Linear Fit + 95% CI


                Panel B: employee share and state exemption threshold: average state 1950-1980
                                                                                                                      1950                                                                                             1960
                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                         Share of decile−employment




                                                                                                                                                     Share of decile−employment
                                                             .75




                                                                                                                                                                                         .75
                                                             .5




                                                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                                             .25




                                                                                                                                                                                         .25
                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                1               2     3   4       5          6   7     8    9   10                                             1   2   3   4       5          6   7     8     9   10
                                                                                                              Income decile                                                                                    Income decile


                                                                                                      Employees                      Self−employed                                                     Employees                      Self−employed

                                                                                                                      1970                                                                                             1980
                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                Share of decile−employment




                                                                                                                                                            Share of decile−employment
                                                             .75




                                                                                                                                                                                         .75
                                                             .5




                                                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                                             .25




                                                                                                                                                                                         .25
                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                1               2     3   4       5          6   7     8    9   10                                             1   2   3   4       5          6   7     8     9   10
                                                                                                              Income decile                                                                                    Income decile


                                                                                                      Employees                      Self−employed                                                     Employees                      Self−employed


Notes: Panel A plots the state income tax share of total state taxes, using all state-year between 1939 and 2010, against log
per capita income. State income tax is the sum of corporate income and personal income tax revenues. The tax revenue
data is from the State Government Finance series, published by the Census. The real per capita income is constructed as
the per capita income in a state-year from the historical BEA series, deflated by the historical CPI. The solid lines denote the
linear fit with a 95% confidence interval from the regression on the full underlying state-year observations. Panel B plots the
employment-shares of employees and self-employed over deciles of the gross income income distribution, for the average
state in the US between 1950 and 1980. An employee-job is defined as a job which activity generates an information trail
that is relevant for income tax enforcement. Employees are expressed as a share of the total economically active workforce.
In every graph, the black solid line represents the location of the State income tax exemption threshold in the gross income
distribution. This threshold represents the value of gross income above which single filer becomes liable to pay State income
taxes, and is constructed using the state tax-calculator from Bakija (2009). For more details on the construction of the exemp-
tion threshold and employee-job, please see Section 4.1. Every graph in Panel B represents the average US continental State
in the indicated year. Source: Section 4.1 and Appendix B.1.




                                                                                                                                                 45
                                                                              F IGURE 7: I MPACT OF UPHOLDING EVENT ON OUTCOMES
                                                                                                                                                             Impact on IDB issuance




                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                   Cumulative IDB Issuance, indexed to 1 in year 0
                                                                                                  0         10          20          30
                                                                                                                                                      −15        −10            −5               0                                                             5            10
                                                                                                                                                                              Years to/since upholding

                                                                                                                                                             Lag to vote: between 5 and 10 years                                                       Lag to vote: >10 years


                                                                                                                                                            Impact on employee-share
                                                                                                                          1.2
                                                                                                  Employee−share, indexed to 1 in year 0
                                                                                                           1              1.1
                                                                                                                          .9




                                                                                                                                                      −15        −10            −5               0                                                             5            10
                                                                                                                                                                              Years to/since upholding

                                                                                                                                                             Lag to vote: between 5 and 10 years                                                       Lag to vote: >10 years


                                                                        Impact on income tax reform likelihood and location of threshold
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.4
            Cumulative tax base reforms, indexed to 1 in year 0




                                                                                                                                                                                         Location of tax threshold in income distribution
                                                        1.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.2
                                            1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                 1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                .6
            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                  −15       −10            −5               0                                                          5            10                                                         −15       −10            −5               0            5              10
                                                                                         Years to/since upholding                                                                                                                                                     Years to/since upholding

                                                                        Lag to vote: between 5 and 10 years                                                    Lag to vote: >10 years                                                                Lag to vote: between 5 and 10 years         Lag to vote: >10 years


Notes: These graphs provide graphical evidence on the impact of the Industrial Development Bonds (IDB) program. Every
graph shows two series: the long-dash, square line indicates the group of States for which the lag between the vote and
upholding event lasted between 5 and 10 years; the short-dash, circle line represents that group of States which the lag
between vote and upholding lasted more than 10 years. The vote event is the year that the State legislature decided to vote
on an IDB statute or provision, while the upholding event is the year that the voted IDB statute or provision was upheld
as constitutional by the State supreme court. For more details on these events and the causes of the lag between them,
please see Section 4.1. In every series, the variable of interest is indexed to 1 in the year of the upholding event, which is
denoted with a solid vertical line. The distance between the vertical and the long-dashed (short-dashed) line demarks the
intermediary time-period after the vote event but before the upholding event in the States for which the lag from vote to
upholding was between 5 and 10 years (longer than 10 years). In Panel A, the outcome is the cumulative number of IDB
issuances +1 (to avoid dividing by 0 in years with no cumulative issuances). In Panel B, the outcome is the employee-share
of gross income. In the left-hand graph of Panel C, the outcome is the cumulative number of legislative reforms to the
nominal value of the State income tax exemption threshold; in the right-hand graph, the outcome is the decile-location of
the income tax exemption threshold in the State’s income distribution. Source: Section 4.1-4.2 and Appendix Section B.2.
                                                                                                                                                                                    46
         F IGURE 8: D ISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF UPHOLDING EVENT ON EMPLOYEE SHARE
                                                           .075
                Decile−specific employee−share change (in ppt)
             −.025        0          .025       .05




                                                                  1   2   3       4        5       6         7    8       9    10
                                                                                 Deciles of income distribution

                                                                          IDB−impact: 1(Uphold) coefficient           95% CI

Notes: This graph displays the impacts of the IDB upholding event on the distribution of employee-share across deciles of
the State income distribution. The graph plots coefficients θbj on the 1(Uphold) indicator in a regression on employee-share
in decile j = 1, ..., 10, using specification 1. Each circle denotes the decile-j point estimate θbj . The dashed lines denote the
95% confidence interval of the point-estimate, where standard errors are clustered at the state level. The black solid line
denotes the average location of income tax exemption threshold in the IDB States, calculated in the year prior to the vote
event. Source: Section 4.4 and Appendix Section B.1.




                                                                                           47
                       TABLE 1: D ETERMINANTS OF CHANGE TO IDB LITIGATION - STATUS


                                                                    LHS=1(Upheld)


      Panel A: Politics
      1(Civil law)             5.435        12.781       12.117        9.789         12.558        10.291       12.956       12.320
                             (3.201)***   (5.212)***   (4.592)***    (4.815)***    (5.489)***    (3.884)***   (5.031)***   (4.921)***

      1(Hist rail default)                   .337         .567           .378         .340          .671         .336         .428
                                          (.105)***      (.334)       (.120)***    (.116)***       (.449)     (.108)***     (.215)*


      Covariate                  -            -        SupremeC      Election       Voting       Population   Neighbor     RightWork
                                                       appointed?    dummies      restrictions     total      uphold?        laws?
      Signif 10 pct?             -            -            N            N              N            N            N             N


      Panel B: Economics
      1(Civil law)             11.020       10.266       11.029        12.803        13.102        10.547       12.776       11.461
                             (6.981)***   (3.905)***   (4.182)***    (5.134)***    (6.031)***    (4.370)***   (5.221)***   (5.988)***

      1(Hist rails)             .358         .677         .571          .332          .294           .461        .338          .358
                             (.092)***      (.455)       (.350)       (.148)**     (.078)***       (.208)*    (.121)***     (.115)***

      Covariate               Redev       LabForce      Manuf        Employee       Income          PIT         PIT          TotT
                             counties      growth       growth        share         per cap         base        take         take
      Signif 10 pct?            N            N            N             N              N             N           N            N



Notes: This table reports the results of estimating non-parametric Cox proportional hazard models, where hazard rates are
reported. The unit of observation is a state-year. A State enters the sample in the year where the State legislature votes in
a statute or provision authorizing the IDB program. The State drops from the sample once the highest instance of the State
court system upholds the constitutionality of the voted statute or provision in a leading court case. Each column in each
panel reports the coefficients on a dummy for civil law origins, a dummy for historical rail defaults, as well as a description
of the included covariate and whether the included covariate is significant at the 10 percent level. The test for significance
relates to the null that the coefficient is equal to one. Panel A includes political covariates that could determine a change in
litigation status: whether State supreme court members are appointed or elected; whether it is a State election year; whether
voter restrictions are in place; the total population size; whether a geographically adjacent State has upheld the IDB statute;
and, whether right-to-work laws are in place. Panel B includes economic potential determinants: the share of counties in a
State that are classified as “redevelopment areas” and eligible for local development financing according to Federal criteria;
the yearly labor force growth; the yearly manufacturing workforce growth; the employee-share of employment; the income
per capita; the size of the State income tax base; the ratio of State income taxes to GDP; the ratio of State total taxes to GDP.
∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗ denote significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, 1 percent level. Standard errors robust to clustering at the state
level. Sources: Section 4.1-4.2 and Appendix Section B.2.




                                                                     48
      TABLE 2: E FFECTS OF IDB P ROGRAM ON E MPLOYMENT AND I NCOME TAX O UTCOMES




                                                            (E-share)                   (K/y)           Log(PIT/GDP)

                                                       (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)

      1(Vote)                                          .003         .003         -.357        -.343             .027
                                                      (.005)       (.235)       (.232)       (.232)            (.039)
      1(Uphold)                                        .017         .015         -.639        -.794             .176
                                                    (.005)***    (.006)***     (.278)**    (.334)**          (.083)**
      1(Uphold)x1(EoI)                                              .003                      .356             -.244
                                                                   (.007)                   (.197)*           (.137)*


      F-test: 1(Uphold) + 1(Uphold)x1(EoI)                           10.17                   1.50              0.51
      (p-value)                                                      (.003)                 (.230)            (.481)

      Mean outcome variable                           0.771          0.771      7.084       7.084              .972

      State FE                                          x               x          x            x               x
      Year FE                                           x               x          x            x               x
      State-year controls                               x               x          x            x               x

      States                                            28             28         28             28             28
      State-year Obs                                   466            466        466            466            466

Notes: This table reports results from estimating the following regression

                yst = β + α1 (Vote-in)st + θ1 (Upheld)st + β1 (Upheld)st × 1 (EoI)st + λXst + µs + γt + εst

where s denotes state and t denotes time. 1 (Vote-in)st indicates whether a vote has occurred in the state House to allow
issuance of IDB but the IDB has not yet been upheld, 1 (Upheld)st indicates whether the State court system has upheld the
constitutionality of the voted IDB statute or provision. The vote-in and upholding events are mutually exclusive. 1 (EoI)st
is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when a State has passed an exchange of information agreement with the Federal
Internal Revenue Service. In Columns 1-2, the outcome variable is the employee-share of the economically active workforce.
In Columns 3-4, the outcome variable is the ratio of the State income tax exemption threshold, K, to State per capita income,
y. K represents the value of gross income above which an individual filer becomes liable to pay State income taxes. In
Column 5, the outcome variable is (log) ratio of State individual income taxes to GDP. In the middle of the table is reported
the mean of the outcome variable in the period before the vote event. The state-year controls, Xst , are indicator variables for
election year, and indicator variables for the existence of voting restrictions in the form of poll tax and literacy tests. These
are the first stage instruments used by Besley et al. (2010) to study political competition and policy-making in US states.
∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗ denote significance at the 10%, 5%, 1% level. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
Source: Section 4.2 and Appendix Section B.1.




                                                                49
                                                     TABLE 3: E FFECTS OF IDB P ROGRAM ON C ONFOUNDING O UTCOMES


                                          Panel A
                                                                    Log(CorpIncTax/GDP)            Log(SalesTax/GDP)      Log(PropertyTax/GDP)          1(PIT Withholding)       PIT MTR        Tax Administration

                                                                                (1)                         (2)                       (3)                        (4)                    (5)             (6)

                                          1(Vote)                               -.030                       .067                     -.038                      -.000                 .123             .006
                                                                               (.050)                      (.056)                    (.026)                    (.001)                (.104)           (.043)
                                          1(Uphold)                             -.058                       -.047                    -.030                      -.001                 .034             -.025
                                                                               (.136)                      (.051)                    (.049)                    (.002)                (.152)           (.080)
                                          1(Uphold)x1(EoI)                      .003                         .114                    -.056                      -.000                 .006             -.020
                                                                               (.101)                      (.098)                    (.070)                    (.001)                (.142)           (.076)

                                          Mean outcome variable                .991                        2.521                     .860                       .014                   .129            2.492

                                          State FE                               x                           x                         x                         x                      x               x
                                          Year FE                                x                           x                         x                         x                      x               x
                                          State-year controls                    x                           x                         x                         x                      x               x

                                          States                                28                          28                        28                        28                       28             28
                                          State-year Obs                        466                         466                       466                       466                     466            466



                                        Panel B
                                                                Income per Capita       Top 1 percent income share   Max Unemp Benefits       1(Right to Work Laws)     Political Competition    Democratic Vote Share

                                                                       (1)                         (2)                      (3)                        (4)                       (5)                        (6)
50




                                        1(Vote)                      27.401                        .162                   -17.910                      .008                    -.001                      -.022
                                                                    (26.799)                      (.114)                  (9.226)*                   (.009)                    (.009)                    (.019)
                                        1(Uphold)                    -8.165                        .040                   -10.448                      .050                    -.004                      -.016
                                                                    (35.421)                      (.223)                  (18.530)                   (.046)                    (.014)                    (.017)
                                        1(Uphold)x1(EoI)             35.958                        .067                    -2.422                     -.037                     .004                      -.022
                                                                    (36.605)                      (.202)                  (18.085)                   (.035)                    (.009)                   (.013)*

                                        Mean outcome variable       7641.297                      13.433                  307.366                     .234                      -.112                    .539

                                        State FE                       x                            x                        x                         x                         x                            x
                                        Year FE                        x                            x                        x                         x                         x                            x
                                        State-year controls            x                            x                        x                         x                         x                            x

                                        States                        28                           28                       28                         28                        28                       28
                                        State-year Obs                466                          466                      466                       466                       466                      466

     Notes: This table reports results from estimating the following regression

                                                  yst = β + α1 (Vote-in)st + θ1 (Upheld)st + β1 (Upheld)st × 1 (EoI)st + λXst + µs + γt + εst

     where s denotes state and t denotes time. 1 (Vote-in)st indicates whether a vote has occurred in the state House to allow issuance of IDB but the IDB has not yet been upheld,
     1 (Upheld)st indicates whether the State court system has upheld the constitutionality of the voted IDB statute or provision. The vote-in and upholding events are mutually
     exclusive. 1 (EoI)st is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when a State has passed an exchange of information agreement with the Federal Internal Revenue Service.
     In Panel A, the outcome variables are: ratio of corporate income tax to GDP; ratio of sales taxes to GDP; ratio of property taxes to GDP; an indicator for whether a State has
     implemented withholding on State income taxes; the State top marginal income tax rate; the number of State tax departments. In Panel B, the outcome variables are: income
     per capita; the top 1% share of gross income; the maximum State weekly unemployment benefits; an indicator for whether right-to-work laws are in place; the measure
     of political competition from Besley et al. (2010); and, the Democratic vote-share across all State-specific elections. The state-year controls, Xst , are indicator variables for
     election year, and indicator variables for the existence of voting restrictions in the form of poll tax and literacy tests. ∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗ denote significance at the 10%, 5%, 1% level.
     Robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. Source: 4.2 and Appendix Section B.1.
Online Appendix for ’Employment Structure and the Rise of the
                    Modern Tax System’

                                               Anders Jensen ∗


                                                 January 2019




 ∗
     Harvard Kennedy School and NBER. Contact: anders_jensen@hks.harvard.edu.


                                                        0
A Cross-development material
A.1 Data sources and construction of variables

In this sub-section, I provide additional details on the novel micro data-base used in Section 3. I

first outline the underlying data and construction of variables in the cross-section of countries. I then

outline the data and variables construction used in the historical US time-series.



A.1.1 Cross-country: sources and methodology

The cross-country database contains micro-data collected from 100 countries around the world, to

document changes in employment structure transformation in as many incremental stages over de-

velopment as possible. I chose to focus on countries with at least 1 million citizens. The selection of a

survey in a particular country had to satisfy three criteria. First, it must be nationally representative.

Second, it must survey respondents in all forms of work arrangement as opposed to, per example,

only salaried workers. Third, it must contain continuous information on all sources of income, instead

of, say, only wage earnings.

   Given these criteria, the preferred type is a living conditions survey. This type of survey will often

dominate a labor force survey, for three reasons. First, the living conditions survey usually contains

information on a broader range of income sources which, especially in the context of less-developed

countries, can be quite important in order to construct the lower deciles of the country’s income distri-

bution. Second, it is not always clear what the underlying sample design is for the labor force survey,

and it could potentially omit individuals which in the context of this study should be included in the

survey, such as casual wage day laborers and household family workers; on the other hand, the scope

of a living conditions survey is usually to assess the conditions of a nationally representative sample

of individuals, which should include all the alternative work type patterns. Third, the sample size of

a living condition survey is typically larger than that for a labor force survey, which does not have to

imply better quality of data, but usually is due to sampling design which attempts to survey all geo-

graphical areas in the country. Basic health and demographics surveys are discarded, because they do

not contain information on work arrangements and income.

   The data collection effort resulted in 100 surveys, which are detailed in Table A.1, displaying for

each country: the year of the survey; the per capita income group; the survey type; the coverage; the

sample size; and, the original source. The income group corresponds to the World Bank classification


                                                    1
of the country in the year of the survey. The micro data-base covers all levels of development: 20%

of surveys from low-income countries; 28% from lower-middle income countries; 21% from upper-

middle income countries; and, 31% from high-income countries. 93 out of the 100 data-sets are living

condition surveys, 5 are labor force surveys, and the remaining 2 are censuses. In low and lower-

middle countries, I obtain almost all surveys directly from the national statistics office, or the relevant

government agency. In these countries, the average sample size is substantially larger than the corre-

sponding Living Standards and Measurement Survey (LSMS) from the same country.

   The construction of the employee variable is based on questions similar to the ’class of worker’

question in the US Census. All cross-country surveys were chosen to ensure the highest possible in-

ternational comparability. Two features in particular serve that purpose, and are common across all

surveys. The first feature is the high level of detail in the categories of the ’worker-class’ question. In

all surveys, I can therefore distinguish between employees and employers. This removes the possibil-

ity that employers of large firms are counted as employees, in which case the comparison of employee

versus self-employed would partially be confounded by a firm size comparison. In addition, I can

systematically distinguish between employees and both family and non-family workers in household

enterprises. I can also systematically distinguish between employees that work for a salary versus em-

ployees that work for in-kind payments. Finally, and related to the previous point, I can distinguish

between casual daily wage laborers and ’regular’ employees in the countries where seasonal work is

arguably most prevalent. It is true, however, that I cannot systematically distinguish casual wage la-

borers, and non-regular wage earners more generally, from contract-based regular employees. Taken

together, this discussion implies that, with the exception of daily wage laborers, I can construct em-

ployee and self-employment categories in a consistent and internationally comparable manner across

all countries. The second advantageous feature of all surveys is that my definition of employee ver-

sus self-employed is systematically based on an ’objective’ worker-class question. In contrast, certain

surveys allow respondents to choose ’informal sector’ in response to the worker-type question. As dis-

cussed in the main text, my employee classification is closely related to the ILO concept of formality.

Nonetheless, the specific definition of formality embedded in surveys is likely to vary across countries

in ways that are hard to measure, and relying on such responses would reduce the transparency of

comparisons across countries. As such, I discard all surveys where I cannot construct the employee

classification based on an detailed and objective ’class of worker’ question.

   I focus on calculating gross income from all sources in order to be conceptually consistent with the


                                                    2
broadest possible income-definition in the tax code. This leads me to calculate four sources of income:

wage income, self-employment income, capital income, and miscellaneous income (such as lottery

receipts). Most importantly, I ensure that I can calculate both employee and self-employment income

with precision. In this context, the most significant challenge is to calculate self-employment income

in agriculture in less-developed countries. Agricultural earned revenue includes the value of crops

sold to others. I do not attempt to create a monetary value of in-kind sales, as offering and receipt of

in-kind goods and services is not subject to tax. Agricultural capital revenue includes the sale of live-

stock, income from rental of equipment, and share-cropping income. From this revenue I attempt to

subtract costs, which include expenditure on inputs, wages paid out to workers, and new investments.

In a limited number of countries, I do not observe any agricultural revenue for respondents that are

self-employed in agriculture. These are most often contributing family workers on farms where the

full output is consumed by the family. In this limited number of cases, I construct the income as the

market value of the own-consumed output, as estimated by the respondent. In all surveys, I exclude

two sources: social transfers, and in-kind goods and services. I exclude social transfers because it falls

outside the concept of taxable income. The monetary value of in-kind goods and services are some-

times included in taxable income, often on a presumptive basis. However, apart from the mentioned

case above, I exclude this source of income because I cannot measure it consistently across all surveys.

Non-monetary income is often more important for less wealthy individuals, and is more prevalent in

less developed countries. In the surveys where there exists systematic data on the monetary value of

non-monetary income, I can confirm that the inclusion of these sources of income does not change the

distributional employee-profile. That is because these sources of non-monetary income are too small

in magnitude to overturn the decile-ranking of individual income.

   In 7 countries, I cannot calculate gross individual income with precision. These countries, also

reported in Table A.2, are: Democratic Republic of Congo, Liberia, Ethiopia, Malawi, Mali, Burkina

Faso, Cambodia. In the case of DRC, Liberia, Ethiopia, and Malawi, I do not comprehensively observe

either agriculture sales or costs, so I cannot calculate agricultural self-employment income. In Mali,

Burkina Faso, and Cambodia, I do not comprehensively observe costs of non-agriculture own-account

workers, so I cannot calculate non-agricultural self-employment income. In these 7 cases, which are

among the poorest in the micro-database, I instead calculate total individual expenditure, and use it as

a proxy for total income. There exists a set of low-income countries in which I have both good income

and expenditure data. In results not reported, I can confirm that the employee-share profiles are very


                                                    3
similar when using either income or expenditure to calculate the x-axis distribution. As mapping

expenditure into income is difficult, I do not attempt to locate the income tax exemption threshold in

these 7 countries.

   While I define the employee-status based on the respondent’s primary job activity, I attempt to

calculate income from all activities reported during the reference period. The main issue that arises

in this context is the allocation of income which is reported at the household, rather than individual,

level. For sources of earned income that are not at the individual level, I assign equal portions of

this income to each economically active member of the household that reports having undertaken this

activity during the reference period. Per example, the value of sold crops will be distributed equally

among all household members that report having contributed to the family farm, either as a first or

secondary activity. For sources of non-earned income reported at the household level, I assign an

equal portion to each economically active member, such as in the case of property rental income.

   Whenever a country’s tax code is based on annual amounts and the reference period in the coun-

try’s survey module is not, I construct the annual income distribution. I multiply the regular amount

by the number of periods in the year – e.g. if wage income was reported monthly, I multiply it by the

number of months that the wage income is reported to have been received during the past year. In the

case where no periodicity exists, I assume that the flow was occurring during the whole year with the

same pattern as during the reference period.

   In every country survey, I limit the sample to the economically active population, following the

definition of employment from the U.N. System of National Accounts. This definition is also used

in Bicks, Fuchs-Schundeln, & Lagakos (2018), and in Feng, Lagakos, & Rauch (2018), which study

respectively how hours worked and unemployment vary with development. I code employment-

type based on the primary job in the reference period. The primary job is often explicitly defined as

the job in which the respondent spent most hours during the reference period. The reference period

in the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) is annual, while it is predominantly monthly in the remaining

surveys. The extent to which the periodicity and the focus on the primary job introduce biases in the

representativeness of my employment-categories is discussed in Section A.6.

   In addition to income and employment-categories, the micro-database also contains variables on

education, sector, and geographical location. The geographical location measures whether a respon-

dent lives in an urban area or not. I do not attempt to harmonize this variable, and use the urban

definition in the surveys, which may therefore vary from country to country. I use variables to indi-


                                                  4
cate three levels of education completion: not completed primary; completed primary but not high

school; completed high school. I chose to not distinguish further levels of education, in order to max-

imize the number of surveys where I could create consistent measures. Finally, I code the sector of

the primary job. The aim was to create a set of sectoral categories which are consistent with the ISIC

classification. I create four sectoral categories: agriculture; manufacturing ; services; and, public ad-

ministration. I define these four categories in relation to the divisions of the ISIC 4.4 classification,

where: agriculture contains Section A; manufacturing and construction contains Sections B to F; ser-

vices contains Sections G to M, and S to U; and, public administration and education contains Sections

N to R. As such, the manufacturing sector also contains mining and construction; the services sector

also contains wholesale and retail trade, transportation, IT, finance, and activities of household enter-

prises; and, public administration also contains education, social work, and entertainment. Most of

the industry codes in the surveys do not contain a pre-existing ISIC classification. To the best extent

possible, I therefore first map the survey-categories to ISIC divisions, and then to my 4 sectoral cate-

gories. I do not include the sectoral variable if the survey has data only on a subset of the categories -

per example, if a survey records that a job is not in the agricultural sector, but does not specify which

non-agricultural sector it belongs to. The availability of the geography, education, and sector variables

across surveys is described in Table A.2. These variables are used in the regression analysis in Section

A.5.



A.1.2 Historical US time-series: sources and methodology

The historical federal profiles in the US between 1950 and 2010 were constructed using the decen-

nial Census samples, extracted from the IPUMS USA database. I exclude all respondents that are not

active in the labor force during the reference period. I calculate the individual income distribution,

based on the measure of gross income at the individual level. To construct the income distribution,

I use the measure of total, pre-tax, personal income. Farm and non-farm business income, as well as

wage income, are consistently recorded in every Census sample. I use the detailed ’class of worker’

question, which allows me to assign unpaid family workers to the self-employed category. Conse-

quently, the self-employed category includes employers, own account workers, self employed that are

not incorporated, and self-employed that are incorporated. Given the resemblance with the categories

contained in the cross-country surveys, there is strong comparability between these US historical pro-



                                                    5
files and the cross-country profiles constructed in Figure 3. I apply individual weights to estimate the

employee-share of every decile of the income distribution in every decade.

   Before 1950, the decennial Census does not report total personal income at the individual level. The

1940 1 percent sample does contain wage and salary income, but no business income nor farm income,

which are required to construct a personal gross income distribution. Instead, I use the 1935-36 Study

of Consumer Purchases. The scope of the study was to “ascertain for the first time in a single national

survey the earning and spending habits of inhabitants of large and small cities, villages, and farms”

(ICPSR Study 8908, 2009). The survey was the result of a joint effort by the Bureau of Labor Statistics

and the Bureau of Home Economics of the Department of Agriculture, and is meant to have been the

sampling-methodology predecessor for the income-component in Census. The survey contains both a

labor force component, where respondents gave information on income and housing, and for a subset

of the total sample, a living conditions component where respondents gave additional information on

expenditure. The primary sampling units were chosen to represent “the demographic, regional, and

economic characteristics of the United States” (ICPSR, 2009). From these areas, a randomly selected

group of approximately 700,000 families were screened in a first wave. From this first wave, 300,000

families were chosen to supply basic income and housing info, and a subset of 61,000 families were

selected to provide additional expenditure information. It is important to understand the selection

criteria into the different waves. The ICPSR accompanying documentation explains that in order to

be selected out of the first wave, the requirements were: “families include at least two members,

with husband and wife married for at least one year, and with no more than the equivalent of ten

boarders for the survey year (...) farm families had to live in a setting that met the Census definition

of a farm; the family itself must operate the farm (or in the southeast, be a sharecropper) and have

conducted farming activities for at least one year” (ICPSR Codebook, 2009). Families were admitted

to the first wave “without restriction in terms of occupation, income, employment status, or whether

they were drawing or had drawn relief during the year.” Selection into the second-wave where the

survey included expenditure components, was based on the following criteria: “non-farm families

must have had at least one wage earner in a clerical, professional, or business occupation. A minimum

income for the survey year of $500 was required in the largest cities and $250 in the smaller cities and

rural areas (...) Families that had received relief were excluded from this third wave.” These criteria

produce a highly selected sample for the second-wave respondents, and hence I base the analysis on

the sample of first-wave respondents.


                                                   6
      The ICPRS data-sample that I use for the 1935 Federal profile is based on a random sub-sample of

approximately 5,000 families who only completed the first-wave ’labor force’ component of the sur-

vey.1 The ICPSR sub-sample was created in the following way: “a sampling fraction of 1 schedule

for entry for every 83 schedules counted was chosen” from the urban sample, creating 3200 sched-

ules from the larger urban areas and 1800 schedules from the more rural areas”; the ICPSR sample

consists of schedules “spread across both the rural and urban portions of the original investigation.”

The employee classification is based on ’status of employment’ question, which is identical to the

(non-detailed) ’class of worker’ question used in all US Censuses from 1950 onward. I code as an

employee any individual respondent who reports being a “salaried worker/wage earner.” I code as

self-employed any respondent who reports being “self-employed”, and any respondent who does not

specify a type of work but declares to be working, is above age 20 and who has substantial work-

related income. I exclude all respondents that are employed on work-relief projects in their primary

job. As such, the sample closely resembles the economically active workforce definition used in the

cross-country sample. Total gross income only exists at the household level. Rather than try to assign

income at the individual level within the household, I focus on the work-type of the head of house-

hold. I then rank individuals based on the reported total income, and estimate the employee-share in

each income decile.

      The 1935-36 survey marked a clear shift in focus of the surveys conducted by the Bureau of Labor

Statistics. Indeed, the surveys carried out prior to the 1930s focused on measuring family income and

expenditure patterns of the U.S. employed workers and their families. Consequently, the available

surveys, including the “Cost of living in the United States, 1917-1919” (ICPRS 7711, 1986) and the

“Cost of living of industrial workers in the United States and Europe, 1888-1890” (Haines, 2006) con-

tain data from families of wage earners or salaried workers in industrial locales scattered throughout

the U.S. In order to construct a historical profile before the 1930s, I use data from Lindert & Williamson

(2016), which studies incomes in the U.S. between 1650 and 1870.

      Unlike previous work which approaches the measurement of income during this historical period

from the production-side or the expenditure-side, Lindert & Williamson build estimates of income

based on personal income records, assembling nominal earnings from free labor and property in-

come. The approach to estimating income in Lindert & Williamson derives from combining informa-
  1

  The ICPSR data available from the 1935-36 survey has also been used in Collins & Wanamaker (2014), Costa (2001), Margo
(1993).



                                                           7
tion about income and labor force participation counts across occupation-space-time. This amounts

to building ’social tables’ across occupations within a given space-time frame, and the approach is

conceptually similar to social accounting matrices that were used in development economics in the

1970s and 1980s. The authors provide a significant effort to capture all occupation categories in a

given space-time. They draw on data from local tax assessments and occupational directories for

’registered’ occupations, and local censuses for ’unregistered occupations’. These same data sources

usually provide counts of the total number of individuals across the different occupations. The au-

thors combine previous work with new estimates from local sources to derive personal earned income

across occupation-space-time. In some instances, the occupation-space-time income reported was not

at the annual level, and the authors bring the estimates to such level by making assumptions on the

full-time number of hours spent (the assumptions are discussed in Lindert & Williamson, 2016). The

authors also collect data on property income by assuming rates of return on wealth estimates that

vary across occupation-space-time, and combine this with earned income to derive measures of total

income.

   I construct a historical 1870 profile based on the data kindly provided by Peter Lindert. This

cross-section builds upon the 1870 1 percent US Census sample delivered to the authors by IPUMS

USA, which included sampling weights at the individual-level. The 1 percent sample contains space-

occupation counts, which are then merged with the authors’ estimate of total income at the same

level. I extend their analysis and classify all available occupation categories as either self-employed

or employee. I use the detailed description of each occupation category to code employment-type.

Per example, all occupations where a reference is made to ’manager’ are coded as employee cells. The

enumerator instructions for the sample design are particularly useful for my exercise in that they high-

light very clearly the need to distinguish between self-employed and employee status: “Do not call a

man a ’shoemaker’, ’bootmaker’, unless he makes the entire boot or shoe in a small shop. If he works

in a boot and shoe factory, say so (...) Cooks, waiters, etc., in hotels and restaurants will be reported

separately from domestic servants.” The occupation category only exists for the head of household.

The measure of total income includes own labor earnings in agriculture and non-agriculture, farm

and non-farm operating income, and property income. This is a comprehensive measure of gross in-

come before taxes and transfers which is not identical to, but closely resembles, the measure used in

the more recent Federal US and cross-country samples. I apply the sampling weights initially pro-

vided by IPUMS USA. I estimate the employee-share in every decile of the individual gross income


                                                   8
distribution, for the population that is active in the labor force.

   In all the profiles, I locate the Federal income tax exemption threshold in the income distribution.

Note that there was no Federal income tax in 1870. In all profiles from 1935 onward, I use the historical

IRS series which provide details on the nominal value of the standard deduction of a single filer.




                                                     9
                                            Table A.1: Cross-Country Data Sources
Country                  Year   Per Capita Income Group     Survey type        Coverage   Sample Size                    Original source

Albania                  2009        Upper Middle           Labor Force        National     18,997               National Institute of Statistics

Argentina                2009        Upper Middle         Living Conditions     Urban       47,862         National Institute of Statistics and Census

Australia                2014            High             Living Conditions    National     16,801                 Luxembourg Income Study

Austria                  2013            High             Living Conditions    National      5,102              Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Azerbaijan               1995            Low              Living Conditions    National      8,901       Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS)

Bangladesh               2010            Low              Living Conditions    National     19,664               Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics

Belgium                  2000            High             Living Conditions    National      2823               Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Belize                   1999        Lower Middle           Labor Force        National     15,167                  Central Statistical Office

Bolivia                  2007        Lower Middle         Living Conditions    National     16,130               National Institute of Statistics

Brazil                   2009        Upper Middle         Living Conditions    National    191, 810      National Institute of Geographics and Statistics

Bulgaria                 2007        Upper Middle         Living Conditions    National      6,941               National Institute of Statistics

Burkina Faso             2014            Low              Living Conditions    National     32,023      National Institute of Statistics and Demographics

Cambodia                 2009            Low              Living Conditions    National     31,959                    Ministry of Planning

Cameroon                 2007        Lower Middle         Living Conditions    National     51,836               National Institute of Statistics

Canada                   2013            High             Living Conditions    National     27,344              Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Chile                    2009        Upper Middle         Living Conditions    National     90,610       Social Observatory, University Alberto Hurado

China                    2013        Upper Middle         Living Conditions    National     14,782              Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Colombia                 2009        Upper Middle         Living Conditions    National     170,220              National Directory of Statistics

Costa Rica               2009        Upper Middle         Living Conditions    National     19,594         National Institute of Statistics and Census

Czech Republic           2013            High             Living Conditions    National      7,653              Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Cote d’Ivoire            2008        Lower Middle         Living Conditions    National     59,699               National Institute of Statistics

Dem. Rep. of the Congo   2004            Low              Living Conditions    National     72,685               National Institute of Statistics

Denmark                  2013            High             Living Conditions    National     88,696              Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Dominican Republic       2009        Upper Middle         Living Conditions    National     30,430                  National Statistics Office

Ecuador                  2009        Lower Middle         Living Conditions    National     78,865         National Institute of Staistics and Censuses

Egypt                    2010        Lower Middle         Living Conditions    National     34,069              Economic Research Forum (ERF)

El Salvador              2014        Lower Middle         Living Conditions    National     20,361       Center for Labor and Social Studies (CEDLAS)

Estonia                  2013            High             Living Conditions    National      6,576              Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Ethiopia                 2010            Low              Living Conditions    National     18,864       Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS)

Finland                  2013            High             Living Conditions    National     11,112              Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

France                   2010            High             Living Conditions    National     14,440              Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)




                                                                          10
                               Table A.1: Cross-Country Data Sources (continued)
Country       Year   Per Capita Income Group     Survey type       Coverage   Sample Size                  Original source

Georgia       2010        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National      4,811            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Germany       2014            High             Living Conditions   National     14,915            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Ghana         2010            Low              Living Conditions   National     62,042                Ghana Statistical Service

Greece        2013            High             Living Conditions   National      6,115            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Guatemala     2014        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National     22,118            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Honduras      2009        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National     98,028              National Institute of Statistics

Hungary       2014            High             Living Conditions   National      2,718            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Iceland       2010            High             Living Conditions   National      4,133            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

India         2004            Low              Living Conditions   National     59,487            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Indonesia     2011        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National     111,824                  Statistics Indonesia

Iraq          2011        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National     176,042           Economic Research Forum (ERF)

Ireland       2010            High             Living Conditions   National      3,508            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Israel        2014            High             Living Conditions   National     11,770            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Italy         2014            High             Living Conditions   National      6,258            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Jamaica       2002        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National     18,943      Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS)

Japan         2008            High             Living Conditions   National      7,840            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Jordan        2010        Upper Middle         Living Conditions   National     15,472            Economic Research Forum (ERF)

Kenya         2005            Low              Living Conditions   National     62,175              National Bureau of Statistics

Kosovo        2000        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National     14,167      Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS)

Liberia       2014            Low              Living Conditions   National     18,089                  Institute for Statistics

Lithuania     2008        Upper Middle         Living Conditions   National     15,837                National Statistics Office

Luxembourg    2013            High             Living Conditions   National      4,373            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Malawi        2011            Low              Living Conditions   National     56,218                National Statistical Office

Mali          2014            Low              Living Conditions   National     37,175          Living Standards Measurement Study

Mexico        2011        Upper Middle         Living Conditions   National     17,682      National Institute of Statistics and Geography

Mongolia      2003            Low                Labor Force       National     49,948                National Statistical Office

Morocco       2009        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National     10,769        Ministry of Economy and General Affairs

Mozambique    2014            Low              Living Conditions   National      9,128              National Institute of Statistics

Namibia       2009        Upper Middle         Living Conditions   National     44,614             National Planning Commission

Netherlands   2013            High             Living Conditions   National     23,935            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

Nicaragua     2014        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National      9,250      Center for Labor and Social Studies (CEDLAS)

Niger         2011            Low              Living Conditions   National      3,859      Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS)

Nigeria       2011        Lower Middle         Living Conditions   National     23,289              National Bureau of Statistics

Norway        2013            High             Living Conditions   National     23,993            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)




                                                                   11
                                           Table A.1: Cross-Country Data Sources (end)
 Country            Year   Per Capita Income Group            Survey type            Coverage   Sample Size                 Original Source

 Pakistan           2001        Lower Middle                Living Conditions        National     75,519              Federal Bureau of Statistics

 Palestine          2011        Lower Middle                Living Conditions        National     25,947            Economic Research Forum (ERF)

 Panama             2010        Upper Middle         Population and Housing Census   National     314,118                IPUMS-International

 Papua New Guinea   1996        Lower Middle                Living Conditions        National      8,660         Living Standards Measurement Survey

 Paraguay           2009        Lower Middle                Living Conditions        National     18,419                National Statistics Office

 Peru               2009        Upper Middle                Living Conditions        National     95,199             National Institute of Statistics

 Poland             2013            High                    Living Conditions        National     39,993            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 Puerto Rico        2005            High             Population and Housing Census   National     35,416                 IPUMS-International

 Romania            1997        Lower Middle                Living Conditions        National     35,995            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 Russia             2013            High                    Living Conditions        National      6,079            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 Rwanda             2000            Low                     Living Conditions        National     32,679             National Institute of Statistics

 Serbia             2007        Upper Middle                Living Conditions        National     17,375      Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS)

 Sierra Leone       2003            Low                     Living Conditions        National     23,022              National Office of Statistics

 Slovakia           2009            High                    Living Conditions        National      4,704               National Statistical Office

 South Africa       2012        Upper Middle                Living Conditions        National      7,105            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 South Korea        2006            High                    Living Conditions        National     13,178            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 Spain              2013            High                    Living Conditions        National     10,728            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 Sri Lanka          2008        Lower Middle                  Labor Force            National     66,381          Department of Census and Statistics

 Sudan              2009        Lower Middle                Living Conditions        National     48,845            Economic Research Forum (ERF)

 Sweden             2005            High                    Living Conditions        National     11,607            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 Switzerland        2013            High                    Living Conditions        National      7,961            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 Taiwan             2013            High                    Living Conditions        National     23,474            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 Tajikistan         2007            Low                     Living Conditions        National      1,503                State Statistical Agency

 Timor Leste        2007        Lower Middle                Living Conditions        National      9,094             National Statistics Directorate

 Tunisia            2009        Upper Middle                Living Conditions        National     50,371            Economic Research Forum (ERF)

 Turkey             2011        Upper Middle                  Labor Force            National     37,121              National Statistical Institute

 Tanzania           2010            Low                     Living Conditions        National     20,559              National Bureau of Statistics

 Uganda             2011            Low                     Living Conditions        National     13,618              National Bureau of Statistics

 Ukraine            2010        Lower Middle                Living Conditions        National     10,428                 State Statistics Service

 United Kingdom     2013            High                    Living Conditions        National     20,002            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 United States      2013            High                    Living Conditions        National     63,859            Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

 Uruguay            2009        Upper Middle                Living Conditions        National     132,559            National Institute of Statistics

 Venezuela          2006        Upper Middle                Living Conditions        National     166,506            National Institute of Statistics

 Zambia             2014        Lower Middle                Living Conditions        National     11,921                Central Statistical Office

Notes: for details on this table, please see Section A.1.




                                                                            12
  Table A.2: Cross-Country Data Variable Availability
Country                  Year   Income   Sector   Education   Location

Albania                  2009     x        x         x

Argentina                2009     x        x         x           x

Australia                2014     x        x         x

Austria                  2013     x                  x           x

Azerbaijan               1995     x        x                     x

Bangladesh               2010     x        x         x           x

Belgium                  2000     x        x         x           x

Belize                   1999     x        x         x           x

Bolivia                  2007     x        x         x           x

Brazil                   2009     x        x         x           x

Bulgaria                 2007     x                  x           x

Burkina Faso             2014              x         x           x

Cambodia                 2009                        x           x

Cameroon                 2007     x        x         x           x

Canada                   2013     x                  x           x

Chile                    2009     x        x         x           x

China                    2013     x        x         x           x

Colombia                 2009     x        x         x           x

Costa Rica               2009     x        x         x           x

Czech Republic           2013     x        x         x           x

Cote d’Ivoire            2008     x        x         x           x

Dem. Rep. of the Congo   2004                        x           x

Denmark                  2013     x        x         x           x

Dominican Republic       2009     x        x         x           x

Ecuador                  2009     x        x         x           x

Egypt                    2010     x        x         x           x

El Salvador              2014     x        x

Estonia                  2013     x        x         x

Ethiopia                 2010                        x           x

Finland                  2013     x        x         x           x

France                   2010     x        x         x           x




                                13
Table A.2: Cross-Country Data Variable Availability (continued)
           Country       Year   Income   Sector   Education   Location

           Georgia       2010     x        x         x           x

           Germany       2014     x        x         x           x

           Ghana         2010     x                  x           x

           Greece        2013     x        x         x           x

           Guatemala     2014     x        x         x           x

           Honduras      2009     x        x         x           x

           Hungary       2014     x        x         x           x

           Iceland       2010     x        x         x           x

           India         2004     x        x         x           x

           Indonesia     2011     x        x         x           x

           Iraq          2011     x        x         x           x

           Ireland       2010     x        x         x           x

           Israel        2014     x        x         x           x

           Italy         2014     x        x         x           x

           Jamaica       2002     x        x         x           x

           Japan         2008     x        x         x           x

           Jordan        2010     x        x         x           x

           Kenya         2005     x        x         x           x

           Kosovo        2000     x        x         x           x

           Liberia       2014                        x           x

           Lithuania     2008     x                  x           x

           Luxembourg    2013     x        x         x           x

           Malawi        2011              x         x           x

           Mali          2014              x         x           x

           Mexico        2011     x        x         x           x

           Mongolia      2003     x        x         x           x

           Morocco       2009     x        x         x           x

           Mozambique    2014     x        x         x           x

           Namibia       2009     x        x         x           x

           Netherlands   2013     x                  x           x

           Nicaragua     2014     x        x

           Niger         2011     x        x         x           x

           Nigeria       2011     x        x         x           x

           Norway        2013     x                              x




                                      14
                               Table A.2: Cross-Country Data Variable Availability (end)
                                        Country             Year   Income   Sector   Education   Location

                                        Pakistan            2001     x        x         x           x

                                        Palestine           2011     x        x         x           x

                                        Panama              2010     x        x                     x

                                        Papua New Guinea    1996     x        x         x

                                        Paraguay            2009     x        x         x           x

                                        Peru                2009     x        x         x           x

                                        Poland              2013     x        x         x           x

                                        Puerto Rico         2005     x                  x           x

                                        Romania             1997     x        x         x           x

                                        Russia              2013     x        x         x           x

                                        Rwanda              2000     x        x         x           x

                                        Serbia              2007     x        x         x           x

                                        Sierra Leone        2003     x        x         x           x

                                        Slovakia            2009     x                  x           x

                                        South Africa        2012     x        x         x           x

                                        South Korea         2006     x                              x

                                        Spain               2013     x        x         x           x

                                        Sri Lanka           2008     x                  x           x

                                        Sudan               2009     x        x         x           x

                                        Sweden              2005     x        x         x

                                        Switzerland         2013     x        x         x

                                        Taiwan              2013     x        x         x

                                        Tajikistan          2007     x        x                     x

                                        Timor Leste         2007     x        x         x           x

                                        Tunisia             2009     x        x         x           x

                                        Turkey              2011     x                  x           x

                                        Tanzania            2010     x        x         x           x

                                        Uganda              2011     x        x         x           x

                                        Ukraine             2010     x        x

                                        United Kingdom      2013     x        x         x

                                        United States       2013     x        x         x

                                        Uruguay             2009     x        x         x           x

                                        Venezuela           2006     x        x         x           x

                                        Zambia              2014     x        x         x           x

Notes: for details on this table, please see Section A.1.




                                                                     15
A.2 Additional historical profile: Mexico 1960-2010

As a robustness check to the stylized facts, I show that they also hold over the long-run in a currently

developing country, Mexico. I focus on Mexico because it has variables of income and employee-jobs

that are consistently defined over a long period of time, namely 1960-2010. The data is extracted from

IPUMS International. The disadvantage is that only earned income is measured consistently over this

period - as opposed to total income, which further includes capital income and ’other’ income. I use

answers to the ’class of worker’ question. The only inconsistency over time in this question is that

the 2010 sample groups household assistants together with salaried workers, whereas in previous

samples, these categories are separated. As such, I am over-estimating the true employee-share in

the 2010 profile. Importantly, day laborers are separated from salaried workers, and I can assign the

former to the self-employment category in all years. There also exists a category for unpaid family

workers, which I assign to the self-employment category. I construct the sample of respondents that

are economically active, and use survey weights to construct individual earned income distributions

in 1960, 1990, and 2010. For the years 1990 and 2010, I code the value of the exemption threshold from

OECD’s Personal Taxes database. For 1960, I use the historical archives of the Mexican Tax Authority.2

      The results from this exercise are displayed in Figure A.1. I uncover the same stylized facts that

were found both in the cross-country sample and in the historical US series: the employee-share profile

is upward-sloping and gradually moves leftward in the gross income distribution; the exemption

threshold gradually moves down the distribution and expands the size of the income tax base; and,

the employee-composition on the tax base is constantly maximized.




  2
      Available at: http://www.dof.gob.mx/index.php.


                                                       16
                                                           Figure A.1: Mexico 1960-2010
                                                               Mexico 1960: Federal Profile




                                          90 100
                                30 40 50 60 70 80
                                Employment share (%)
                                          20
                                          10
                                          0




                                                       1   2      3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10
                                                                      Deciles of income distribution

                                                                       Employee               Self−Employed


                                                               Mexico 1990: Federal Profile
                                          90 100
                                30 40 50 60 70 80
                                Employment share (%)
                                          20
                                          10
                                          0




                                                       1   2      3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10
                                                                      Deciles of income distribution

                                                                       Employee               Self−Employed


                                                               Mexico 2010: Federal Profile
                                          90 100
                                30 40 50 60 70 80
                                Employment share (%)
                                          20
                                          10
                                          0




                                                       1   2      3    4        5       6         7     8     9   10
                                                                      Deciles of income distribution

                                                                       Employee               Self−Employed


Notes: The circle-line (small cross-line) indicate the employee-share of the economically active workforce in a decile of the
Mexican personal gross income distribution. An employee-job is defined as a job whose activity generates an information
trail that can be leveraged for income tax enforcement purposes. For more details on this variable, please see Section 3.2.
In every profile, the vertical solid line denotes the location of the Federal individual income tax exemption threshold. This
threshold is the nominal value of gross (pre-tax) income above which a single filer becomes liable to pay income tax. Each
historical profile is built from the Census micro-data from IPUMS International. The values of the exemption thresholds are
from the OECD’s Personal Taxes database, and the official archives of the Mexican revenue service. Source: Section 3.4 and
Appendix Section A.2.



                                                                               17
A.3 Redistributive targeting

In this robustness check, I provide evidence to suggest that the exemption threshold is not set to

target social assistance or anti-poverty in the income distribution. Governments define thresholds

of income that are used as inputs in formulas to provide social assistance and anti-poverty relief. I

use the national poverty line and the minimum wage values as proxies for the ’social redistribution’

threshold. I first show that only very rarely is the income tax threshold explicitly defined to be either

equal to, or a multiplicative of, this social redistribution threshold. In 5% of countries in the cross-

sectional sample, the tax code defines the exemption threshold to be a multiple of this redistribution

threshold. These countries are: Mozambique, Bolivia, Paraguay, Turkey, and Slovakia. As an example,

in Mozambique the exemption threshold is equal to 36 times the minimum wage, while in Paraguay it

is equal to 120 times the minimum wage. I use the country-specific IBFD tax summaries to document

this pattern. There exists a much more frequent explicit relation between redistributive thresholds and

social security contributions. Indeed, several countries use (a multiplicative of) the minimum wage to

define an exemption threshold for employee contributions.

   Even if there exists no explicit relation defined in the tax code, governments may nonetheless

implicitly maintain an association between the tax threshold and the social assistance threshold. To

investigate this, I collect data on the value of the national poverty line and the minimum wage in all

countries in the cross-sectional sample. I try to collect the data in as close a year as possible to the

survey and tax exemption threshold year. I use harmonized data from ILO on the statutory nominal

gross monthly minimum wage. Data is missing in 8 countries: Austria, Denmark, Finland, France,

Kosovo, Sweden, Switzerland, Palestine. There does not exist a similar harmonized database on the

value of the national poverty line for my sample. The World Bank collects cross-country data on the

share of the population that falls below both international and national poverty lines, but such data

does not directly disclose the value of the national lines used. I was able to collect relevant data in

88 of the 100 countries in my sample. The missing countries are: Albania, Austria, Hungary, Kosovo,

Panama, Papua New Guinea, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Timor Leste, Ukraine, and Venezuela. Im-

portantly, I collect the poverty line that is set by the national government, rather than the value of the

international poverty line in local currency. Some governments do incorporate international criteria

to determine poverty lines. Per example, some low-income countries base their poverty calculations

on the minimum nutritional intake concept used by the World Bank to define international poverty;

and, some European countries adopt the EU-wide definition of poverty as 60% of median income. The

                                                   18
important point is that the poverty lines I collect are based on an active decision made by the govern-

ment, similarly to the definition of the tax exemption threshold. In some countries, the government

defines several poverty lines, per example on a regional basis or on an urban-rural basis. I always pick

the poverty line in each country with the highest value. Since poverty lines in developing countries

are most often below the tax exemption threshold, this decreases the likelihood to observe that the

two thresholds are far away from each other in value.

   The results are displayed in Figure A.2. The three panels separate countries into development

groups: low and lower middle income; higher middle income; and, high income. I construct the ratio

of the income tax exemption threshold to the minimum wage, and of the exemption threshold to the

poverty line. In the left-hand graphs, the bars represent country-specific ratios using the minimum

wage, while the right-hand graphs display the ratio using the poverty line. Finally, within each graph,

I sort the countries by GDP per capita. I take the log of the ratio, as this allows me to display all

country-ratios on the same graph. Therefore, a bar-value below 0 means that the exemption thresh-

old is located below the minimum wage/poverty line in the specific country. There is no obvious,

confounding trend which emerges from Figure A.2. Within all development groups, countries with

similar per capita income, and hence similar size of tax base (Figure 4), display very large variation in

the relative value of the tax threshold to the redistribution threshold (note the log-scale of the y-axis).

This holds even for countries at similar levels of development within the same region: the ratio for

the minimum wage (poverty) is 0.48 log points (1.90 log points) in Burkina Faso, while it is 3.07 log

points (6.09 log points) in Uganda; it is 2.09 log points (2.79 log points) in Bolivia, and 0.51 log points

(2.65 log points) in Honduras. The highest-income countries often locate both the poverty and the

minimum wage thresholds above the tax exemption threshold. But apart from this feature, there is

not any systematic relationship between the relative location of tax and redistribution thresholds, and

per capita income. Taken together, these findings suggest that the tax exemption threshold is not set

to target social assistance in the income distribution.




                                                    19
                                                                     Figure A.2: Redistributive Targeting
                                                                Panel A: Low and Lower-Middle Income Countries
                                           7




                                                                                                             7
                                           6




                                                                                                             6
                                           5




                                                                                                             5
                      −7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4




                                                                                       −7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4
                                                                                                 Log [PIT Threshold/Poverty Line]
                                 Log [PIT Threshold/Min Wage]




                                                                    Panel A: Upper-Middle Income Countries
                                           4




                                                                                                             4
                                           3




                                                                                                             3
                                                                                       Log [PIT Threshold/Poverty Line]
                                                  2




                                                                                                                     2
                       Log [PIT Threshold/Min Wage]
                                            1




                                                                                                             1
                                     0




                                                                                                      0
                             −1




                                                                                               −1
                      −2




                                                                                       −2
                                           −3




                                                                                                             −3
                                           −4




                                                                                                             −4




                                                                        Panel C: High-Income Countries
                                           5




                                                                                                             5
                                           4




                                                                                                             4
                                                   3




                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                         Log [PIT Threshold/Poverty Line]
                      Log [PIT Threshold/Min Wage]
                                              2




                                                                                                                   2
                                         1




                                                                                                             1
                                    0




                                                                                                        0
                        −2 −1




                                                                                       −3 −2 −1
                                           −3
                                           −4




                                                                                                             −4
                                           −5




                                                                                                             −5




Notes: In every graph, a bar represents a country-observation from the cross-country micro-database. The three panels
demark countries according to their per capita income group: low and lower-middle; upper-middle; high income. Within
each graph, countries are ranked in ascending order of per capita income. Within each group, the left-hand graph shows
the log of the ratio of the income tax exemption threshold to the minimum wage; the right-hand graph shows the log of the
ratio of the income tax exemption threshold to the poverty line. All thresholds are expressed in annual and local currency.
Source: Section 3.4 and Appendix Section A.3.




                                                                                      20
A.4 Sectoral distributional profiles

In this robustness check, I consider whether the location of the exemption threshold is targeting sec-

toral structure, rather than employment structure. I study whether the threshold appears to be set

such as to avoid a ’hard to tax’ sector, agriculture, or whether the threshold is set to capture the ’easy

to tax’ sectors of manufacturing and public administration (Musgrave, 1981). In order to investigate

this confounding hypothesis, I first consider whether the tax exemption explicitly targets any sector.

In particular, I use the IBFD country-reports in all countries in the cross-section, and report whenever

income from agriculture is fully exempt from individual income taxation. I do not take into account

instances where tax codes allow self-employed to deduct costs specifically related to agricultural work

- per example, from the purchase of a tractor for farming. This is because my measure of the exemption

threshold in all countries is the standard deduction, which is granted regardless of taxpayer behavior,

and not the itemized deduction, which requires the taxpayer to itemize deductions. I chose the former

measure because it can be constructed in a comparable way across space and time, as discussed in

Section 3.2. I find that agricultural income is fully exempt only in 11% of low-income countries; 12%

of middle-income countries; and, 5% of high-income countries. This list includes Mali, Morocco, and

Sierra Leone in Africa; and, India and Pakistan in Asia.

   As an alternative approach, I consider whether changes in sectoral distributional profiles over

development could account for the movement in the exemption threshold. I create four sectoral cate-

gories in all the surveys in the cross-section: agriculture; manufacturing and construction; trade and

services; and, public administration. I define these four categories in relation to the divisions of the

ISIC 4.4 classification. The construction of the sector variable is described in detail in Section A.1.1.

   Using these harmonized sector variables, I first study the distributional profiles of agricultural

employment. I construct these profiles in the same way as the employment profiles in the main text

(Section 3.2). The results are displayed in Figure A.3. At lowest levels of development, agriculture is

prevalent everywhere except for the top of the income distribution. And, in the transition from low-

income to middle-income group, the downward-sloping agriculture-profile gradually shifts leftward

in the distribution. This pattern is similar to stylized fact #1, such that stylized fact #2 would be consis-

tent with a setting where the exemption threshold targets the non-agricultural sector which increases

gradually further down the income distribution. However, Figure A.3 also reveals that in these same

income groups, virtually all agricultural work is concentrated among self-employed with no infor-

mation trails. On the other hand, Figure A.3 reveals that in the transition from middle-income to the

                                                     21
high-income group, the agricultural profile has become very small in magnitude and almost entirely

flat in the distribution. During this same transition, there continues to be an important transition be-

tween self-employment and employee-jobs outside of the agricultural sector, which is associated with

further decreases in the location of the threshold. These facts suggest that movement out of agriculture

could account for the expansion of the tax base, but only in a limited range of the development path,

where it is fully confounded by movements out of self-employment. In contrast, movements out of

self-employment can account for the expansion of the base over the full development path, including

over a range of development where it cannot be confounded by movements out of agriculture.

   I now consider whether the movement of the exemption threshold is consistent with targeting

of ’easy to tax’ sectors. I focus on manufacturing and public administration. Since work in these

sectors is strongly correlated with having an employee-job, I study the sectoral profiles conditional

on employee-job. Results are displayed in Figure A.4. The distributional profile of easily taxable

sectors would have to be upward-sloping in the income distribution, and move leftward as the country

develops, in order to be a confounding factor. This is not borne out in the observed profiles. The

public administration profile is upward-sloping at some development levels, but the magnitude of

the slope is quantitatively small, and there is no consistent left-ward shift over development. The

public sector share at the top of the income distribution is most likely driven by central administration

workers, while the share towards the lower end of the distribution is probably made up in part by

field-workers in health and education. While located at very different parts of the income distribution,

these jobs share the common feature of being easy to tax - in the sense that the government, as the

direct employer, perfectly observes the salaries. The manufacturing distributional profile is largely flat

in the income distribution. The level-shift upward and then downward of the manufacturing profile is

consistent with the inverse-U shaped aggregate importance of manufacturing over development that

other work has documented. Taken together, these facts do not suggest that the stylized facts #1-#4

are confounded by sectoral transitions over the development path.




                                                   22
                      Figure A.3: Distributional Profiles of ’Hard-to-Tax’ Sectors
                         Profile for average country at $1065 pc [LHS] and $2226 pc [RHS]




                                      90 100




                                                                                                                                       90 100
                            30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                             30 40 50 60 70 80
                            Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                             Employment share (%)
                                      20




                                                                                                                                       20
                                      10




                                                                                                                                       10
                                      0




                                                                                                                                       0
                                                   1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10                          1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10
                                                                     Deciles of income distribution                                                                   Deciles of income distribution

                                                           Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture                                       Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture




                        Profile for average country at $3239 pc [LHS] and $5796 pc [RHS]
                                      90 100




                                                                                                                                       90 100
                            30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                             30 40 50 60 70 80
                            Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                             Employment share (%)
                                      20




                                                                                                                                       20
                                      10




                                                                                                                                       10
                                      0




                                                                                                                                       0
                                                   1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10                          1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10
                                                                     Deciles of income distribution                                                                   Deciles of income distribution

                                                           Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture                                       Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture




                        Profile for average country at $8826 pc [LHS] and $11257 pc [RHS]
                                      90 100




                                                                                                                                       90 100
                            30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                             30 40 50 60 70 80
                            Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                             Employment share (%)
                                      20




                                                                                                                                       20
                                      10




                                                                                                                                       10
                                      0




                                                                                                                                       0




                                                   1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10                          1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10
                                                                     Deciles of income distribution                                                                   Deciles of income distribution

                                                           Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture                                       Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture




                       Profile for average country at $17141 pc [LHS] and $27960 pc [RHS]
                                      90 100




                                                                                                                                       90 100
                            30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                             30 40 50 60 70 80
                            Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                             Employment share (%)
                                      20




                                                                                                                                       20
                                      10




                                                                                                                                       10
                                      0




                                                                                                                                       0




                                                   1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10                          1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10
                                                                     Deciles of income distribution                                                                   Deciles of income distribution

                                                           Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture                                       Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture




                       Profile for average country at $38224 pc [LHS] and $53878 pc [RHS]
                                      90 100




                                                                                                                                       90 100
                            30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                             30 40 50 60 70 80
                            Employment share (%)




                                                                                                                             Employment share (%)
                                      20




                                                                                                                                       20
                                      10




                                                                                                                                       10
                                      0




                                                                                                                                       0




                                                   1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10                          1   2      3       4        5       6         7     8        9       10
                                                                     Deciles of income distribution                                                                   Deciles of income distribution

                                                           Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture                                       Self−employed Agriculture             Employee Agriculture



Notes: These figures plot the employment shares of self-employed agricultural workers and of employee agricultural work-
ers, over deciles of the income distribution, for representative countries at different levels of per capita income. Employees
(self-employed) are defined as individuals working in jobs which generate (no) information trails for the purposes of income
tax enforcement. The share of each group is defined as the share of the total economically active workforce in the decile of
the income distribution. To construct this graph, I partition the cross-country sample into ten groups of equal size, based
on their level of per capita income. Note that I am limited to the group of countries where there exists sectoral data (see
Table A.2). Within each group, I calculate the unweighted average employment-share of agricultural self-employed and
agricultural employee. I plot this average profile for every group, and indicate the average per capita income of the group. I
use expenditure-side real GDP at chained PPPs in 2011 US$ from the same year as the country-survey year. Source: Section
3.4 and Appendix Section A.4.
                                                                                                                        23
                      Figure A.4: Distributional Profiles of ’Easy-to-Tax’ Sectors
                         Profile for average country at $1065 pc [LHS] and $2226 pc [RHS]




                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                             Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)




                                                                                                                                                                  Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)
                                                                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                               1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10                                                     1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10
                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution

                                                                                       Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services                                                             Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services




                         Profile for average country at $3239 pc [LHS] and $5796 pc [RHS]
                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                             Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)




                                                                                                                                                                  Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)
                                                                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                               1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10                                                     1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10
                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution

                                                                                       Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services                                                             Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services




                        Profile for average country at $8826 pc [LHS] and $11257 pc [RHS]
                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                             Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)




                                                                                                                                                                  Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)
                                                                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                               1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10                                                     1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10
                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution

                                                                                       Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services                                                             Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services




                        Profile for average country at $17141 pc [LHS] and $27960 pc [RHS]
                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                             Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)




                                                                                                                                                                  Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)
                                                                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                               1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10                                                     1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10
                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution

                                                                                       Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services                                                             Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services




                        Profile for average country at $38224 pc [LHS] and $53878 pc [RHS]
                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                             Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)




                                                                                                                                                                  Sectoral share of employee−employment (%)
                                                                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                               1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10                                                     1   2           3        4       5          6          7     8      9         10
                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution                                                                                                       Deciles of income distribution

                                                                                       Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services                                                             Manufacturing           Trade and private services       Public services




Notes: These figures plot the sectoral shares of employees over deciles of the income distribution, for representative coun-
tries at different levels of per capita income. Sectors are defined accordig to the ISIC classification (Section A.4). The share
of each sector is defined as the share of the total employee workforce in the decile of the income distribution. To construct
this graph, I partition the cross-country sample into ten groups of equal size, based on their level of per capita income. Note
that I am limited to the group of countries where there exists sectoral data (see Table A.2). Within each group, I calculate the
unweighted average sectoral shares by income decile. I plot this average profile for every group, and indicate the average
per capita income of the group. I use expenditure-side real GDP at chained PPPs in 2011 US$ from the same year as the
country-survey year. Source: Section 3.4 and Appendix Section A.4.


                                                                                                                                                             24
A.5 Robustness of employee-income gradient in regression setting


In this subsection, I investigate the employee-income gradient in a regression setting. This serves two

purposes. First, it provides a complementary method to the distributional profiles approach, to study

the robustness of the employee-income gradient. Second, it provides a more formal setting to study

which characteristics partially contribute to the steepness of the observed slope. I focus on three char-

acteristics: sector, location, and education. These are individual characteristics that the government

could, albeit imperfectly, seek to target for redistributive purposes. As such, if controlling for one such

characteristic eliminates the employee-income gradient, this could suggest that the threshold in fact

targets this confounding characteristic. At the same time, these are observable characteristics which

vary over development, including from the sectoral movement from agriculture to manufacture to

services; the rural-urban migration; and, the rise in higher education. As such, the partial reduction

in magnitude due to controlling for a particular characteristic would be informative of the impor-

tance of this characteristic in quantitatively explaining the change in employee-income gradient over

development.

I use the four sectoral categories described in the Section A.1.1. I further create a dummy variable

equal to 1 if a respondent lives in an urban area. I do not attempt to harmonize this variable, and

use the urban definition directly in the surveys. Finally, I use education variables to code four dum-

mies, indicating if a respondent has: not completed primary; completed primary but not high school;

completed high school. I chose to not distinguish further levels of education, in order to maximize

the number of surveys where i could create consistent measures. The availability of these different

variables is described in Table A.2.

To visualize the impact of controlling for a characteristic on the employee-income gradient, I employ

the methodology used in Bachas, Gadenne & Jensen (2019). In particular, in every country c, I estimate

the following regression


                            1(Employee)i = α + θX i + βlog (income)i + εi


where incomei is the individual gross income of individual i used to construct the income distribu-

tion (Section 3.2), 1(Employee)i is a dummy equal to 1 if an individual is an employee (Section 3.2),

and X i contains the control indicator variables (sector, education, urban). I obtain a country-specific

slope-coefficient β c from estimating this regression separately in every country. In every graph, I

                                                    25
                         c
plot these coefficients βwith control together with coefficients from estimating the regression without
           c
controls, βno control , against log per capita income. The two coefficients for a particular country are
                           c
denoted by the beginning (βno                     c
                              control ) and end (βwith control ) of a vertical arrow. This regression is a

linear probability model, which has the advantage that the slope-coefficient is directly interpretable.

The disadvantage is that the slope-coefficient is not informative in settings where the relationship

between employee and log(income) is strongly non-linear. This is the case in less (most) developed

countries, where the likelihood of being an employee is very small (large) apart from the very top (top

and bottom) of the income distribution (Figure 3). As an alternative, I can estimate the employee-

share differential between the top and bottom deciles. This yields very similar qualitative results (not

reported).

The results are displayed in Figure A.5. The top two panels control for geography (left graph) and

education (right graph). The impact of geography is limited, but the inclusion of education signifi-

cantly reduces the income-employee gradient especially in middle-income countries. The bottom left

graph controls for sectors. This leads to the strongest reduction in magnitude, both in low-income

and middle-income countries. It does not, however, fully eliminate the slope in most countries, and

the potential confounding movement out of agriculture has been addressed in Appendix Section A.4.

The bottom right graph includes all the control variables. This leads to a further reduction in slopes in

most countries, compared to the sector control specification. This suggests that within sectors, location

and, perhaps more likely, education, continues to be associated with higher income and employee-job

status. Interestingly, the full set of controls almost fully eliminates the variation in the magnitude of

employee-income gradient across development. This suggests that the joint movement over develop-

ment of these three characteristics could drive the distributional employment patterns in stylized fact

#1.




                                                   26
     Figure A.5: Employee-Income Gradients Across Countries Without and With Controls
                                                  .3




                                                                                                                                                                               .3
    Slope coefficient: 1(Employee) on log(income)




                                                                                                                                 Slope coefficient: 1(Employee) on log(income)
                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                          .1




                                                                                                                                                       .1
              0




                                                                                                                                           0
  −.1




                                                                                                                               −.1
                                                       6       7              8           9            10             11                                                            6       7              8           9                 10             11
                                                                              Log GDP per Capita                                                                                                           Log GDP per Capita

                                                           Linear Fit w/o Controls          Linear Fit w Geography Controls                                                             Linear Fit w/o Controls               Linear Fit w Education Controls
                                                 .3




                                                                                                                                                                               .3
   Slope coefficient: 1(Employee) on log(income)




                                                                                                                                 Slope coefficient: 1(Employee) on log(income)
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                          .1




                                                                                                                                                       .1
              0




                                                                                                                                           0
  −.1




                                                                                                                               −.1




                                                       6       7              8           9            10             11                                                            6       7              8              9              10             11
                                                                              Log GDP per Capita                                                                                                                  lg_gdppc

                                                            Linear Fit w/o Controls           Linear Fit w Sector Controls                                                                 Linear Fit w/o Controls               Linear Fit w All Controls




Notes: Each dot in every scatter-plot represents a country-specific slope coefficient based on estimating the regression in
Section A.5. Each of the four graphs show slope-coefficients when including controls for: geography (North-West quadrant);
education (NE); sectors (SW); geography, education, and sector (SE). In each graph, the start-point of an arrow represents
the country-specific slope-coefficient without the control, and the end-point of an arrow represents the slope-coefficient
after including the control. All slope-coefficients are plotted against log GDP per capita, measured using expenditure-side
real GDP at chained PPPs in 2011 US$. In every graph, the solid (dashed) line represents the linear OLS fit of the slope-
coefficients without control (with control). For more details on the construction of the different control variables, please see
Section A.1.1. These graphs are constructed using the full cross-country survey sample. Source: Section 3.4 and Appendix
Section A.5.




                                                                                                                              27
A.6 Potential biases resulting from methodology

In this subsection, I discuss the potential biases that can arise from the survey methodology and the

measurement and construction of variables. I code employment type based on the primary job in

which the respondent spent the most hours during the reference period. Many individuals have many

jobs at the same time (Banerjee & Duflo, 2007). But this will this will affect the representativeness of

my estimates only to the extent that these jobs fall in different categories in my classification. An

individual who contributes on the family farm while being an own-account worker within the same

reference period would be classified as ’self-employed’ in both jobs. In surveys where the reference

period is not yearly, there may be bias in the measure of employment structure if the employment

type in the reference period is not representative of the entire year. This is potentially important in

developing countries, where there is strong seasonality in job type. This introduces bias to the extent

that the jobs at different periods of the year fall in different employment structure categories, which I

argue is unlikely in a developing country context. Indeed, individuals that are casual wage laborers

during the harvest season are unlikely to be regular full-time employees in the non-harvest season.

Rather, they are likely to be own-account workers or contributing family workers. In this case, the

individual would be classified as self-employed during all periods of the year, despite the different

jobs held at different periods of the year.

   A second source of bias comes from the fact that I cannot systematically separate casual wage

work from contract-based wage-work. I can always distinguish between working for someone for

pay versus for in-kind payment, and I exclude the latter from the employee category. As such, casual

wage-laborers that receive in-kind payment are systematically classified as self-employed. This leaves

the group of casual workers that are not paid in-kind as the group that I potentially mis-classify as

employee, whenever the survey answers do not provide sufficient precision about the nature of the

employee-work. Since the transition over development involves a movement out of casual wage labor

into contract-based wage labor, this mis-classification will lead me to under-state the true growth in

employee-share along the development path.

   Another potential source of bias arises from the possibility that self-employed misreport their true

amount of income. This is unlikely to introduce a major bias, for three reasons. First, unlike on

tax returns, self-employed do not directly have any incentive to mis-report their income to survey-

ors. Second, the model in Section 5 does predict under-reporting of income among self-employed

locally around the exemption threshold. But while the standard bunching model predicts a steep-

                                                   28
ened employee-share locally around the exemption threshold, it also predicts a decrease in employee-

share further to the left of the threshold. This is not borne out in the data: instead, I observe a grad-

ual increase in the employee-share over the full distribution. More generally, under-reporting of in-

come by the self-employed would imply that the true self-employed distributional profile lies to the

right of the observed one. If development is associated with increases in the ability to detect under-

reporting among self-employed, this would generate gradual leftward shifts of the employee-share

profile. Under-reporting of income by self-employed could also be due to by non-evasion motives.

Woodruff et al. (2009) show that recall error, which is more present when the reference period is not

annual, lead self-employed to under-estimate their income. If development is associated with a de-

crease in recall error, either due to changes in survey methodology or to an increase in accounting tools

and book-keeping, this would similarly imply a rightward shift of the employee-profile at increasing

levels of development. Both evasion detection capacity and measurement precision, which plausibly

grow with development, therefore lead me to under-estimate the true progressive rightward shifts in

the employee-profile due to structural transition out of self-employment.

   Finally, bias could be introduced from the construction of the income tax base. I construct the

tax base as the share of the individual income distribution that lies above the single-filer standard

deduction (or allowance). As explained in the main text (Section 3.2), this choice is made to construct

the tax base in the most transparent way without making any behavioral assumptions and in a way

that can meaningfully be compared across countries. Notwithstanding, there exists features of tax

systems which allow taxpayers to further reduce their tax liability, including deductible expenses. If

a significant number of filers makes use of such additional features, this introduces a wedge between

the size of base measured in this paper, and the size of the ’effective’ base. The extent of existence

of these features varies significantly across countries. Per example, there is a growing policy debate

in the US on the large number of taxpayers that do not pay any Federal income tax. There exists

no consistent evidence across countries at different levels of development on the extent to which the

effective tax base is reduced through credits and deductions. Even if taxpayers in all countries in my

sample made use of these deductions, it is likely that the size-wedge between my measured base and

the effective base is larger in more developed countries. This is simply because the potential wedge in

less-developed countries is bounded above by the small size of my measured base. In this case, I am

overstating the variation in size of base across levels of development (Panel B, Figure 4). Perhaps more

importantly, a size-wedge that increases with development means that I am understating the strength


                                                   29
of the association between size of tax base and income tax collection (Panel B, Figure 5). This point

is also supported by the observation that the variance in residual tax collection, controlling for the

statutory size of tax base, is larger in more developed countries (Panel C, Figure 5). This discussion

suggests that bias introduced by the wedge between my measure of the base and the effective size

of tax base only strengthens the main finding of the tax base being a first-order determinant of tax

collection across development.




                                                 30
B US states material
B.1 Data sources and construction of variables

In this sub-section, I describe the construction of variables used in the US states analysis (Section 4).




B.1.1 Employment and earnings


I construct the aggregate employment-share variables using decennial Census data at the state level

between 1930 and 2010. The data is extracted from IPUMS USA. In each decennial data-extract, I

exclude from the sample any individual that is not economically active during the reference period

and for whom the general class of worker variable is 0 (“N/A”). I also exclude, when possible, any

individual who reports total personal income either equal to 9999999 (“N/A”) or strictly negative. In

the IPUMS USA data, total personal income corresponds to the respondent’s total pre-tax personal

income or losses from all sources for the previous year. I code as self-employed (employee) a respon-

dent who responds ’self-employed’ (’works for wages’) in the class of worker category. This classifi-

cation in IPUMS USA is consistent with the classification used in the cross-development sample, in

the sense that I code the employment-type based on the primary job of the respondent in which they

spent the most time during the reference day or week. Within each decennial extract, I apply person-

weights to estimate, for each state, the representative total number of respondents, the total number

of employee respondents, and the total number of self-employed respondents. I then calculate the

employee-share as the ratio of total number of employee respondents to the total number of employee

and self-employed respondents. I interpolate the numerator and denominator between Census years

using a natural cubic spline (Herriot & Reinsch, 1973).

   I construct the employment shares by income decile of the income distribution of each state, in

1935 and in every decade between 1950 and 2010. The 1950-2010 data is extracted from the IPUMS

USA database. The definitions of type of work and industry are the same as those used to construct

the state-year aggregate employment shares. I rank all respondents within a given state according

to the reported total personal income. The personal income reported measures each respondent’s

total pre-tax personal income. Importantly, throughout the sample period, this measure is largely

comparable: it includes in all samples, wage, farm and business components. I then apply person-

weights and partition each state’s income distribution into ten deciles (ten bins of equal sample size).


                                                    31
Within each decile, I estimate the conditional proportions of employees and self-employed to construct

the employee-shares by income decile. In years before 1950, the decennial US Census does not provide

reported income and occupation-category at the level of the individual. I use the 1935-36 Study of

Consumer Purchases in the United States, which had the scope to ’ascertain for the first time in a single

national survey the earning and spending habits of inhabitants of large and small cities, villages, and

farm’. I access this data under the ICPSR data archive reference #08908. I discuss the 1935 data-sample

and construction of variables in more detail in Section A.1.2. I construct the deciles of the state-specific

income distribution and estimate the employment shares specific to each decile-state. I use these data

to construct the profile of employment-share and self-employment share over deciles of each state’s

income distribution, for all continental states, between 1935 and 2010. I again interpolate both the

numerator and denominator between data-years.

   The earning structure is constructed for all states and all years between 1929 and 2001 by combin-

ing the two historical series, namely SA5H and SA5 ’Personal Income by Major Components and Earn-

ings by Industry’ published by the US Bureau of Economic Analysis. The denominator for earnings-

structure is line-item 45 ’Net earnings by place of residence’, which equals total earnings less contri-

butions for government social insurance plus ’adjustment for residence’. The employee-share uses

in the numerator line-item 90 ’private non-farm earnings’, while the self-employed share of income

uses line-item 70 ’proprietors’ income’. The line-item 45 is also used as the denominator y to construct

the ratio of the PIT-threshold K to average earnings, K/y. Importantly, this measure y of personal

income excludes transfers from all levels of government, similarly to the gross income variable used

in the cross-development sample.




B.1.2 Tax revenue


The tax-revenue sources by state and year are based on the historical series on state government fi-

nances published by the US Census Bureau. The State Government Finances series publishes series

on yearly tax-revenue collected over the fiscal year of each state. I proxy for tax-take by constructing

the ratio of tax-revenue collected to total personal income in the state, where the denominator is based

on the BEA historical series of state personal income. This tax-take ratio differs from a more stan-

dard construction of the variable, used in the cross-development sample, where the denominator use

a measure of aggregate output. Unfortunately, continuous GDP data at the state-year level in the US is

                                                    32
only available from 1963 onward. Instead, I follow previous papers studying growth in the US states

(e.g. Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1992; Besley et al., 2010) and use state personal income as a measure of

state output. In the State Government Finances, T40 is the line-code corresponding to personal income

tax; T41 corresponds to corporate net income tax; and, T09 corresponds to general sales tax.




B.1.3 Personal income tax structure: thresholds, rates, and reforms


To construct measures of the state PIT-base and state PIT-rate structure, I use data from the Bakija

(2009) historical U.S. Federal and state income tax calculator program. I thank Jon Bakija for kindly

providing me access to the calculator. The calculator models federal and state personal income taxes

based on legal text, covering the period from 1900 to 2007 for state income tax laws. I construct the

income tax threshold K for an individual earner who files under the status of being single and who

claims the standard deduction. This filng behavior is directly comparable to the filing behavior cho-

sen to calculate the exemption threshold in the cross-development sample. As such, the measures of

thresholds and income tax base are comparable between the US states time-series and the develop-

ment cross-country series. The choice of a single earner, as opposed to household earnings, is also

consistent with the income distribution which is calculated based on ranking of total personal earned

income. Finally, an appealing feature of the standard deduction is that, unlike the itemized deduction,

the filer does not deduct state personal income tax from her federal income tax liability. This pro-

vides additional incentives for the filer to under-report state income taxes, and makes the filing-choice

more similar to the under-reporting model derived in Section 5. Evidence from IRS statistics suggest

that standard deduction filers are systematically more prevalent at lower levels of gross income (the

Statistics of Income series on individual income tax returns regularly documents on this: see e.g. IRS,

1982). I construct the ratio K/y where y is the state-year per capita personal income, extracted from

the historical US BEA series.

   I use the same state tax calculator to construct measures of the tax-rate structure. The calculator

provides data on the number of brackets for the specific filing-type, and the marginal tax rate which

applies to each bracket. Some states have multi-bracketed structure with progressive marginal tax

rates, other states apply a single-rate flat income tax over all taxable income. I use the marginal tax

rate that applies on the first bracket in Table 3.

   The measure for income tax reforms is coded in the following way. States began in the 1980s to

                                                     33
automatically adjust the nominal values of the exemption threshold (and rate-brackets) for inflation.

Prior to this period, no state provided inflation adjustments. Prior to the 1980s, the dollar value of the

calculated threshold K would therefore remain constant unless a legislative reform occurred which

changes the value of the exemption threshold. I therefore code a year of reform as a year, before

1980, during which the nominal value of the threshold changed. I then construct the state-specific

cumulative series of exemption reforms over time. I use this measure of reform likelihood in Panel A of

Figure 7. In a graph that pools several States, the cumulative distribution measure has the advantage

of controlling for cross-state heterogeneity in the frequency of threshold reforms.




B.1.4 Covariates


The poll tax and literacy test dummies are taken from Besley et al. (2010). They provide state-time

varying measures of the share of the state population subject to either a literacy test or a poll tax.

Prior to the 1965 Voting Rights Act, such measures were in place in predominantly Southern states.

The 1965 VRA gave the Attorney General the authority to appoint federal examiners to oversee voter

registration in states using literacy or qualification tests, and the power to seek legal action against

poll taxes as a prerequisite for voting in state elections. Besley et al. use variation in these dummies

to instrument for political competition, which they find to have a significant impact on the share of

non-farm income and tax revenues. I also use the election year dummies from Besley et al.

   I construct proxies for the state-year policy environment. These different proxies are meant to

capture variation in state-policies which may have affected location decisions of private firms. The

choice of proxies is based on historical readings which provide qualitative evidence that these policies

contributed to the workforce transition into manufacturing and services jobs, especially in Southern

and Midwestern states (Cobb, 1993; Newman, 1984). First, a dummy for the existence of a corporate

income tax is constructed, which takes value 1 in all years in a state where there exists such a tax-

base. The date of creation of stat corporate income tax is taken from Table 4.1 of Newman (1984). The

dummy for the existence of right-to-work laws is extracted from Besley et al. (2010). Right-to-work

laws make it illegal to demand that employees join a union, or to automatically deduct union fees

from wages. The continuous measure of state unemployment insurance firm-size coverage is taken

from the historical publication series ’Significant Provisions of UI State Laws” published by the US

Department of Labor. I download all publications between 1937 and 1979. In each state-year, I code

                                                   34
the firm-size coverage, that is the lower-bound on firm-size above which an employee in a given firm

is entitled to receive state UI benefits. This measure is defined consistently over the entire series.

Federal-time varying regulation provided an upper-bound on the allowed firm-size, but states were

free to legislate in order to define a firm-size below the Federally mandated size. Some states chose to

lower the firm-size coverage earlier on, ahead of Federal regulations, while some states followed the

Federal upper-bound throughout time. After 1979, Federal regulations extended coverage to all firms

with one employee or more, and I code the state-time coverage as equal to 1 from 1979 onward. I also

wanted to code the employer UI-contribution, expressed as a percentage of wages, but this measure

is not consistently reported throughout.




B.1.5 Additional outcome variables


I construct a proxy for tax administrative reforms based on the historical series of the Book of the State,

published annually from 1993 until today by the Council of State Governments. I collect data at the

state-year level on the number of agencies administering major taxes: property, income, sales, gaso-

line, motor vehicle, tobacco, death, liquor. I code the total number of state tax agencies in operation

in every state-year. This variable is available from 1939 to 2009. This variable is intended to proxy

for investments in enforcement capacity, through consolidation of the number of tax agencies, and is

used in the robustness checks (Table 3). I also collected state-year data from the same source on the

annual salaries of the chief state administrative official in different departments: revenue-collection

and taxation; treasury; attorney general. I then constructed the ratio of the annual salary in revenue-

taxation relative to the salary in the Treasury and to the salary as Attorney General. These ratios were

meant to proxy for investment in enforcement capacity through funding higher wages to tax admin-

istrators (relative to other state administrators). In results not reported, I do not find an impact of the

upholding event on this measure of relative pay. These variables represent, to my knowledge, the first

long-run time-series on proxies for tax administrative capacity of individual states in the US. As an

additional proxy for enforcement capacity, I code the year when each state adopted withholding of

state personal income taxes by employers. There exists both micro-evidence from Denmark (Kleven

et al., 2011) and state-level evidence from US states (Dusek & Bagchi, 2017) on withholding’s positive

impacts on income tax collection. I use the historical IRS ’Annual Report’ series to code the years of

adoption. This variable is used in robustness checks (Table 3).

                                                    35
   I use data from Besley et al. (2010) to build proxies for political outcome-variables. I use their

measure of party-neutral political competition, which is defined as (minus) the absolute value of the

deviation of the democratic vote-share from 50 percent, where the vote-share is the average vote-

share over all state-wide races. Further, I use the Democratic vote-share averaged across all state-wide

elections, and the Democratic seat-share in the state House. These measures are used as outcome

variables in robustness checks (Table 3).

   In the robustness checks (Table 3), I also study the impact of upholding on the generosity of the

state’s unemployment benefits. In particular, I use the measure of state maximum unemployment

benefits. This variable is taken from the ’Correlates of State Policy’ database (Jordan & Grossman,

2017).

   Finally, in the robustness checks (Table 3), I study the impact of upholding on level of income, and

income inequality. I use the ’net earnings’ measure of income from BEA, and the top 1 percent income

share from Frank et al. (2015).




B.1.6 Exchange of information agreements


In the main heterogeneity analysis (Table 2), I study whether the impact of upholding on tax structure

and collection differs according to whether a state has an exchange of information agreement in place

by the time of the court upholding decision. I code the year of implementation of the agreement from

the historical IRS series ’Annual Report.’ The signature of the exchange of information acts has been

found to increase income tax revenue (Troiano, 2017). Troiano’s source for the year of implementation

is Penniman (1980). There are only minor differences in the year of implementation between the

annual IRS publication series and Penniman (1980), and my results are robust to using this alternative

measure of implementation dates.




B.1.7 Cost of collection


I construct the measure of cost of collection used in Section 4.1 from the Book of the States. The earliest

year where the required data exists is 1962. The cost-components of collecting state taxes are capital

outlays, operating costs, and payroll. In 1962, these measures exist for the state’s financial admin-


                                                    36
istration, which includes the revenue administration and the procurement administration. As such,

my cost measure constitutes an upper bound, since I cannot separate the administrative costs of the

revenue division from the procurement division. I divide this total cost by the total gross tax revenue

collected within the same financial year. This measure of cost of collection is similar in construction to

Jensen & Lagakos (2019), which studies variation in cost of national tax administrations across levels

of development. Interestingly, I find that the cost of collection in the average US state in 1962 is slightly

higher than the average low-income country’s tax administration from Jensen & Lagakos (2019).




                                                     37
B.2 Program details: Industrial Development Bonds

In this sub-section, I provide additional information on the Industrial Development Bonds program

(IDB), and the legal uncertainty which generates variation at the state-level in the effective implemen-

tation date.

   The IDB was a place-based local development program that sought to attract industrial facilities to

predominantly rural areas characterized by ’surplus labor’ concentrated among self-employed farm-

ers (Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, 1962). The first state to implement an IDB

program was Mississippi, when it launched ’Balancing Agriculture with Industry’ in 1936. Practice

of IDB did not, however, become a multi-State practice until the mid-1950s, when several other States

decided to implement similar programs.

   The official justification for government intervention was that these rural areas were “deficient in

credit facilities” (ACIR, 1962), and capital for local firms was not readily available from conventional

credit sources. Through the IDB, the local government therefore sought to relieve a local credit con-

straint. In the IDB program, sub-state government units (counties, boroughs, and cities) issue bonds

to finance the acquisition or construction of facilities and equipment for lease to private firms. Im-

portantly, IDB issuances were revenue bonds, which are secured exclusively by the revenues of the

project. This is in contrast to general obligation bonds, which are secured by the credit of the issuer

- in this case, the local government. This distinction implies that there is not a direct relationship be-

tween the issuance under the IDB program and increased tax revenue due to a need to solidify the

local government’s funding capacity.

   The interest received from IDB securities was exempt from Federal income taxes. This meant that

IDB securities commanded more favorable terms in the financial markets in relation to corporate se-

curities with comparable risk. The Federal exemption is thought to have been one of the main reasons

behind the growth of the IDB market. The growth of IDB issuances in the late 1960’s implied an

amount of forgone Federal government tax revenue which became intolerable. This triggered legisla-

tion in the early 1970s to remove the IDB exemption for Federal tax purposes and and to significantly

limit the per issuance volume of IDB. These reforms also significantly widened the scope of projects

that could be approved under municipal bond projects, with a shift away from rural industrialization

towards public-goods projects in infrastructure and environmental conservation.

   For identification purposes, I exploit the institutional features of implementation. In particular, the

particular methods under IDB were unprecedented in the context of postwar state financing. The use

                                                   38
of public credit for an otherwise private purpose was considered to be in direct violation of the public

purpose doctrine, which prohibits such usage. Constitutions of many States explicitly contained such

public purpose statutes. The implementation of IDB therefore required, in a first instance, a legislative

vote of constitutional or statutory provision that authorizes industrial development financing.

   The lack of historical precedent, however, meant that the voted provision required judicial testing

in order to be effectively implemented. Indeed, investors were reluctant to hold IDB securities in the

period where the legality of the voted state provision had not been confirmed in the state’s judicial

system (Cobb, 1993). Judicial testing was most often delivered by a court case brought before the

State’s supreme court. This court case could be triggered in several ways. Most often, the issuance of

an IDB required a significant amount of pre-issuance preparation, including a detailed description of

the local workforce needs and a justification for why a particular candidate private firm would satisfy

those needs. These preparations were often done by a local government agency, created specifically

for this purpose. The case would then be brought against the legality of this local development agency.

More generally, any legal step required to issue IDB could be targeted in a court case. In several States,

including Tennessee, the IDB statute featured the requirement of a vote of approval by the relevant

electors as a special municiapl election. The court case could also directly involve the issuance of an

IDB bond itself. But as the graphical evidence in Panel A of Figure 7 shows, this was only very rarely

the case.

   In several instances, the fact that IDB were issued as revenue, rather than general obligation, bonds,

was the basis of the argument for not violating the ’credit for public purpose’ doctrine. In the case of

Wayland v. Snapp, the Arkansas Supreme Court “(...) chose to uphold the issuance of the revenue

bonds by invoking the doctrine that revenue bonds do not violate a credit clause because they are

retired through lease revenues of the project, not out of tax funds” (Yale Law Journal, 1961).

   I collect information on the dates of the legislative vote and the upholding from several sources.

Importantly, I collect information from both administrative sources and legal reviews: Abbey (1965),

ACIR (1963), Pinsky (1972), and Economic Development Administration (1978). The date for the vote

is the year of appearance of the constitutional statute or provision authorizing local development

financing. The date for the upholding event is the publication year of the leading case that upholds

the constitutionality of the statute or provision. There is only little conflict in the reported dates of

the vote and the upholding between the administrative and legal sources. In the case of upholding,

there are sometimes several leading cases, when the first case upholds the constitutionality of the


                                                   39
statute allowing cities to issue development bonds, and the second (later) case extends these powers

to counties. I always choose the earliest date across sources for both the vote and the upholding events.

   Table B.1 provides information for each IDB state in my time-period of study. The table reports

the year of vote and the year of upholding that I use in the main analysis. In Figure B.1, I plot the

cumulative distribution of the time-lag between the vote-year and the upholding-year. The average

lag is 6.67 years, with a standard deviation of 6.77. In just under 40 percent of States, the time-lag

exceeds 10 years. In the main analysis, my estimation is helped by the existence of a significant lag

between the vote and the upholding events within state; the variance in lag across States; and, the

differential timing of court upholding decisions across States.




                                                   40
        Figure B.1: Time-Lag Between Vote and Upholding Events Across IDB States




                                  1
              Cumulative distribution in IDB states
               .2        .4       0  .6        .8




                                                      0           5               10               15                20
                                                          Time−lag between IDB vote−in and court upholding (years)

Notes: This graph displays the empirical cumulative distribution function of the time-lag in years between the vote event
and the upholding event within each State that has upheld IDB by 1980. The year of the vote is the year where the State
legislature voted in a statute or provision authorizing IDB. The year of the uphold event is the year where the State supreme
court upheld the legality of the voted IDB statute or provision through a leading court case. The time-lag is defined as the
difference in years between these two events. Source: Section 4.1 and Appendix Section B.2.




                                                                                 41
                Table B.1: Industrial Development Bonds Program Legal Timing

State           Year vote   Year uphold                            Leading court case

Alabama           1949         1950          Newberry v. City of Andalusia, 257 Ala. 49, 57 So. 2d 629

Arizona           1963         1973        Industrial Development Authority of Pinal County v. Nelson,
                                                            109 Ariz. 368, 509 P. 2d 705

Arkansas          1958         1960               Wayland v. Snapp, 232 Ark. 57, 334 S.W. 2d 633

Colorado          1955         1970           Allardice v. Adams County, 173 Colo. 133, 476 P. 2d 982

Delaware          1961         1962                    In re Opinion of the Justices, 177 A. 2d 205

Georgia           1957         1970                          In re Opinion on Sub. H. B. 24

Illinois          1951         1972            People ex rel. City of Salem v. McMackin, 53 Ill. 2d 347

Iowa              1963         1964               Green v. City of Mount Pleasant, 131 N.W. 2d 5

Kansas            1961         1962               State ex rel. Ferguson v. Pittsburgh, 364 P. 2d 71

Kentucky          1946         1950           Faulconer v. City of Danville, 313 Ky. 468, 232 S.W. 2d 80

Louisiana         1952         1954             Miller v. Washington Parish, 75 Southern So. 2d 394

Maine             1958         1966           Northeast Shoe Company v. Industrial and Recreational
                                                     Finance Approval Board, 233 A. 2d 423

Maryland          1960         1974                Wilson v. Board of County Commissioners of
                                                   Allegheny County, 273 Md. 30, 327 A. 2d 488

Michigan          1963         1966                    City of Gaylord v. Beckett, 144 N.W. 2d 460

Minnesota         1961         1970                City of Pipestone v. Madsen, 178 N.W. 2d 594

Mississippi       1936         1944                     Albritton v. City of Winona, 178 So. 799

Missouri          1960         1975                    Atkinson v. Planned Industrial Expansion
                                                         Authority of St. Louis, 517 S.W. 2d 36

Montana           1965         1970                     Fickles v. Missoula County, 470 P. 2d 287

Nebraska          1960         1962          State ex rel. Meyer v. County of Lancaster, 113 N.W. 2d 63

Nevada            1959         1973               State ex rel. Brennan v. Bowman, 512 P. 2d 1321

New Hampshire     1955         1971                      Opinion of the Justices, 278 A. 2d 357

New Mexico        1955         1956         Village of Deming v. Hosdreg Co., 62 N.M. 18, 303 P. 2d 920

North Dakota      1955         1964               Gripentrog v. City of Wahpeton, 126 N.W. 2d 230

Ohio              1955         1966       State v. Greater Portsmouth Growth Corporation, 218 N.E. 2d 446

Oklahoma          1960         1961                     Application of The Oklahoma Industrial
                                                          Financial Authority, 360 P. 2d 720
                                                  42
                  Table B.1: Industrial Development Bonds Program Legal Timing (end)

 State                  Year vote      Year uphold                             Leading court case

 Pennsylvania              1956             1968             Basehore v. Hampden IDA and Walker v. Butler
                                                                       County IDA, 248 A. 2d 212

 Rhode Island              1958             1974                   In re Advisory to Governor, 324 A. 2d 641

 South Carolina            1962             1967                       Elliott v. McNair, 156 S.E. 2d 421

 South Dakota              1964             1968                   Clem v. City of Yankton, 160 N.W. 2d 125

 Tennessee                 1951             1952                    Holly v. Elizabethon, 241 S.W. 2d 1001

 Utah                      1953             1968                      Allen v. Toole County, 445 P. 2d 994

 Virginia                  1962             1967            Industrial Development Authority of the City of
                                                            Chesapeake v. Suthers, 208 Va. 51 155 S.E. 2d 326

 West Virginia             1963             1964         State ex rel. Marion County v. Demus, 135 S.E. 2d 352

 Wisconsin                 1957             1973          Hammermill Paper Co. v. LaPlante, 205 N.W. 2d 784

 Wyoming                   1963             1967                           Uhls v. State, 429 P. 2d 74


Notes: This table provides details on the legal timing of the IDB program in all States. The year of the vote is the year where
the State legislature voted in a statute or provision authorizing IDB. The year of the uphold event is the year where the State
supreme court upheld the legality of the voted IDB statute or provision through a leading court case. This leading court case
is indicated in the final column of the table. The years of the vote and upholding event are drawn from administrative and
legal reviews. Source: Section 4.1 and Appendix Section B.2.




                                                              43
B.3 Robustness of main regression results

In this sub-section, I provide robustness checks for the main results in the US states regression setting.

In Table B.2, I maintain the same specification as in the main text, but consider alternative measures of

the main outcome variables. In the main text, I studied the impact of the upholding event on employ-

ment structure using the employee-share of the active workforce. The disadvantage of this variable is

that it is interpolated between Census years. In Column 1, as an alternative I use the employee-share

of income. This variable is drawn from the SA5H BEA series and is continuous throughout the sample

period. The variable is constructed as the ratio of total wages and salaries to total resident income.3

Column 1 indicates that the upholding event led to a large and significant increase in the employee-

share of income, in line with the main finding of an increase in the employee-share in employment.

      The final three columns of Table B.2 investigate the robustness of the absence of a per capita income

effect. In column 2, I use the BEA ’net earnings by place of residence’, which equals total earnings less

contributions for government social insurance plus ’adjustment for residence’. In Column 3, I use

the Census-based measure of total personal income. This income measure is interpolated between

Census years. In Column 4, I use the IRS-based measure of income, adjusted gross income (AGI),

drawn from the top-income share series in Frank et al. (2015). I find an insignificant impact of both

the upholding event and the vote-in event across these three alternative measures of income. Both the

BEA and Census measures suggest an insignificant positive impact, while the IRS measure suggests an

insignificant, but negative impact. The absence of an impact on income at the state-level using various

measures is consistent with the regressions in Section B.4 which also fail to detect a per capita income

impact, but at the local county-level. Note that the absence of an impact on income in this context is

not inconsistent with other place-based program evaluations which have found positive development

impacts. Indeed, the findings in those studies, including Kline & Moretti (2014), are based on long-run

estimates, while my estimates only capture the short-run program impacts.

      In Table B.3, I consider the robustness of the impact on employment-structure to alternative speci-

fications. Column 1 replicates the result from the main specification. In Column 2, I remove the vote-in

dummy from the main specification. The counterfactual is now entirely built from states that uphold

IDB at a later date. This has only a minor impact on the estimated coefficient, which changes from

1.7 percentage points to 1.5 percentage points. In Column 3, I remove the main covariates from the

main specification, which are the first stage instruments used in Besley et al. (2010), and election year
  3
      It was also used in the graphical evidence in Figure 7.


                                                                44
dummies. This has no effect on the estimated coefficient. In Column 4, I augment the main specifi-

cation with additional controls. These additional controls are plausible determinants of employment-

structure, but were not included in the main specification because of their potential endogeneity. They

are: log per capita income; an indicator for the existence of right to work laws; an indicator for the

existence of a corporate income tax; and, a firm-size measure of the state’s unemployment insurance.

The sources and construction of these variables is described in Section B.1. The inclusion of these

controls has no impact on the main estimate.
   In Column 5, I allow for the determinants of the time-lag between the vote-in and upholding
event to have an independent impact. In particular, Table 1 showed that the time-lag was shorter in
states with civil law origins, and longer in states that had witnessed defaults for a historical public-
private funding initiative. While these are state-specific but time-invariant characteristics, they may
nonetheless be correlated with state-time varying determinants of employment structure. This would
confound the impact of the upholding event. I therefore allow civil law states and historical default
states to be on fully non-parametric time-paths throughout the sample period. Formally, I estimate

                                                                                         
                       yst =β + α1 (Vote-in)st + θ1 (Upheld)st + t 1 (Civil Law)s × γt
                                                       
                            + ßt 1 (Hist Default)s × γt + λXst + µs + γt + εst


   where all variables are defined as in the main text, and 1 (Civil Law)s and 1 (Hist Default)s are

indicators taking a value of 1, respectively, if a state is has civil law origins or has experienced a

historical default. The construction of these variables is described in the main text (Section 4.2). The

inclusion of these time-paths marginally reduces the estimated coefficient on the upholding event,

from 1.7 to 1.5 percentage points, which remains strongly statistically significant.
   In Column 6, I investigate the possibility that my main control specification does not adequately
capture differential convergence patterns in employment structure over time across states. Indeed, the
IDB-implementation period was characterized by rapid structural convergence for the less-developed
states in the US (Barro & Sala-i-Martin, 1992; Caselli and Coleman, 2001). To investigate this, I augment
the main specification with an interaction between a linear time-trend and the cross-sectional level of
state GDP per capita in 1940. That is, I estimate


    yst = β + α1 (Vote-in)st + θ1 (Upheld)st + λXst + µs + γt + ß (Initial_Incomes1940 × [t − 1940]) + εst


   where variables are defined as in the main text, and where Initial_Incomes1940 is the cross-section of
initial GDP per capita in 1940, which is interacted with a linear time trend [t − 1940]. This leads to only a very



                                                       45
marginal reduction in the magnitude of the estimated impact of upholding.

   Finally, I show that the results are robust to excluding the set of IDB states which were imple-

menting the Tennessee Valley Authority program (Kline and Moretti, 2013), a concurrent Federal

place-based development program. The joint IDB-TVA states are: Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi,

and Tennessee. I remove these states from the sample, and re-estimate the main specification on the

reduced sample. Column 7 shows that this leads to no meaningful change in the estimated impact of

the upholding event.




                                                    46
                         Table B.2: Alternative Measures of Employment and Income


                                E-share of income      Avg Income (BEA)         Avg Income (Census)        Avg Income (IRS)

                                        (1)                     (2)                       (3)                       (4)

 1(Vote)                                .000                  23.369                     38.807                   -684.822
                                       (.004)                (29.475)                   (43.544)                 (978.986)
 1(Uphold)                              .013                   .424                      59.052                   -624.991
                                      (.006)**               (33.114)                   (55.131)                (1115.546)

 Mean outcome variable                  .707                   1016                      2003                      1596

 State FE                                x                       x                         x                         x
 Year FE                                 x                       x                         x                         x
 State-year controls                     x                       x                         x                         x

 States                                 28                      28                        28                       28
 State-year Obs                         466                     466                       466                      466

Notes: This table reports results from estimating the following regression

               yst = β + α1 (Vote-in)st + θ1 (Upheld)st + β1 (Upheld)st × 1 (EoI)st + λXst + µs + γt + εst

where s denotes state and t denotes time. 1 (Vote- in)st indicates whether a vote has occurred in the state-House to allow
issuance of IDB but the IDB has not yet been upheld, 1 (Upheld)st indicates whether the State court system has upheld the
constitutionality of the voted IDB statute or provision. The vote-in and upholding events are mutually exclusive. 1 (EoI)st
is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when a State has passed an exchange of information agreement with the Federal
Internal Revenue Service. In Columns 1, the outcome variable is the wage and salary share of of individual income, drawn
from BEA historical data. In Column 2, the outcome variable is ’net earnings by place of residence’, which is the BEA
concept of personal income. It is equal to total earnings less contributions for government social insurance plans plus a
residence adjustment. In Column 3, I use the measure of gross personal income from the decennial Census. This measure
is interpolated between Census year, using a natural cubic spline. In Column 4, I use the IRS measure of income, adjusted
gross income, which is drawn from the top income share series (Frank et al., 2015). The state-year controls, Xst , are indicator
variables for election year, and indicator variables for the existence of voting restrictions in the form of poll tax and literacy
tests. These are the first stage instruments used by Besley et al. (2010) to study political competition and policy-making
in US states. ∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗ denote significance at the 10%, 5%, 1% level. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level in
parentheses. Source: Section 4.5 and Appendix Section B.3.




                                                               47
                                        Table B.3: Alternative Specifications



                                                             Employee-share of employment

                              (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)               (6)             (7)

 1(Vote)                      .003                           .004         .003           .004              .004            .004
                             (.005)                         (.005)       (.005)         (.006)            (.005)          (.006)
 1(Uphold)                    .017           .015            .017         .017           .015              .016            .018
                           (.005)***      (.005)***       (.005)***    (.005)***       (.006)**         (.005)***       (.006)***

 Specification               Main      Cross-sectional   No controls   Extensive     Time path        Initial income    Exclude
                                            only                        controls   civil law states     time-trend     TVA states

 Mean outcome variable       .707           .707            .707          .707          .707              .707            .777

 State FE                      x             x                x            x              x                 x              x
 Year FE                       x             x                x            x              x                 x              x

 States                        28           28               28           28             28                28              24
 State-year Obs               466           466             466           466            466               466            409

Notes: this table reports results from estimating alternative specifications, described in detail in Section B.3. In all regres-
sions, the outcome variable is the employee-share of the economically active workforce. Column 1 replicates the central
finding from estimating the main specification (1). Column 2 removes the indicator variable for the vote event from the
main specification. Column 3 removes the controls from the main specification. Column 4 augments the main specification
with additional controls: log per capita income; an indicator for the existence of right to work laws; an indicator for the ex-
istence of a corporate income tax; and, a firm-size measure of the state’s unemployment insurance. Column 5 augments the
main specification with a full set of year indicator interactions with both the indicator for civil law origins and the indicator
for historical rail default. Column 6 augments the main specification with an interaction between a linear time-trend and the
cross-section of GDP per capita in 1940. Finally, Column 7 estimates the main specification, but on a reduced sample which
excludes the four States (Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, Tennessee) which were part of the Tennessee Valley Authority
development program. ∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗ denote significance at the 10%, 5%, 1% level. Robust standard errors clustered at the state
level in parentheses. Source: Section 4.5 and Appendix Section B.3.




                                                               48
B.4 Local IDB impacts: evidence from county-level regressions


In this subsection, I study the impact of the IDB program at the county-level. While the effective start

of the program is triggered at the level of the state supreme court (Sections 4.1- 4.2), the decision itself

to issue IDB is predominantly made by counties within the state.4 As such, a county-level analysis

provides an assessment of the direct local economic impacts of the program. At the same time, the

county-level analysis at the level of local implementation helps to shed light on the absence of an

economically meaningful impact of IDB on non-employment outcomes.

In order to study the county-level impacts of IDB, I rely on two main data-sets. The first is the com-

prehensive county-level panel data-set ICPSR 2896 ’Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social

Data: The United States, 1790-2002.’ This data-set has been used in other studies of long-run impacts

of local place-based development programs, including the Tennessee Valley Authority program (Kline

& Moretti, 2013). I interpolate values between data-points in the ICPSR data-set. Note that during my

period of interest, the primary source in ICPSR is the County Data Book. Since this source delivers

data every five years, the interpolation period is smaller than between decennial Census which is used

in the main analysis. Nonetheless, the data has the disadvantage that it does not contain a continuous

measure of per capita income, which is the main object of interest in this county-level analysis. I there-

fore supplement it with a second county-year panel data-set. This data-set is the combination of the

continuous BEA county-level per capita income data, which exists from 1969 onward; and, the 1959

Census module which measures per capita income in the cross-section of all counties. While I do have

to interpolate per capita income between 1959 and 1969, this data-set nonetheless gives me a more

naturally continuous measure of per capita income than the ICPSR data-set. The only disadvantage is

that my sample only starts in 1959, while 7 states have voted in the IDB program before that date. The

county-level analysis is therefore limited to the counties in the 21 states that vote in after 1959.

The aim is to investigate the impacts of the IDB by comparing counties with the program to counties

without the program. The basis for this exercise remains the specification used in the main text, which

assesses impacts by comparing changes before and after the upholding event, while controlling for any

impact occurring during the vote in event. But without any additional modifications, this specification

would rely on counties in different states as a counterfactual. Instead, I want to create a control county
  4
    The decision could also be made by higher tiers of government, such as the the state government, or lower tiers of
government, including cities. Data from Moody’s Investor Service (1974) suggests that in practice, actual issuance was
predominantly carried out by counties.




                                                         49
within the same state. This is a meaningful exercise since the IDB program was initiated at the county

level and only a subset of counties in a given state would initiate IDB.

I assign treatment at the county-level within the state based on a list created by the federal government

before IDB had become widely implemented. The Area Redevelopment Administration (ARA) is a

federal agency that was created in 1961, with the aim of providing technical (data-driven) assistance

to state and local governments to implement local development financing. For this purpose, the ARA

created criteria that defined ’redevelopment areas.’ These were predominantly rural geographical

areas, characterized by “structural underemployment”, where the encouragement of new industries

was perceived as a solution to the stagnant levels of development (ARA, 1962). This characterization

is effectively identical to the characterization of counties that IDB was targeted towards. In every

state, the ARA compiled data from Census and the Departments of Health, Education, Welfare, and

Agriculture, to establish a statistical profile of every county in 1961, and classify a subset of those as

’redevelopment areas.’

I digitize the list of ’redevelopment’ counties based on the ’Statistical Profiles’ in every state (ARA,

1961), and merge it with the main county panel data-set. This list has the appealing feature that it

was created by a government entity which was not responsible for implementing IDB in the pre-IDB

period. As such, the selection of counties into the list may be considered plausibly exogenous to

unobservable county-time varying confounding determinants of local development.

I augment the empirical specification used in the main text with this list to create a difference-in-

differences design. More specifically, I consider the ARA ’redevelopment’ status to be a county-specific

time-invariant assignment to program treatment. Since there exists counties on the ARA list that do

not take up IDB, and there exists counties not on the ARA list that can take up IDB, this is an intent-to-

treat design. The diff-in-diff evaluation will compare changes in outcome in ARA counties before and

after the court upholding event to changes in outcomes in non-ARA counties within the same state,

while controlling for any impacts that occurred during the vote-in event. Formally, I estimate


                ycst =β + α1 (Vote-in)st + θ1 (Upheld)st + π (1 (Vote in)st × 1 (ARA)c )                 (1)

                      + φ (1 (Upheld)st × 1 (ARA)c ) + µc + γt + εcst


where ycst is the outcome of interest in county c, in state s, at time t, 1 (Vote-in)st and 1 (Upheld)st in-

dicate whether a state has, respectively, voted in but not upheld or upheld the IDB program. 1 (ARA)c



                                                    50
is a county-specific, time-invariant indicator that takes value 1 if a county is on the ARA federal list

of redevelopment areas, and µc and γt are county and year fixed effects, respectively. I cluster the

standard error at the state level, to allow for spill-over between ARA and non-ARA counties within

the same state. The time-window is identical to the one used in the main estimation (Tables 2-3): in

every IDB state that upholds before 1971, I consider the time-period that ranges from 5 years before

the vote-in event to 5 years after the upholding event.

The results are displayed in Table B.4. In the first column, I study the employee-share of the active

workforce as the outcome variable. I find that the large, positive impact is concentrated in the ARA

counties in the upholding period. In the following two columns, I find no overall impacts on the level

of employment and urbanization. The absence of impacts on these two outcomes is consistent with

the interpretation that the IDB program achieved its stated objective of reducing underemployment

in specifically targeted rural areas. Issuance of IDB required documenting the specific local indus-

trial needs of a county and a justification for why the size and characteristics of the proposed IDB

facility would achieve this local need. In comparison to other place-based development programs,

IDB was therefore highly targeted in nature and narrow in scope, aiming to finance industrial devel-

opment commensurate with the specific local workforce needs. The increase in the employee-share

and the absence of an impact on the size of the workforce suggests IDB primarily provided a tran-

sition into employee-jobs of ’underemployed’, self-employed farmers. The absence of any change in

urbanization suggests that workers did not migrate to the predominantly rural areas where the IDB

facilities were being opened. Consistent with the absence of generalized economic impacts, the fi-

nal two columns find no statistically significant impacts per capita income. The fourth column uses

family income, measured in the ICPSR data-set, while the fifth column uses the continuous BEA per

capita income measure. The impact on the continuous measure of per capita income is particularly

insignificant, both statistically and economically.

Taken together, these county-level results provide additional evidence to support the absence of any

meaningful non-employment development impacts, in the short-run 5-year window considered in

this estimation strategy. In particular, the IDB program seems to have led to a significant transition

from self-employment to employee-jobs but only locally in the specifically targeted IDB counties. The

absence of any spill-over to work structure or workforce attachment in non-treated counties suggests

sectoral re-allocation was limited. The absence of any change to levels of urbanization suggests mi-

gration from non-treated to treated counties was also limited. The compensation for migration costs


                                                      51
and the efficiency gains from sectoral re-allocation are two of the main mechanisms through which

previous studies have found long-run positive income impacts of place-based programs. These mech-

anisms seem to not be significant forces in the IDB context in the 5-year short run.




                                                  52
                         Table B.4: County-Level Evidence on Local Impacts of IDB



                         E-share     Employment       Urbanization      Log(Family Income)       Log(Personal Income)

                            (1)            (2)              (3)                   (4)                       (5)

 1(Vote)                    -.007         -.003             -.003                 -.016                      .031
                           (.006)        (.002)            (.003)                (.030)                    (.043)
 1(Vote)*1(ARA)             .003          -.001             -.001                 -.007                     -.019
                           (.007)        (.003)            (.009)                (.033)                    (.038)
 1(Uphold)                  -.009         -.004             -.003                 -.044                     -.003
                           (.008)        (.003)            (.005)                (.047)                    (.072)
 1(Uphold)*1(ARA)           .031          -.002              .000                  .044                     -.008
                         (.010)***       (.004)            (.010)                (.040)                    (.051)


 County FE                   x             x                 x                     x                         x
 Year FE                     x             x                 x                     x                         x

 States                     21             21               21                    21                        21
 County-year obs           5140           5140             5140                  5140                      5140

Notes: This table reports the results from estimating the following regression

                         ycst =β + α1 (Vote in)st + θ1 (Upheld)st + π (1 (Vote in)st × 1 (ARA)c )
                                                             
                               + φ 1 (Upheld)st × 1 (ARA)c + µc + γt + εcst

where ycst is the outcome of interest in county c, in state s, at time t, 1 (Vote in)st and 1 (Upheld)st indicate whether a
state has, respectively, voted in but not upheld or upheld the IDB program. 1 (ARA)c is a county-specific, time-invariant
indicator that takes value 1 if a county is on the ARA federal list of redevelopment areas, and µc and γt are county and year
fixed effects, respectively. The outcome variables are: employee-share of employment; economically active employment
share of population; urbanization share of population; log family income; and, log personal income. The first 5 outcomes
are drawn from ICPSR 2896, while the final outcome variable is constructed from historical BEA series and the 1959 Census.
The sample is limited to counties in the 21 IDB States that vote in IDB statutes or provisions after 1959. ∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗ denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, 1% level. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. Sources: Appendix
Section B.4.




                                                             53
References
 [1] Barro, R. J., X. Sala-i-Martin [1992]. “Convergence”, Journal of Political Economy, 100(2).

 [2] Caselli, F., J. Coleman [2001]. “The U.S. Structural Transformation and Regional Convergence: A
     Reinterpretation”, Journal of Political Economy, 109(3).

 [3] Cobb, J. [1993]. The Selling of the South. University of Illinois Press, Chicago.

 [4] de Mel, S., D. Mckenzie, C. Woodruff [2008]. “Measuring Micro-enterprise Profits: Musk We Ask
     How the Sausage is Made?”, Journal of Development Economics, 88.

 [5] Dusek, L., S. Bagchi [2017]. “Third-Party Reporting, Tax Collections, and the Size of Government:
     Evidence from Withholding”, Working Paper.

 [6] Economic Development Administration [1978]. The Industrial Revenue Bond as a Financial Attrac-
     tion Device. Office of Economic Research, Washington D.C.

 [7] Frank, M. E. Sommeiller, M. Price, E. Saez [2015]. “Series for Top Income Shares by US States
     since 1917”, WID Technical Note Series, No.2015-7.

 [8] Jordan, M., M. Grossman [2017]. The Correlates of State Policy v.2.1. East Lansing, MI: Institute for
     Public Policy and Social Research.

 [9] Pinsky, D. [1972]. “State Constitutional Limitations on Public Industrial Financing: An Historical
     and Economic Approach”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 111(3).

[10] Yale L.J. [1961]. “The Public Purpose of Municipal Financing for Industrial Development”, Yale
     Law Journal, 70(5).




                                                     54
