                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  IMMIGRANT NETWORKING AND COLLABORATION:
                          SURVEY EVIDENCE FROM CIC

                                        Sari Pekkala Kerr
                                         William R. Kerr

                                       Working Paper 25509
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25509


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019




Comments are appreciated and can be sent to skerr3@wellesley.edu. We thank our discussant
Anne Le Brun, two anonymous referees, and participants at the NBER Conference on The Role
of Immigrants and Foreign Students in Science, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship for helpful
comments. This revised paper is a forthcoming book chapter in the associated NBER conference
volume. This research was generously supported by the Kauffman Foundation, the National
Science Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and Harvard Business School. William
Kerr is a Research Associate of the Bank of Finland and thanks the Bank for hosting him during a
portion of this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Immigrant Networking and Collaboration: Survey Evidence from CIC
Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 25509
January 2019
JEL No. D85,F22,M13,O30

                                          ABSTRACT

Networking and the giving and receiving of advice outside of one's own firm are important
features of entrepreneurship and innovation. We study how immigrants and natives utilize the
potential networking opportunities provided by CIC, formerly known as the Cambridge
Innovation Center. CIC is widely considered the center of the Boston entrepreneurial ecosystem.
We surveyed 1,334 people working at CIC in three locations spread across the Boston area and
CIC's first expansion facility in St. Louis, MO. Survey responses show that immigrants value
networking capabilities in CIC more than natives, and the networks developed by immigrants at
CIC tend to be larger. Immigrants report substantially greater rates of giving and receiving advice
than natives for six surveyed factors: business operations, venture financing, technology,
suppliers, people to recruit, and customers. The structure and composition of CIC floors has only
a modest influence on these immigrant versus native differences.


Sari Pekkala Kerr
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
skerr3@wellesley.edu

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1    Introduction

High-skilled immigrants are a substantial and growing share of U.S. innovation and entrepre-
neurship, accounting for about a quarter of U.S. patents and …rm starts. While recent research
has begun to quantify these broad contributions and measure traits of the types of …rms cre-
ated (e.g., Brown et al., 2018; Kerr and Kerr, 2017, 2018), many important factors about
the innovation and entrepreneurial processes used by immigrants versus natives and how they
interact are less explored.
    We examine a particularly important feature— networking and the giving and receiving of
advice outside of one’s own …rm. Individuals working on new concepts, be they embodied in
a new growth-oriented …rm or a technology being developed in an established company, must
acquire and integrate new knowledge. A frequent explanation for the clustering of innovative
activity both nationally (e.g., Silicon Valley vs. Bismarck) and locally (e.g., Kendall Square
vs. the South Shore in the Boston area) is the information spillovers and knowledge exter-
nalities that collocation with other innovators can provide. Entrepreneurs also cite access to
knowledge and bene…cial networks as one rationale for joining co-working spaces, incubators
and accelerators, and similar facilities, sometimes at a higher rent for the space. The degree
to which immigrants and natives di¤er on these dimensions is unknown but also important for
understanding the implications of a rising share of immigrants in our innovative workforce.
    We study how immigrants and natives utilize the potential networking opportunities pro-
vided by CIC, formerly known as the Cambridge Innovation Center. CIC is widely considered
the center of the Boston entrepreneurial ecosystem, with its …rst facility and headquarters
being in Kendall Square adjacent to MIT. Many well-known ventures have emerged from CIC,
including Android (purchased by Google), Carbonite, and Hubspot. Start-ups begun at CIC
have raised over $7 billion in venture capital funding and produced thousands of patents since
its founding in 2001. To get a sense of this scale, the venture capital raised by CIC …rms
exceeds the amounts raised in most U.S. states. CIC is also home to the labs and satellite
o¢ ces of many large companies, with products such as Siri rumored to have been developed
there. CIC o¤ers many formal and informal networking opportunities, including the weekly
Venture Cafe where local entrepreneurs and innovators gather to network and hear talks.
    In collaboration with CIC leadership, we surveyed people working at CIC in three locations
spread across the Boston area and CIC’s …rst expansion facility in St. Louis, MO. A total of

                                              2
1,334 people participated in the survey (a 24% response rate). The survey included extensive
questions about the background of individuals (including education and place of birth), the
traits of their …rms, their networking attitudes and behaviors both within and outside of CIC,
their expectations for their company’s future, and their personality traits. CIC leadership was
particularly interested in learning about the reasons why entrepreneurs chose to locate their
…rm at CIC, and what value CIC was creating for their ventures.
   We consider in this paper the networking attitudes and behaviors of immigrant entrepre-
neurs, inventors, and other employees at CIC, as contrasted to their native counterparts. There
are lengthy literatures on immigrant self-employment and entrepreneurship and on the impor-
tance of networking for business outcomes. Yet, very little is known about the di¤erent ways
in which immigrant and native founders access business networks and how they utilize such
connections to bene…t their ventures. Immigrants operating in a new business environment
may show a heightened dependency on the connections available to them through their o¢ ce
location relative to natives more familiar with the local area. CIC provides a unique labo-
ratory to study these questions given our survey’s ability to track both formal and informal
networking in a detailed manner.
   Survey responses show that immigrants value the networking capabilities at CIC more than
natives. This …nding (and the others to be described below) are true in the sample averages
and also in regressions that condition on person and …rm traits and introduce …xed e¤ects for
each ‡oor in a CIC building. There is suggestive evidence that immigrants are more likely
to locate in CIC for the networking potential, and either way, there is robust evidence that
immigrants perceive greater networking bene…ts and access to other companies as an important
contributor to their work derived by locating at CIC.
   Networks developed at CIC by immigrants tend to be one person larger than those of
natives, on average, but these di¤erences are rarely statistically signi…cant. When asked to
list the location of their …ve most important contacts, immigrant and native entrepreneurs
at CIC display mostly similar reliance on CIC itself. For contacts outside of CIC, immigrant
entrepreneurs are substantially more likely to list overseas locations, while native entrepreneurs
are over-represented in terms of contacts elsewhere in the United States.
   Looking at networking behavior inside CIC, the largest di¤erences are found in the degree
to which immigrants both give advice to and receive advice from people within CIC who work


                                                3
outside of their company. For both of these actions, immigrants report substantially greater
rates of information exchange than natives for six surveyed factors: business operations, venture
…nancing, technology, suppliers, people to recruit, and customers. On providing advice, the
immigrant di¤erential to natives is highest on business operations and customers and lowest
on venture …nancing. On receiving advice, the di¤erential is highest on venture …nancing and
customers, and lowest on suppliers and technology.
    Our last set of analyses considers the speci…c traits of CIC building ‡oors on which the
company o¢ ces of immigrants and natives are located, to see if they interact di¤erently with
‡oor-level environments. The ‡oors within each CIC facility can have a very di¤erent feel
or purpose: for example, one ‡oor may be more populated with larger, …xed o¢ ce spaces
suitable for established teams, while another ‡oor is a co-working space designed for very
small and frequently changing teams or individual entrepreneurs. Conditional on the match
of a client’s needs to a type of space, the speci…c ‡oor and o¢ ce allocation is otherwise based
upon availability and often has a degree of randomness.
    In the building ‡oor analysis, we measure six traits of each ‡oor: inventor percentage,
immigrant percentage, average age, female percentage, average …rm size, and total number of
…rms. Controlling for ‡oor …xed e¤ects, we interact these traits with an indicator for whether
the respondent is an immigrant, to observe whether there is heterogeneity in the immigrant
di¤erential due to the various ‡oor characteristics. We do not …nd evidence that ‡oor traits
matter for the strength of the immigrant-native di¤erential with respect to networking. There
is some evidence that the greater degree to which immigrants give and receive advice is accen-
tuated on ‡oors that have a high fraction of inventors, but the more important …nding is that
these ‡oor-level shaping factors are second order to the main e¤ects.
    The next section provides a short literature review. Section 3 describes CIC and our survey
instrument in detail. Section 4 presents the main empirical …ndings, and Section 5 concludes.


2    Literature Review

Entrepreneurs can strongly bene…t from collocating with other entrepreneurs, as is evident in
Silicon Valley, Boston, North Carolina’s Research Triangle, and many other industrial clusters.
Extensive literature documents the importance of networking within such clusters and the
potential location advantages for entrepreneurs in terms of innovation and discovery, securing


                                               4
…nancing and other resources, and increasing the performance of their ventures.1 Katz and
Wagner (2014) provide a summary on the more recent concept of “innovation district” that
has become very popular with cities; the authors explain how network considerations are a
large part of why such start-up company collocations are proving successful.2
       Many scholars argue that networks are particularly important at the start-up phase of a
business, when good advice and connections to …nancing are most valuable.3 Four kinds of
social networks are typically discussed in the literature, including family, collegial, transna-
tional, and ethnic networks. One strand of the networking literature has focused on the e¤ect
of networking activity on business outcomes and …rm performance, and another strand has
evaluated the various factors in‡uencing networks’ formation and their functioning.4 Expla-
nations for why belonging to a network improves …rm performance include the provision of a
source of competitive advantage, reduced transaction costs, and enhanced access to knowledge
and resources.5 Given the many potential mechanisms, the importance of networks is likely to
vary greatly across heterogeneous …rms.
       While most of the literature does not di¤erentiate between immigrant and native entrepre-
neurs, extensive research quanti…es that individuals from similar backgrounds tend to network
with each other, a phenomenon that is called “homophily” (e.g., McPherson, Smith-Lovin,
and Cook, 2001). From the point of view of an immigrant entrepreneur, this may mean that
there are fewer obvious network connections available in many foreign locations as compared
to a typical native in the same location, and ethnicity has been found to be an important
dimension of homophily in entrepreneurial founding teams.6 Some studies argue that height-
ened interaction among immigrant networks can explain why immigrant entrepreneurs cluster
   1
     For example, Witt (2007), Elfring and Hulsink (2003, 2007), Powell, Koputt, and Smith-Doerr (1996),
Balconi, Breschi, and Lissoni (2004), Breschi and Lissoni (2005, 2009), Glaeser and Kerr (2009), Kerr and
Kominers (2015), Greve and Sala¤ (2003), Sorenson (2005), Aldrich and Reese (1993), Carlino and Kerr (2015),
and Aldrich et al. (1987).
   2
     Katz, Vey, and Wagner (2015) further argue that the economic, physical, and networking assets within
those districts create the innovation ecosystem that makes them so valuable. Chatterji, Glaeser, and Kerr
(2014) discuss the policy environments that support innovation districts.
   3
     For example, Davidson and Honig (2003), Aldrich and Zimmer (1986), Kim and Aldrich (2005), Uzzi (1999),
Sharir and Lerner (2006), and Weber and Kratzer (2013).
   4
     For example, Hoang and Antoncic (2003), Ahuja (2000), Calvó-Armengol et al. (2009), Fershtman and
Gandal (2011), Jack (2010), Jack et al. (2010), and Gandal and Stettner (2016).
   5
     For example, Dyer and Singh (1998), Lin and Lin (2016), Gulati and Higgins (2003), Zaheer and Bell (2005),
Vanhaverbeke et al. (2009), Schott and Jensen (2016), McDonald, Khanna, and Westphal (2017), and Mazzola
et al. (2016).
   6
     For example, Aldrich and Waldinger (1990), Wilson and Martin (1982), Ruef, Aldrich, and Carter (2003),
Hegde and Tumilson (2014), and Gompers, Huang, and Wang (2017).



                                                      5
their businesses in certain locations and industries.7 Saxenian (2000) describes how Chinese
and Indian immigrant networks in Silicon Valley promoted the extensive clustering of Chi-
nese and Indian high-tech entrepreneurs in the small geographic area. Despite the large share
of immigrant-owned businesses (e.g., Kerr and Kerr, 2018), immigrant entrepreneurs in the
U.S. tend to have a smaller network to draw upon when seeking …nancing, mentors, partners,
employees or clients than do typical native-born entrepreneurs (Raijman and Tienda, 2000).
        A complete literature review on business networks spans many disciplines from economics
and sociology to management science and regional analysis.8 This study contributes in im-
portant and novel ways. We provide a rare economics-based view into how immigrant entre-
preneurs network and how their networking behavior di¤ers from native entrepreneurs. We
further compare immigrant entrepreneurs to natives working in the same facility, which is a
new empirical approach in this research space. Our CIC sample is both large and also focused
on companies that tend to be very innovative and growth-oriented, which is di¢ cult to ac-
complish in many settings. Finally, we complement earlier analyses on the successful ability of
immigrant entrepreneurs to network by providing evidence that links the networking behavior
to personality traits and other characteristics of the individual and the …rm.9


3        CIC and Survey Instrument
3.1       CIC History and Operations

CIC was founded in its present format in 2001, known then as the Cambridge Innovation
Center. The …rst facility, known by its address of One Broadway, is in a building adjacent to
and owned by MIT. The founders, Tim Rowe and Andy Olmsted, had previously established
a “foundry” incubator at the spot. While the foundry model was unsuccessful, Rowe and
Olmsted pivoted into what is now often labeled a co-working model, being among the …rst of
    7
     For example, Light, Bhachu, and Karageorgis (1989), Saxenian (2002), Kalnins and Chung (2006), Chand
and Ghorbani (2011), Aliaga-Isla and Riap (2013), Kloosterman, van der Leun, and Rath (1998), Sala¤ et al.
(2003), Kremel (2016), and Kerr and Mandor¤ (2015). Immigrant clustering for innovation is also observed in
Hunt and Gautheir-Loiselle (2010), Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2015), and Kerr (2018).
   8
     Summaries include Branstetter, Gandal, and Kuniesky (2017), Cisi et al. (2016), and Hoang and Antoncic
(2003). Recent studies have, for example, focused on the relationship between network structure and behavior
(Ballester, Calvó-Armengol, and Zenou, 2006; Calvó-Armengol and Jackson, 2004; Goyal, van der Leij and
Moraga-Gonzalez, 2006; Jackson and Yariv, 2007; Karlan at al., 2009) as well as the relationship between network
structure and business performance (Ahuja, 2000; Calvó-Armengol, Patacchini, and Zenou, 2009; Fershtman
and Gandal, 2011; and Gandal and Stettner, 2016).
   9
     See Åstebro et al. (2014) and Kerr, Kerr, and Xu (2018) for reviews of literature.




                                                       6
its kind.
       CIC today o¤ers clients o¢ ce management services that are ‡exible in design and month-
to-month in duration. CIC rentals include access to “hardware” features like fully-stocked
communal kitchens, regular and 3D printing, hardware tool shops, conference rooms, and IT
and communications infrastructure. CIC also encourages extensive “software” features for its
clients through formal and informal networking opportunities, lectures on topics related to
start-ups and innovation, recreational classes like yoga, and proximity to funders, law …rms,
and other service providers. A complete history of CIC and its present operations are included
in the Kerr, Kerr, and Brownell (2017a,b) case studies.
       The closest comparison to CIC are co-working spaces like WeWork that have risen to
popularity with the “sharing economy.”10 Relative to an operation like WeWork, CIC has both
higher-touch services and typically greater price points. The model of CIC also emphasizes a
growth in a company’s spaces over time (recon…guring o¢ ces during expansions or contractions)
and serving a broader population of clients. CIC houses start-ups, single individuals in co-
working spaces, not-for-pro…t organizations, law …rms, venture investors, and satellite o¢ ces
for large corporations. Amazon, Apple, Bayer, Google, PwC and Shell are examples of current
and past larger clients. The for-pro…t CIC is widely recognized as the anchor for Boston’s
entrepreneurship and innovation ecosystem, with its weekly Venture Café happy hour regularly
drawing several hundred participants.
       CIC prides itself on housing “more start-ups than anywhere else on the planet.”The com-
pany is now in three locations in the Boston area, along with setting up independent entities
connected to wet lab spaces and civic meeting spaces. At the One Broadway location, CIC
has grown from one ‡oor to its current seven. CIC expanded to St. Louis in 2014, and it has
recently opened facilities in Miami, Rotterdam, and Philadelphia. It will open a Providence
center in 2019, as part of an aggressive growth plan to reach 50 cities by 2026 (Kerr et al.,
2017a,b).
       CIC’s clients are substantially more innovative and high-potential than the average venture
in the Boston area. Guzman and Stern (2016, 2017) measure the likely potential of start-ups
using digital signals available in their incorporation documents. Ventures registering as C-
Corps or in Delaware are more likely to be targeting rapid growth than other companies, and
  10
    Related literature on incubators and accelerators includes Aernoudt (2004), Bruneel et al. (2012), Colombo
and Delmastro (2002), Gandini (2015), Grimaldi and Grandi (2005), and Peters et al. (2004).


                                                      7
the names of ventures also indicate aspirations— for example, a venture named “In…nity Global
Technologies” is more likely to target growth than one named “Billy’s Bicycle Shop.” During
the 2010-2012 period, the ventures registered at CIC had a growth potential score using this
technique that was eight-fold higher than the average Boston-area …rm, and CIC ventures were
ten-fold more likely to have a patent at the outset or be a Delaware-incorporated …rm.11

3.2      CIC Survey Design

The scale and diversity of CIC o¤er a unique platform to study entrepreneurs, inventors, and
employees working in innovative enterprises. We conducted a survey in 2017 of clients at four
CIC locations, pulling from Cambridge, Boston, and St. Louis. The survey was designed in
collaboration with the leadership team at CIC. CIC’s client agreement allows them to survey
tenants once per year, with responses being voluntary, and this survey served this function. It
was launched during spring 2017 and remained open for 13 weeks.
      In e¤orts to increase participation, CIC sent out one reminder email per location to clients
encouraging them to participate. CIC also hosted a pizza lunch at the 101 Main Street location
where one researcher handed out ‡iers, discussed the survey’s goals, and had laptops available
to …ll out the survey. Reminders tended to increase participation for a short while, and CIC
leadership made the decision to not send further inquiries and decided when to end the survey.
      Table 1 describes the surveyed locations. The survey was sent to 5,645 individuals, of
which about 20% were identi…ed by the …rms as “Heads” to CIC (e.g., for the purposes of
directing o¢ cial correspondence). The average …rm has 4.8 people and has been at CIC for
2.8 years, with clients in the longest running One Broadway and 101 Main Street locations in
Cambridge having stayed longer on average. St. Louis houses larger …rms on average, re‡ecting
its lower use of individual co-working spaces. 50 Milk Street, a location in the …nancial district
of Boston, contains the largest share of nonpro…t companies, about 19% of all clients.
      A total of 1,334 people participated in the survey for a 24% response rate. The …rst survey
question required respondents to categorize themselves as an Employee, Founder and/or CEO,
Owner, or Other (e.g., board member, advisor). Those who designated themselves as an
employee received a shorter set of questions than the other three categories, which were given
the same question set. The full survey instrument is included in the Appendix.
 11
      We thanks Jorge Guzman for these calculations.




                                                       8
      First, we use the term “entrepreneur” as short-hand to group all non-employee responses,
whether founder, CEO, or owner. Going forward in this analysis, we exclude those reporting
their role as “Other” for a sample size of 1,222 responses. This latter category is harder to
de…ne and frequently captures people with relatively limited day-to-day activity at CIC (e.g., a
MIT professor who mostly remains on campus). Second, we use the term “inventor”for those
who report having personally …led a patent, and this trait is orthogonal to the entrepreneur
versus employee distinction. Approximately 31% of respondents are entrepreneurs and 22%
are inventors.
      Our analysis focuses on di¤erences between natives and immigrants, and we de…ne immi-
grants as those who report they were born outside of the United States. The overall immigrant
share is 26% in the sample. This de…nition includes individuals who arrived in the country
as children as well as those who came to the United States later in life to study, work, or to
directly start a business. The total number of immigrant respondents is 262, with 82 identi…ed
as entrepreneurs and 180 as employees. Of the 262 immigrants, 85 are inventors.
      Table 2 describes survey responses by location. Response rates were between 16% and
24% across locations. We later learned that some individuals in nonpro…t …rms felt the survey
did not apply to them, which is one reason for the lower response rate in 50 Milk Street.
The immigrant share of respondents is approximately one-third in all three Boston facilities
and much lower at 5.5% in St. Louis. The immigrant share of the CIC sample is about
double their 13% share of U.S. population, re‡ective of their greater role in innovation and
entrepreneurship.12 The shares are also in keeping with their local areas: using the 2014-2016
American Community Surveys, the immigrant shares in Boston and St. Louis among employed,
college-educated workers aged 20-60 are 18.4% and 7.6%, respectively; narrowing to those in
STEM …elds, the shares increase to 33.5% and 17.8%, respectively. The overall CIC sample is
about 60% male, 61% between the ages of 25 and 44, and 19% holders of advanced degrees.

3.3      Survey Responses and Sample Comparisons

Table 3 provides detailed demographics and backgrounds for the whole sample and also splits
by immigrant versus native respondents. In some cases, the overall average will not exactly
match the weighted average of the two groups due to individual respondents choosing to not
 12
      For example, Singer (2013), Kerr and Kerr (2017, 2018), and Brown et al. (2018).




                                                       9
report speci…c variables. Di¤erences do emerge immediately, with natives being slightly more
likely to be entrepreneurs at CIC companies, and immigrants almost twice as likely to be
inventors.
      In terms of demographics, natives are more likely to be female, white, at either extreme
of the age distribution, a bachelor’s or masters degree holder, and with degrees in business
and economics. They also are slightly more likely to have prior industry experience but less
likely to have previous start-up experience either as an employee or a founder. In comparison,
immigrants tend to be clustered between ages 25 and 54, are more likely to have a doctorate
and to have studied in STEM …elds, and also more likely to have previous start-up experience,
especially as an employee. Using the National Survey of College Graduates, Hunt (2011) links
the higher rates of immigrant inventiveness especially to their …elds of study and educational
attainment.
      CIC itself does not collect similar demographic information on its client population, but
CIC’s leadership believes that our survey respondent demographics re‡ect the overall popula-
tion of their facilities very well. Some greater insight does exist for the gender dimension. A
2015 CIC study found that 28% of Company Heads were women, which is roughly on par with
the 24% among our respondent entrepreneurs. Similarly, a 5% random sample of CIC clients
in 2017 showed that 35% of all CIC-based company employees were women, which closely
compares to the 40% share in our sample. To put things into a broader context, other compar-
ison points for women’s leadership include 5.4% of Fortune 500 CEOs, 24% of Congressional
representatives, and 12% of Executive O¢ cer positions in the top 15 Silicon Valley …rms.13
      Once starting the survey, response rates were high for most questions. Questions regarding
experiences at CIC and demographics had response rates of over 80%, while questions regarding
personality had response rates of over 75%. Questions with the lowest response rates included
those related to patents associated with the …rm and interest in future CIC events. We believe
that response rates for patenting activity of the …rm were lower because the question lacked a
“do not know” option. These …elds are not used in the present study.
 13
    For example,    Zarya (2016),      Brown (2017),     and Bell and White         (2014).   See
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/12/18/record-number-women-in-congress/.




                                                10
4     Survey Results
4.1   Measuring Networking Attitudes and Behaviors

We next describe how the survey captured attitudes towards networking and the importance
of networking opportunities in the choice to locate the company within CIC. Table 4 provides
the survey questions used to calculate the values for most of the variables analyzed below, and
the Appendix has the full survey instruments for additional reference. Figures 1-3 display the
response patterns by immigrant status. We group questions into three sets, and these sets rely
on questions from di¤erent parts of the survey and are not necessarily sequential in how they
are presented in this paper.
    We group the …rst set of questions around the respondents’ self-reported perceptions of
CIC networking bene…ts. Respondents were asked to rate aspects of CIC in terms of their
importance for the decision to locate the company there, with value one (1) being “not very
important” and value …ve (5) being “very important.” A related question asked respondents
how being located at CIC has actually helped their business to “Better network among other
businesses,”on a scale from “not at all”(1) to “very much”(5). Similar …ve-point scales were
used to gauge the purposefulness of individuals’ networking; to measure perceptions about
how CIC helped them access companies at CIC, within the vicinity of CIC, or in the greater
Boston/St. Louis area; and to measure whether respondents see a premium in CIC value-
added compared to costs and over other competitors’o¤ering. In all cases, the raw average for
the immigrant respondents exceeds that of the natives. Immigrants are more likely to consider
networking opportunities an important factor in choosing to locate at CIC and to report having
bene…ted from CIC in this regard.
    A second group of questions uses survey responses to infer information on the types of
networks possessed by individuals. Respondents were asked to estimate the number of people
at CIC (outside of the employees/investors of their own company) they know well enough
to believe that these people could be of bene…t to their business over the next six months.
The scale had again …ve options ranging from “none” to “over 20.” Similarly, respondents
estimated how many people at CIC they know well enough to believe they would remember
the respondent’s name in six months if they left CIC today. The response options were the
same as in the previous question. For analysis, we converted the binned values into the mid-
points of their range, except for the bottom/top category: “none”coded as zero, “1-4 persons”

                                              11
coded as three, “5-10 persons”codes as eight, “11-20 persons”codes as 15, and “More than 20
persons” coded as 20. Immigrants report knowing more of both types of individuals at CIC,
especially those who are likely to be bene…cial to their business (4.9 versus 4.5). Figure 3 plots
the cross-sectional pattern of networks by time in CIC. For all respondents who answered that
they knew at least one such person, we further asked whether these connections were made
before or after joining CIC.
   We constructed another measure of networking through the responses of individuals re-
garding where exactly they networked at CIC. This question was asked of people indicating
that CIC helped their business to network at a level of three or higher on a …ve-point scale.
Respondents could tick one or more of the following possibilities: a) Informally: Conversa-
tions or introductions at Venture Cafe; b) Informally: Conversations or introductions in a CIC
kitchen; c) Other public spaces at CIC; d) Other informal channels; e) Purposefully seek out
meetings with …rms located inside CIC (ask via email, phone, LinkedIn,. . . ); f) Purposefully
seek out meetings with …rms located nearby / outside CIC (ask via email, phone, LinkedIn,. . . );
g) Other CIC-based …rms purposefully ask to meet with me; and h) Other. We tallied the
number of boxes checked, with immigrants and natives showing very similar values of about
2.9 unique network locations.
   At the very end of the survey, we asked the entrepreneurs a rather detailed question about
the locations of the respondent’s most important contacts (based on Nanda and Khanna,
2010): “Please think of 5 people not directly connected with your company with whom you
have had important conversations related to your business in the last 6 months. These may
be family members, friends, former colleagues, instructors or other persons with whom you
discussed aspects of your business (e.g., strategy, business development, market conditions,
…nancing) but NOT employees, investors, or clients that have direct stake in the company.
Where are these external colleagues located?” The respondent has …ve options: same ‡oor at
CIC, another ‡oor at CIC, within the Boston (St. Louis) area, within the United States, and
overseas. Natives were signi…cantly more likely to have their most important connections either
in the greater Boston (St. Louis) area or elsewhere in the United States, while immigrants were
much more likely to have these important connections abroad.
   A third set of questions asked respondents about the frequency at which they either pro-
vided or received advice on various aspects of running their business to/from “people outside


                                               12
of your company at CIC.” The frequency options ranged from “never” (1) to “weekly” (4).
Six topic categories were considered: business operations, venture …nancing, technology, sup-
pliers, people to recruit, and customers. Immigrants report substantially higher rates of both
providing and receiving advice on all topics.
   The full survey asks many more questions about growth expectations, company …nancing
history, personality traits of individuals and their attitudes towards risk, and so on. Partici-
pants were also incentivized to complete the survey with a reward that was designed to also
capture an element of their risk attitudes by presenting them with a choice between a sure
prize and a lottery of known probabilities. These questions are studied in other papers (e.g.,
Kerr, Kerr, and Dalton, 2019).

4.2   Analytical Results

Tables 5-9 analyze these survey responses with least squares regressions. Each row corresponds
to a survey question, and we report eight results per question across the columns. In all cases,
we only report the coe¢ cient and standard error on an indicator variable for the respondent
being an immigrant. Regressions are unweighted and report robust standard errors, and es-
timations that cluster standard errors at the …rm level deliver very similar results. Columns
1-4 report results where we leave the dependent variable in its raw form, while Columns 5-8
consider transformations of the dependent variable to have a binary form of low versus high
responses (given unit value). For each question, we describe the scale of the baseline values
and their transformation.
   The four columns in each set repeat a pattern. Our initial estimation controls for person-
level covariates and building …xed e¤ects. Person-level covariates include controls for gender,
age, race, educational attainment, full- versus part-time status, prior industry experience, prior
startup experience, and prior patenting history. Covariates are introduced using indicators
for value ranges; item non-response was grouped into an “unknown” category. The second
estimation incorporates …xed e¤ects for individual CIC ‡oors within buildings. Across the
four buildings, there are a total of 20 ‡oors in our sample. The third estimation adds an
additional …rm-level control for the number of the …rm’s employees working at CIC. The last
analysis excludes St. Louis from the analysis to focus just on Boston given the substantial
di¤erences between the two cities in terms of immigrant share and other features. At the right



                                                13
hand side of each table, we report the observation counts in total and for Boston only.
   Table 5 considers the perceptions of networking at CIC by immigrants versus natives. The
perceptions of respondents have several attractive properties: they capture the bene…ts and
costs known by respondents but unobservable to the researcher or CIC leadership, they measure
the saliency of an e¤ect that is otherwise di¢ cult to judge, and (for the purposes of CIC) they
are what ultimately matters for the company’s location choice at CIC. The downsides of these
perceptions are the mirror images of the advantages, most notably being that respondents
may have an inaccurate understanding of their true networking behavior or they may engage
in “cheap talk.”
   The variables reported in Table 5 are measured on a …ve-point scale ranging from “strongly
disagree” (1) to “strongly agree” (5) or comparable wording. For the binary analysis, we
group scores of four or …ve into the high bin that is given a unit value. The …rst row presents
some indication that immigrants may locate their businesses at CIC for better networking
opportunities, and this pattern is most evident in the binary analysis. Either way, immigrants
in the second row show substantially higher perceptions of CIC helping their business via
networking than natives. The di¤erential is on the order of 10% of the baseline average of 3.67
in Table 4. Immigrants show a similarly higher purposefulness in building their networks.
   When respondents articulate the location of the other companies that CIC speci…cally
helps them access, a modest edge is given to other companies located within CIC, although
an important immigrant di¤erential is also observed for accessing other local non-CIC …rms.
As the baseline value in Table 4 is rising from 3.26 for companies within CIC to 3.63 for non-
vicinity companies in the greater Boston/St. Louis area, the relative e¤ect for immigrants of
CIC-based connections is higher than initially evident in Table 5. These results are robust
in both the baseline and binary analyses. Finally, immigrants are somewhat more likely to
consider CIC bene…ts as outweighing the costs and/or what other local co-working spaces could
provide, but these results are not precisely measured.
   Table 6 turns to measures that we can construct of actual networking behavior at CIC.
This is a useful complement to the perceptions of networking, given the pros and cons noted
above. The …rst metrics consider the person counts within a respondent’s CIC network outside
of the respondent’s own company. These person count questions allowed for …ve ranges from
“none”to “more than 20.”Baseline estimations use the mid-points of these ranges, as described


                                              14
earlier, with zero for the smallest and 20 for the largest category. The binary analysis combines
responses with eleven or more persons as the high category.
   Immigrants report on average a 0.6 person larger professional network at CIC, compared
to a baseline average of 4.5 persons. This di¤erence is about twice as large as the second
form of the question that was designed to elicit familiarity with those around a respondent
(baseline average of 5.9 persons). While we do not know the overlaps of these two groups, we
also report a regression that sums the two counts. Across all these outcomes, there is some
modest evidence that CIC enables a larger professional network for immigrants than it does
for natives, perhaps with a total network advantage of 0.5-1.0 person. But these results are
not precisely measured and should be treated with caution. By contrast, and re‡ecting the
identical raw responses in Table 4, we observe no di¤erence between immigrants and natives
in terms of the count of locations or the types of networking employed.
   In general, the di¤erential in immigrant perceptions of CIC networking advantages in Table
5 appear a bit more robust than the actual network e¤ects in Table 6. Two factors, however,
should be noted. One is that the relative magnitudes of the point estimates in Table 6 are
substantial for the professional network, on the order of 10%-20% of the e¤ect, and comparable
to perception di¤erences. Second, the counterfactual for network size is hard to de…ne. It could
have been that absent CIC’s networking potential, the professional networks of immigrants
would have been substantially smaller than those of natives; yet we are only able to measure
these di¤erences conditional on being inside of CIC.
   Table 7 considers immigrant di¤erences using the additional networking questions that
were asked of entrepreneurs only. These leaders were …rst asked to rate the importance of
the …ve most signi…cant people they met at CIC for their business. Immigrants suggest that
these …ve contacts are marginally more important, but the di¤erences are far from statistically
signi…cant.
   Second, we analyze di¤erences in the top …ve contacts that entrepreneurs have by counting
up the number of contacts mentioned in each location. This count can range from zero to
…ve for any one location, and for the binary analysis we group three and above contacts into
the high category. Table 7 …rst analyses the …ve options as asked in the survey, and then an
additional analysis is provided that groups the same ‡oor and another ‡oor responses at CIC
into a single outcome. There are substantial di¤erences in the locations of top entrepreneur


                                               15
contacts, with immigrant entrepreneurs pointing signi…cantly more to overseas contacts versus
those in the local area surrounding CIC. Network reliance on CIC itself is comparable for the
two groups.
   Tables 8 and 9 turn to our third set of questions on the giving and receiving of advice
across six broad topics: business operations, venture …nancing, technology, suppliers, people
to recruit, and customers. Table 4 noted that immigrants reported substantially higher rates
of exchanging advice on all these dimensions. Baseline responses are on a four-point scale from
“never” (1) to “weekly” (4). The binary analysis bins responses other than “never” into the
high category.
   Tables 8 and 9 con…rm that these di¤erences are robust to controlling for the other traits
of individuals, companies, and the ‡oors on which respondents work. As the average baseline
value for most of these variables is on the order of 1.8 in Table 4, these quanti…ed di¤erences
are often 10% or greater. On providing advice, the immigrant di¤erential to natives is highest
on business operations and customers and lowest on venture …nancing. On receiving advice,
the di¤erential is highest on venture …nancing and customers, and lowest on suppliers and
technology. But these di¤erences are small relative to the larger context of high rates of giving
and receiving advice.
   We have conducted a number of robustness checks on these analyses. We condensed our
regression tables by only showing Boston-speci…c results for the full speci…cation with person-
and …rm-level covariates, and the comparability carries through on other regression variants,
too. Adding St. Louis to the sample tends to raise slightly the immigrant di¤erential, indicating
a modestly greater immigrant reliance in St. Louis on CIC networking than in Boston.
   We introduce person- and …rm-level controls via indicator variables for ranges, and we kept
missing values via an unknown category to maintain consistent sample sizes across columns.
Our results are robust across these design choices, which is not surprising given the raw e¤ects
evident in Table 4 alongside the substantial coe¢ cients observed in regression analyses.
   In terms of additional covariates, we also …nd very similar results when including the
binary response by a respondent if the network was pre-known before coming to CIC. We have
also run analyses where we control for the tenure of an individual at CIC. These analyses
are quantitatively similar in aggregate, with e¤ects growing or shrinking modestly on some
outcomes. There is su¢ cient risk for over-controlling with these variables (e.g., we do not


                                               16
know what fraction of a respondent’s network is pre-known before locating at CIC) that we
have left them out of the baseline results reported here.

4.3   Extended Analysis

Our last set of analyses is not formally reported but qualitatively described. These analyses
consider traits of CIC ‡oors on which immigrants and natives are located to see if they interact
di¤erently with ‡oor-level environments. The ‡oors within a CIC facility have di¤erent feels
or purposes: for example, one ‡oor may be more populated with larger, …xed o¢ ce spaces
suitable for established teams, while another ‡oor is co-working space designed for very small
teams or individual entrepreneurs. Some of these ‡oor-level di¤erences are intentional, while
others are due to legacy layouts of buildings. Conditional upon the match of a client’s needs
to a type of space, allocation to a speci…c o¢ ce is otherwise based upon availability and often
has some randomness.
   We measure six traits of each ‡oor: inventor percentage, immigrant percentage, average
age, female percentage, average …rm size, and total number of …rms. The measures are derived
from respondent data for ‡oors. We control for ‡oor …xed e¤ects, which captures the main
e¤ects of these variables, and we interact these ‡oor-level traits with whether a respondent
is an immigrant to observe whether there is heterogeneity in the immigrant di¤erential due
to various ‡oor characteristics. We restrict this analysis to ‡oors where 15 or more people
responded to the survey. We further drop St. Louis due to some limitations on our ‡oor
information for this facility and its overall very di¤erent immigrant background.
   The most important …nding from these analyses are null results for interactions; that is,
the immigrant di¤erential captured in this paper mostly operates independently of the ‡oor
environment. As important, we speci…cally …nd evidence that the di¤erential for immigrant
networking and giving and receiving advice does not depend upon the immigrant being on a
‡oor with many other immigrants. Thus, while we do not observe the immigrant and native
components of a respondent’s network, we have reason to believe the networks are not strongly
segmented in CIC. There is some evidence that the greater degree to which immigrants give
and receive advice is accentuated on ‡oors that have a high fraction of inventors, but the more
important …nding is that these ‡oor-level shaping factors are second order to the main e¤ects.
We conclude that ‡oor traits do not shape the strength of the immigrant di¤erential with



                                              17
respect to networking.


5    Conclusion

Networking and the giving and receiving of advice are important for entrepreneurship and
innovation. Our analysis of CIC …nds that immigrants take more advantage of networking
opportunities at CIC, especially around the exchange of advice. This e¤ect is quite robust,
holding in the raw data and tightly controlled speci…cations, and it does not appear to be
mediated very much by ‡oor-level traits. We are not able to assess whether this generates
long-term performance advantages for immigrants, but it at least leads them to value CIC to
a greater extent than natives.
    Looking forward, we hope other researchers continue to examine di¤erences in behaviors of
immigrants within entrepreneurship and innovation compared to natives. It is now well estab-
lished that immigrants are a large and growing component of the U.S. science and engineering
workforce, and they have comparable overall quality on many dimensions to natives engaged in
the …eld. But there remains much to be explored about how their preferences and interactions
shape the communities of which they are becoming an ever larger share.




                                             18
References

Aernoudt, R. (2004). “Incubators: Tool for entrepreneurship?”Small Business Economics 23:
127-135.
Ahuja, G. (2000). “Collaboration networks, structural holes, and innovation: A longitudinal
study.” Administrative Science Quarterly 45(3): 425-455.
Aldrich, H.E., B. Rosen, and W. Woodward. (1987). “Impact of social networks on business
foundings and pro…t: A longitudinal study.”In N.S. Churchill, J. Hornaday, O.J. Krasner, and
K. Vespter (eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 154-168. Wellesley, MA: Center for
Entrepreneurial Studies.
Aldrich, H.E., and P.R. Reese. (1993). “Does networking pay o¤? A panel study of entrepre-
neurs in the research triangle in Churchill, N. C.” In S. Birley, J. Doutriaux, E.J. Gatewood,
F.S. Hoy, and W.E.Wetzel (eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 325-339. Wellesley,
MA: Babson College.
Aldrich, H.E., and R. Waldinger. (1990). “Ethnicity and entrepreneurship.” Annual Review
of Sociology 16(1): 111-135.
Aldrich, H.E., and C. Zimmer. (1985). “Entrepreneurship through social networks.” In R.
Smilor and D. Sexton (eds.), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship, 3-23. New York, NY:
Ballinger.
Aldrich, H.E., and C. Zimmer. (1986). “Entrepreneurship through social networks.” In H.
Aldrich (ed.), Population Perspectives on Organizatons, 13-28. Uppsala: Acta Universitatis
Upsaliensis.
Aliaga-Isla, R., and A. Riap. (2013). “Systematic review of immigrant entrepreneurship
literature: Previous …ndings and ways forward.” Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
25(9-10): 819-844.
Åstebro, T., H. Herz, R. Nanda, and R.A. Weber. (2014). “Seeking the roots of entrepreneur-
ship: Insights from behavioral economics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3): 49-70.
Balconi, M., S. Breschi, and F. Lissoni. (2004). “Networks of inventors and the location of
academic research: An exploration of Italian data.” Research Policy 33(1): 127-45.
Ballester C., A. Calvó-Armengol, and Y. Zenou. (2006). “Who’s who in networks. Wanted:
The key player.” Econometrica 74(5): 1403-1417.
Bell, D.A., and S.S. White. (2014). Gender Diversity in Silicon Valley: A Comparison of
Silicon Valley Public Companies and Large Public Companies. Fenwick and West LLP.
Branstetter L., N. Gandal, and N. Kuniesky. (2017). “Network-mediated knowledge spillovers:
A cross-country comparative analysis of information security innovations.” NBER Working
Paper No. 23808. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Breschi, S., and F. Lissoni. (2005). “Cross-…rm inventors and social networks: Localised
knowledge spillovers revisited.” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 79/80: 189-209.
Breschi, S., and F. Lissoni. (2009). “Mobility of inventors and networks of collaboration: An
anatomy of localised knowledge ‡ows.” Journal of Economic Geography 9(4): 439-468.
Brown, A. (2017). “Despite gains, women remain underrepresented among U.S. political and
business leaders.”In Pew Research Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2017/03/20/despite-gains-women-remain-underrepresented-among-u-s-political-and-
business-leaders/.
Brown, J.D., J.S. Earle, M.J. Kim, and K.-M. Lee. (2018). “Immigrant entrepreneurs, job
creation, and innovation.” Census Bureau Working Paper. Washington, DC.
Bruneel, J., T. Ratinho, B. Clarysse, and A. Groen. (2012). “The evolution of business
incubators: Comparing demand and supply of business incubation services across di¤erence
incubator generations.” Technovation 32: 110-121.


                                             19
Calvó-Armengol, A., and M.O. Jackson. (2004). “The e¤ects of social networks on employment
and inequality.” American Economic Review 94(3): 426-454.
Calvó-Armengol, A., E. Patacchini, and Y. Zenou. (2009). “Peer e¤ects and social networks
in education.” Review of Economic Studies 76(4): 1239-1267.
Carlino, G., and W.R. Kerr. “Agglomeration and innovation.” In G. Duranton, J.V. Hender-
son, and W.C. Strange (eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics Volume 5, 349-404.
Elsevier.
Chand, M., and M. Ghorbani. (2011). “National culture, networks and ethnic entrepreneur-
ship: A comparison of the Indian and Chinese immigrants in the US.” International Business
Review 20(6): 593-606.
Chatterji, A., E.L. Glaeser, and W.R. Kerr. (2014). “Clusters of entrepreneurship and in-
novation.” In J. Lerner and S. Stern (eds.), Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 14,
129-166. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Cisi, M., F. Devicienti, A. Manello, and D. Vannoni. (2016). “Network agreements and
…rms’ economic performance: New empirical evidence from Italian SMEs.” Working paper
039. Department of Economics and Statistics, University of Torino.
Colombo, M.G., and M. Delmastro. (2002). “How e¤ective are technology incubators? Evi-
dence from Italy.” Research Policy 31: 1103-1122.
Davidsson, P., and B. Honig. (2003). “The role of social and human capital among nascent
entrepreneurs.” Journal of Business Venturing 18(3): 301-331.
Dyer, J.H., and H. Singh. (1998). “The relational view: Cooperative strategy and sources of
interorganizational competitive advantage.” Academy of Management Review 23(4): 660-679.
Elfring, T., and W. Hulsink. (2007). “Networking by entrepreneurs: Patterns of tie-formation
in emerging organizations.” Organization Studies 28: 1849-1866.
Elfring, T., and W. Hulsink. (2003). “Networks in entrepreneurship: The case of high-
technology …rms.” Small Business Economics 21: 409-422.
Fershtman, C., and N. Gandal. (2011). “Direct and indirect knowledge spillovers: The “social
network” of open-source projects.” The RAND Journal of Economics 42(1): 70-91.
Gandal, N., and U. Stettner. (2016). “Network dynamics and knowledge transfer in virtual
organizations.” International Journal of Industrial Organization 48: 270-290.
Gandini, A. (2015). “The rise of coworking spaces: A literature review.” ephemera 15(1):
193-205.
Glaeser, E.L., and W.R. Kerr. (2009). “Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship:
How much of the spatial distribution can we explain?” Journal of Economics & Management
Strategy 18(3): 623-663.
Gompers, P.A., K. Huang, and S.Q. Wang. (2017). “Homophily in entrepreneurial team
formation.” Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 17-104.
Goyal, S., M.J. Van Der Leij, and J.L. Moraga-Gonzalez. (2006). “Economics: An emerging
small world.” Journal of Political Economy 114(2): 403-412.
Greve, A., and J. W. Sala¤. (2003). “Social networks and entrepreneurship.”Entrepreneurship:
Theory and Practice 28(1):1-22.
Grimaldi, R., and A. Grandi. (2005). “Business incubators and new venture creation: An
assessment of incubating models.” Technovation 25: 111-121.
Gulati, R., and M. Higgins. (2003). “Which ties matter when? The contingent e¤ects of
interorganizational partnerships on IPO success.” Strategic Management Journal 24(2): 127-
144.
Guzman, J., and S. Stern. (2017). “Nowcasting and placecasting entrepreneurial quality
and performance.” In J. Haltiwanger, E. Hurst, J. Miranda, and A. Schoar (eds.), Measuring
Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges, 63-109. NBER Book Series
Studies in Income and Wealth, Cambridge MA.

                                            20
Guzman, J., and S. Stern. (2016). “The state of American entrepreneurship? New estimates
of the quantity and quality of entrepreneurship for 15 US states, 1988-2014.” NBER Working
Paper No. 22095. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hegde, D., and J. Tumlinson. (2014). “Does social proximity enhance business relationships?
Theory and evidence from ethnicity’s role in US venture capital.”Management Science 60(9):
2355-2380.
Hoang, H., and B. Antoncic. (2003). “Network-based research in entrepreneurship: A critical
review.” Journal of Business Venturing 18(2): 165-187.
Hunt, J. (2011). “Which immigrants are most innovative and entrepreneurial? Distinctions by
entry visa.” Journal of Labor Economics 29(3): 417-457.
Hunt, J., and M. Gauthier-Loiselle. (2010). “How much does immigration boost innovation?”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2): 31-56.
Jack, S. (2010). “Approaches to studying networks: Implications and outcomes.” Journal of
Business Venturing 25: 120-137.
Jack, S., S. Moult, A.R. Anderson, and S. Dodd. (2010). “An entrepreneurial network evolv-
ing: Patterns of change.”International Small Business Journal: Researching Entrepreneurship
28(4).
Jackson, M., and L. Yariv. (2007). “Di¤usion of behavior and equilibrium properties in
network games.” American Economic Review 97(2): 92-98.
Kalnins, A., and W. Chung. (2006). “Social capital, geography, and survival: Gujarati immi-
grant entrepreneurs in the U.S. lodging industry.” Management Science 52(2): 233-247.
Karlan, D., M. Mobius, T. Rosenblat, and A. Szeidl. (2009). “Trust and social collateral.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3): 1307-1361.
Katz, B., and J. Wagner. (2014). “The rise of innovation districts: A new geography of
innovation in America.” Report, Metropolitan Policy Program, Brookings Institute.
Katz, B., J.S. Vey, and J. Wagner. (2015). “One year after: Observations on the rise of
innovation districts.” Report, Metropolitan Policy Program, Brookings Institute.
Kerr, S.P., and W.R. Kerr. (2017). “Immigrant entrepreneurship.”In J. Haltiwanger, E. Hurst,
J. Miranda and A. Schoar (eds.), Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge
and Challenges, 187-249. NBER Book Series Studies in Income and Wealth, Cambridge MA.
Kerr, S.P., and W.R. Kerr. (2018). “Immigrant entrepreneurship in America: Evidence from
the survey of business owners 2007 & 2012.” NBER Working Paper No. 24494. Cambridge,
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kerr, S.P., W.R. Kerr, and M. Dalton. (2019). “Risk attitudes and personality traits of
entrepreneurs vs. inventors.” Working Paper.
Kerr, S.P., W.R. Kerr, and T. Xu. (2018). “Personality traits of entrepreneurs: A review of
recent literature.” Foundation and Trends in Entrepreneurship, 14, no. 3: 279-356.
Kerr, W.R. (2018). The Gift of Global Talent: How Migration Shapes Business, Economy &
Society, Stanford University Press, Palo Alto CA.
Kerr, W.R., S. Kerr, and A. Brownell. (2017a). CIC: Catalyzing Entrepreneurial Ecosystems
(A). HBS No. N-817-126. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing.
Kerr, W.R., S. Kerr, and A. Brownell. (2017b). CIC: Catalyzing Entrepreneurial Ecosystems
(B). HBS No. N-817-127. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing.
Kerr, W.R., and S.D. Kominers. (2015). “Agglomerative forces and cluster shapes,” Review
of Economics and Statistics 97(4): 877-899.
Kerr, W.R., and W.F. Lincoln. (2010). “The supply side of innovation: H-1B visa reforms
and U.S. ethnic invention,” Journal of Labor Economics 28(3): 473-508.
Kerr, W.R., and M. Mandor¤. (2015). “Social networks, ethnicity, and entrepreneurship.”
NBER Working Paper No. 21597. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                            21
Kim, P.H., and H.E. Aldrich. (2005). “Social capital and entrepreneurship.”Foundations and
Trends in Entrepreneurship 1(2): 55-104.
Kloosterman, R., J. van der Leun, and J. Rath. (1998). “Across the border: Immigrants’
economic opportunities, social capital and informal business activities.”Journal of Ethnic and
Migration Studies 24(2): 249-268.
Kremel, A. (2016). “Ful…lling the need of business advisory services among Swedish immigrant
entrepreneurs.” Journal of Entrepreneurship and Public Policy 5(3): 343-364.
Light, I., P. Bhachu, and S. Karageorgis. (1989). “Migration networks and immigrant entre-
preneurship.” In I. Hubert and P. Bhachu (eds.) Immigration and Entrepreneurship: Culture,
Capital, and Ethnic Networks, 25-50. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Lin, F-J., and Y-H. Lin. (2016). “The e¤ect of network relationship on the performance of
SMEs.” Journal of Business Research 69(5): 1780-1784.
Mazzola, E., G. Perrone, and D.S. Kamuriwo. (2016). “Network positions and the probability
of being acquired: An empirical analysis in the biopharmaceutical industry.” British Journal
of Management 27(3): 516-533.
McDonald, M.L., P. Khanna, and J. D. Westphal. (2017). “Getting them to think outside
the circle: Corporate governance, CEOs’ external advice networks, and …rm performance.”
Academy of Management Journal 51(3): 452-475.
McPherson, M., L. Smith-Lovin, and J.M. Cook. (2001). “Birds of a feather: Homophily in
social networks.” Annual Review of Sociology 27(1): 415-444.
Nanda, R., and T. Khanna. (2014). “Diasporas and domestic entrepreneurs: Evidence from
the Indian software industry.”Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 19(4): 991-1012.
Peri, G., K. Shih, and C. Sparber. (2015). “STEM workers, H-1B visas and productivity in
US cities.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(3): S225-S255.
Powell, W., K. Koput, and L. Smith-Doerr. (1996). “Interorganizational collaboration and the
locus of innovation: Networks in learning in biotechnology.” Administrate Science Quarterly
41(1): 116-145.
Raijman, R., and M. Tienda. (2000). “Immigrant pathways to business ownership: A com-
parative ethnic perspective.” International Migration Review 34: 682-706.
Ruef, M., H.E. Aldrich, and N. Carter. (2003). “The structure of founding teams: Homophily,
strong ties, and isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs.” American Sociological Review 68(2):
195-222.
Sala¤, J.W., A. Greve, W. Siu-Lun, and L.X.L. Ping. (2003).“Ethnic entrepreneurship, social
networks, and the enclave.”In B.S.A. Yeoh, M.W. Charney, and T.C. Kiong (eds.), Approach-
ing Transnationalisms. Boston, MA: Springer.
Saxenian, A. (2000). “Silicon Valley’s new immigrant entrepreneurs.” San Francisco: Public
Policy Institute of California
Saxenian, A. (2002). “Silicon Valley’s new immigrant high-growth entrepreneurs.” Economic
Development Quarterly, 16(1): 20-31.
Schott, T., and K. Jensen. (2016). “Firms’ innovation bene…ting from networking and in-
stitutional support: A global analysis of national and …rm e¤ects.” Research Policy 45(6):
1233-1246.
Sharir, M. and M. Lerner. (2006). “Gauging the success of social ventures initiated by indi-
vidual social entrepreneurs.” Journal of World Business, 41(1): 6-20.
Singer, A. (2013). “Contemporary immigrant gateways in historical perspective.” Daedalus,
the Journal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 142(3): 76-91.
Sorenson, O. (2005). “Social networks and industrial geography.”In U. Cantner, E. Dinopou-
los, and R.F. Lanzillotti (eds.), Entrepreneurships, the New Economy and Public Policy. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer.

                                              22
Uzzi, B. (1999). “Embeddedness in the making of …nancial capital: How social relations and
networks bene…t …rms seeking …nancing.” American Sociological Review 64(4): 481-505.
Vanhaverbeke, W., V. Gilsing, B. Beerkens, and G. Duysters. (2009). “The role of alliance net-
work redundancy in the creation of core and non-core technologies: A local action approach.”
Journal of Management Studies 46(2): 215-244.
Weber, C., and J. Kratzer. (2013). “Social entrepreneurship, social networks and social
value creation: A quantitative analysis among social entrepreneurs.” International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Venturing 5(3): 217-239.
Wilson, K., and W.A. Martin. (1982). “Ethnic enclaves: A comparison of the Cuban and
black economies in Miami.” American Journal of Sociology 88: 135-160.
Witt, P. (2007). “Entrepreneurs’networks and the success of start-ups.”Entrepreneurship and
Regional Development 16(5): 391-412.
Zaheer, A., and G. Bell. (2005). “Bene…ting from network position: Firm capabilities, struc-
tural holes, and performance.” Strategic Management Journal 26(9): 809-825.
Zarya, V. (2016). “Female Fortune 500 CEOs are poised to break this record in 2017.”Fortune.
Retrieved from http://fortune.com/2016/12/22/female-fortune- 500-ceos-2017.




                                             23
Figure 1: Networking Importance, Location, and Advice
Figure 2: CIC Importance and Number of Beneficial Contacts
Figure 3: Beneficial Contacts by Tenure at CIC
Table 1. Descriptive statistics for CIC locations
Notes: One Broadway is the original CIC building at the edge of MIT. Boston-area expansions are 101 Main (one block
away from One Broadway) and 50 Milk Street (Boston financial district).

                                     All              50 Milk         One Broadway           101 Main      St. Louis
Year opened                                             2014                2001                2012         2014
Individuals                         5,645               1,236              2,467                464          1,478
 Heads                              1,168                346                577                  59           186
 Non-Heads                          4,477                890               1,890                405          1,292
Footprint (sq. ft.)                422,177             93,410             155,147              52,465       121,155

Average firm tenure at
                                     2.8                 2.3                 4.4                 4.4          1.6
CIC in years

Average firm size at CIC
                                     4.8                 3.6                 4.6                 4.6          7.9
in employees

Percent of firms that are
                                     10.5               19.1                 7.1                 7.1          10.0
nonprofits




Table 2. Descriptive statistics on survey responses by facility
Notes: See Table 1. Some respondents do not designate themselves as being at one of the four facilities.

                                     All              50 Milk         One Broadway           101 Main      St. Louis
Number of recipients                5,645               1,236              2,467                464          1,478

Number of respondents               1,222               199                 493                  86           348
 Entrepreneurs                       378                 55                 184                  14           114
 Employees                           844                144                 309                  72           234
Entrepreneur share                   30.9               27.6                37.3                16.3          32.8

Response rate                        21.6               16.1                20.0                18.5          23.5

Age
 Percent aged < 25                   8.7                11.1                 8.5                10.1          7.2
 Percent aged 25-34                  37.2               37.2                35.5                48.1          36.5
 Percent aged 35-44                  24.5               30.0                21.2                26.6          25.9
 Percent aged 45-54                  17.4               13.3                22.5                 6.3          14.7
 Percent aged > 54                   12.3                8.3                12.3                 8.9          15.7
Percent immigrant                    26.0               33.7                34.8                33.8          5.5

Percent women                        40.1               45.3                38.6                42.3          38.7

Percent advanced degree              19.0                8.0                25.8                11.3          17.7
Table 3. Descriptive statistics for immigrants vs natives
Notes: Some respondents do not designate themselves as being immigrants or natives.
Entrepreneurs are defined as those who identify their position as Founder, CEO or Owner.
Inventors are defined as those who report having personally filed for a patent.

                                                 All             Natives          Immigrants
Respondents                                     1,222              744                262
Percent of sample                                                  74.0               26.0

Role and background
 Entrepreneur                                    30.9              33.2               31.3
 Employee                                        69.1              66.8               68.7
 Inventor                                        21.5              17.5               32.9

Female                                           40.2              42.0               35.1
Age
  Under 25                                        8.7               9.7                5.8
  25-34                                          37.2              36.3               40.3
  35-44                                          24.5              23.3               26.7
  45-54                                          17.4              16.5               20.2
  Over 55                                        12.3              14.2                7.0
Race and ethnicity
  Asian                                          12.8               5.7               33.5
  African American                                3.5               4.6                0.8
  Hispanic/Latino                                 5.5               3.0               13.1
  White                                          73.5              83.8               48.5
  Other responses                                 3.8               3.8                4.2
Education
  BA/MA                                          75.3              76.4               70.9
  PhD                                            19.0              17.4               24.5
  Other                                           5.7               6.2                4.6
Field of Education
  STEM                                           36.0              31.3               49.8
  Business or economics                          29.3              31.0               24.9
  Other                                          34.6              37.7               25.3
Experience
  Prior work in industry                         62.6              62.8               61.8
  Prior work in a startup                        47.9              45.3               53.8
  Prior entrepreneur                             32.3              31.0               36.3
Table 4. Networking baselines for immigrants vs natives
Notes: See Table 3.

                                                       All    Natives   Immigrants
Respondents                                           1,222    744         262

Located in CIC for networking opportunities?          3.63     3.62        3.79

Does CIC networking environment help your
business?                                             3.67     3.65        3.76

How purposeful are you in building your business
network?                                              2.85     2.80        3.03

CIC is important because of access to other
companies within CIC                                  3.26     3.22        3.36


… within the vicinity of CIC                          3.40     3.34        3.57


… in the greater Boston / St. Louis area              3.63     3.57        3.78


CIC's value outweighs the cost to tenants?            3.67     3.66        3.72

CIC offers more valuable connections than other co-
working facilities?                                   3.78     3.77        3.86

Person count: people in other CIC firms who could
benefit your business in the next six months?         4.53     4.45        4.89

Person count: people in other CIC firms whose name
you would remember in six months?                     5.91     5.89        6.13

Measure of unique locations a respondent listed for
where they network                                    2.90     2.92        2.90

Frequency of Advice (1-4)
Provide advice: business operations                   2.02     1.97        2.17
Provide advice: venture financing                     1.69     1.64        1.81
Provide advice: technology                            2.05     1.99        2.23
Provide advice: suppliers                             1.69     1.64        1.81
Provide advice: people to recruit                     1.87     1.83        1.98
Provide advice: customers                             1.87     1.82        2.01

Receive advice: business operations                   1.89     1.83        2.06
Receive advice: venture financing                     1.66     1.58        1.84
Receive advice: technology                            1.98     1.94        2.10
Receive advice: suppliers                             1.68     1.64        1.79
Receive advice: people to recruit                     1.80     1.76        1.89
Receive advice: customers                             1.83     1.77        2.00
Table 5. Impact of CIC on perceived networking activity for immigrants vs natives
Notes: Baseline responses were on a 1 to 5 scale with 1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree. Binary analysis bins responses with 0 = 1, 2, or 3 and 1 = 4 or 5. Person level covariates include controls for gender,
age, race, educational attainment, prior industry experience, prior startup experience, fulltime vs part time status, and patenting history. Firm level covariates include firm size. Covariates are introduced using
indicators for value ranges; non-response was grouped into an "unknown" category. Regressions report robust standard errors and are unweighted.

                            Question                                                      Baseline Values                                              Binary Analysis                               Sample Size
                                                                                          for immigrant indicator                                      for immigrant indicator
                                                                                (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)                  (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)             Full     BOS Only
                                                                               0.101        0.068        0.135         0.169               0.144*       0.131*       0.160**       0.182**           326         222
      Located in CIC for networking opportunities?
                                                                               (0.191)      (0.180)      (0.186)      (0.189)              (0.074)      (0.071)      (0.074)        (0.082)

                                                                             0.331***      0.339***     0.341***     0.338***             0.130***     0.129***     0.130***       0.125***          985         698
Does CIC's networking environment help your business?
                                                                               (0.108)      (0.108)      (0.109)      (0.116)              (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.041)        (0.044)
   How purposeful are you in building your business                          0.292***      0.303***     0.323***     0.291***               0.050        0.043        0.054         0.045            1003        712
                      network?                                                 (0.098)      (0.099)      (0.100)      (0.105)              (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.039)        (0.041)

 CIC is important because of access to other companies                       0.281***      0.288***     0.298***     0.280***              0.095**      0.096**      0.095**       0.083**           994         707
                      within CIC                                              (0.090)       (0.091)      (0.093)      (0.099)              (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.040)       (0.042)
                                                                              0.208**      0.222**      0.223**       0.193*              0.106***      0.106**      0.100**       0.082*            992         705
                 … within the vicinity of CIC
                                                                              (0.097)      (0.098)      (0.098)       (0.105)              (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.042)       (0.044)
                                                                              0.233**      0.219**      0.214**      0.214**               0.081*       0.073*        0.071         0.071            706         706
          … in the greater Boston / St. Louis area
                                                                              (0.096)      (0.098)      (0.098)      (0.098)               (0.043)      (0.043)      (0.044)       (0.044)
                                                                              0.151*        0.122        0.120         0.098               0.089**       0.068        0.062         0.050            986         700
         CIC's value outweighs the cost to tenants
                                                                              (0.081)      (0.082)      (0.083)       (0.087)              (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.042)       (0.045)
   CIC offers more valuable connections than other co-                         0.131        0.120        0.122         0.110                0.044        0.041        0.039         0.031            981         695
                    working facilities                                        (0.081)      (0.081)      (0.082)       (0.088)              (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.041)       (0.044)
                                          Person Level Covariates                 x            x            x            x                    x            x            x              x
                                                     Building FE                  x            x            x            x                    x            x            x              x
                                                        Floor FE                               x            x            x                                 x            x              x
                                           Firm Level Covariates                                            x            x                                              x              x
                                                    Boston Only                                                          x                                                             x
Table 6. Impact of CIC on measured networking activity for immigrants vs natives
Notes: See Table 5. Person count questions allowed for five ranges from none to more than 20. Baseline estimations use the mid-points of ranges and 20 for the largest category; binary analysis bins responses with 0
= ten or fewer and 1 = eleven or more. Respondents indicated across eight options where they networked, and the metric used in the analyses is the sum of these checked options.

                           Question                                                     Baseline Values                                              Binary Analysis                              Sample Size
                                                                                        for immigrant indicator                                      for immigrant indicator
                                                                               (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)                  (5)          (6)         (7)            (8)            Full    BOS Only
   Person count: people in other CIC firms who could                         0.664*        0.538       0.672*        0.497               0.034        0.023        0.029         0.012           1004         714
      benefit your business in the next six months?                          (0.392)      (0.402)      (0.400)      (0.417)             (0.024)      (0.025)      (0.025)       (0.026)

  Person count: people in other CIC firms whose name                          0.371        0.118        0.303        0.170               0.014       -0.001        0.009         0.000           1003         712
          you would remember in six months?                                  (0.427)      (0.431)      (0.431)      (0.458)             (0.030)      (0.030)      (0.030)       (0.032)

                                                                              0.996        0.626        0.951        0.640               0.022        0.012        0.022         0.008           1005         714
          Person count: Sum of the two responses
                                                                             (0.740)      (0.752)      (0.747)      (0.778)             (0.021)      (0.022)      (0.021)       (0.022)

   Measure of unique locations a respondent listed for                        0.037       -0.007        0.036       -0.023              -0.014       -0.025       -0.021        -0.037            791         539
                 where they network                                          (0.150)      (0.155)      (0.153)      (0.168)             (0.026)      (0.028)      (0.028)       (0.029)
                                          Person Level Covariates               x            x            x            x                    x           x            x              x
                                                     Building FE                x            x            x            x                    x           x            x              x
                                                        Floor FE                             x            x            x                                x            x              x
                                           Firm Level Covariates                                          x            x                                             x              x
                                                    Boston Only                                                        x                                                            x
Table 7. Founder networks for immigrant vs natives
Notes: See Table 5. Baseline responses for first two questions were on a 1 to 5 scale with 1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree. Binary analysis bins responses with 0 = 1, 2, or 3 and 1 = 4 or 5. Lists of
important contacts by location were transformed into count variables ranging from zero to five. Binary analysis bins responses with 0 = 2 or fewer mentions and 1 = 3 or more mentions.

                            Question                                                      Baseline Values                                           Binary Analysis                                Sample Size
                                                                                          for immigrant indicator                                   for immigrant indicator
                                                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)               (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)             Full    BOS Only

  Think of the 5 most important people you met at CIC
    specifically. How important were they for your                              0.043        0.030        0.061         0.079             0.026        0.030        0.045         0.047            311         210
                        business?                                              (0.150)      (0.149)      (0.150)       (0.170)           (0.076)      (0.078)      (0.079)       (0.086)

 How many of these top five contacts are located on the                         0.012        0.023        0.064         0.131            -0.000        0.001        0.005         0.024            309         209
                 same floor as you?                                            (0.118)      (0.122)      (0.128)       (0.145)           (0.023)      (0.024)      (0.026)       (0.030)
                                                                                0.037        0.037        0.036         0.074            -0.003        0.002       -0.007        -0.012            309         209
                    … Another floor at CIC?
                                                                               (0.117)      (0.120)      (0.116)       (0.122)           (0.022)      (0.022)      (0.019)       (0.022)
                                                                              -0.423**     -0.429**      -0.389*       -0.244            -0.078       -0.078       -0.074        -0.106            309         209
           … Within the Boston / St. Louis area?
                                                                               (0.193)      (0.196)      (0.203)       (0.220)           (0.072)      (0.075)      (0.079)       (0.087)
                                                                               -0.356*      -0.314*      -0.380*      -0.526**           -0.040       -0.016       -0.021        -0.066            309         209
                 … Within the United States?
                                                                               (0.188)      (0.190)      (0.193)       (0.216)           (0.059)      (0.059)      (0.061)       (0.066)
                                                                              0.748***     0.695***      0.686***     0.573***           0.083**      0.075**      0.074**       0.066*            309         209
                           … Overseas?
                                                                               (0.127)      (0.129)       (0.133)      (0.148)           (0.037)      (0.035)      (0.034)       (0.038)

Measure for networking on same floor or another floor at                        0.049        0.060        0.100         0.205            -0.029       -0.032       -0.022         0.028            309         209
                        CIC                                                    (0.166)      (0.166)      (0.172)       (0.187)           (0.043)      (0.045)      (0.045)       (0.048)

                                           Person Level Covariates                x            x             x            x                 x            x             x            x
                                                      Building FE                 x            x             x            x                 x            x             x            x
                                                         Floor FE                              x             x            x                              x             x            x
                                            Firm Level Covariates                                            x            x                                            x            x
                                                     Boston Only                                                          x                                                         x
Table 8. Providing advice at CIC for immigrants vs natives
Notes: See Table 5. Baseline responses are on a 1 to 4 scale with 1 = Never, 2 = Infrequent, 3 = Monthly, and 4 = Weekly. Binary analysis bins 0 = Never vs 1 = any other selection.

                           Question:                                                    Baseline Values                                             Binary Analysis                       Sample Size
 How often do you provide advice on the following topics to                             for immigrant indicator                                     for immigrant indicator
         people outside of your company at CIC?                                (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                  (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)     Full   BOS Only
                                                                            0.260***     0.269***     0.296***    0.238***             0.123***     0.129***     0.143***      0.123***   994      706
                      Business operations
                                                                            (0.081)      (0.081)      (0.079)      (0.084)              (0.038)      (0.038)     (0.037)        (0.040)

                        Venture funding                                     0.176**      0.175**      0.194***      0.118              0.117***     0.120***     0.125***      0.094**    987      702
                                                                            (0.070)      (0.071)       (0.070)     (0.072)              (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.041)

                           Technology                                       0.201***     0.178**      0.188**      0.160**             0.113***     0.110***     0.116***      0.113***   994      706
                                                                             (0.076)     (0.077)      (0.077)      (0.081)              (0.036)      (0.036)      (0.036)       (0.039)

                                                                            0.185***     0.184**      0.190***     0.160**              0.102**     0.099**      0.104**        0.082*    984      699
                            Suppliers
                                                                             (0.070)     (0.073)       (0.072)     (0.073)              (0.041)     (0.041)      (0.041)        (0.044)

                                                                            0.214***     0.233***     0.250***    0.195***             0.120***     0.125***     0.131***      0.098**    992      704
                        People to recruit
                                                                             (0.070)      (0.071)      (0.070)     (0.073)              (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.042)

                                                                            0.282***     0.285***     0.312***    0.235***             0.139***     0.140***     0.147***      0.108**    988      700
                           Customers
                                                                             (0.077)      (0.078)      (0.077)     (0.081)              (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.043)

                                         Person Level Covariates                x            x            x           x                    x            x            x             x
                                                    Building FE                 x            x            x           x                    x            x            x             x
                                                       Floor FE                              x            x           x                                 x            x             x
                                          Firm Level Covariates                                           x           x                                              x             x
                                                   Boston Only                                                        x                                                            x
Table 9. Receiving advice at CIC for immigrants vs natives
Notes: See Table 5. Baseline responses are on a 1 to 4 scale with 1 = Never, 2 = Infrequent, 3 = Monthly, and 4 = Weekly. Binary analysis bins 0 = Never vs 1 = any other selection.

                           Question:                                                    Baseline Values                                             Binary Analysis                       Sample Size
How often do you receive advice on the following topics from                            for immigrant indicator                                     for immigrant indicator
         people outside of your company at CIC?                                (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                  (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)     Full   BOS Only
                                                                            0.252***     0.256***     0.278***    0.237***              0.095**     0.098**      0.109***      0.090**    990      701
                      Business operations
                                                                             (0.073)      (0.074)      (0.073)     (0.077)              (0.039)     (0.039)       (0.039)      (0.043)

                        Venture funding                                     0.257***     0.276***     0.293***    0.264***             0.133***     0.149***     0.158***      0.151***   990      701
                                                                             (0.068)      (0.069)      (0.069)     (0.070)              (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.040)       (0.043)

                                                                            0.178**      0.187**      0.212***     0.194**              0.079**     0.088**      0.101**       0.099**    988      702
                           Technology
                                                                            (0.077)      (0.080)       (0.080)     (0.086)              (0.039)     (0.040)      (0.041)       (0.045)

                                                                            0.165**      0.169**      0.185***     0.154**              0.104**     0.110***     0.120***      0.100**    989      700
                            Suppliers
                                                                            (0.067)      (0.068)       (0.068)     (0.070)              (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.045)

                                                                            0.144**      0.160**      0.173**      0.132*               0.067*       0.080*      0.086**         0.062    986      698
                        People to recruit
                                                                            (0.070)      (0.071)      (0.071)      (0.074)              (0.041)      (0.041)     (0.042)        (0.045)

                                                                            0.274***     0.281***     0.310***    0.265***             0.128***     0.126***     0.139***      0.103**    989      702
                           Customers
                                                                             (0.074)      (0.075)      (0.075)     (0.078)              (0.040)      (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.045)

                                         Person Level Covariates                x            x            x           x                    x            x            x             x
                                                    Building FE                 x            x            x           x                    x            x            x             x
                                                       Floor FE                              x            x           x                                 x            x             x
                                          Firm Level Covariates                                           x           x                                              x             x
                                                   Boston Only                                                        x                                                            x
Appendix A: Survey Instruments

Entrepreneurship/CIC survey

Q1.1 Harvard and Wellesley College are conducting a survey at CIC to better understand patterns of
innovation in startups. The data will build on entrepreneurship research and will help define the
factors that accelerate and support innovative businesses, with a focus on how innovators build and
utilize networks. The results of this survey will also help CIC to build upon the quality of its facilities
and offerings. This survey will take <10 minutes, with an additional 5 minutes if you are the owner,
founder, or CEO of a business. All respondents receive a $5 Amazon gift card or participate in a
drawing of a $2,000 gift card. Please answer as many questions as possible. All responses are
treated in strict confidence by CIC, Harvard, and Wellesley College. If you have any questions or
comments about this project or the survey, please contact Bill Kerr (617-596-
7763, wkerr@hbs.edu). Note: By responding to this survey you personally consent to having your
responses used in the research study. These responses represent your personal views and opinions,
not those of your employer. You also understand that this survey will not be asking you to reveal any
confidential business information. Your answers will be seen only by the researchers at Harvard and
Wellesley and will be aggregated and anonymized in any publications.

Q1.3 Please characterize your position in the company you are most involved with at CIC.
*This question requires an answer in order to start the survey*
o Employee (1)
o Founder and/or CEO (2)
o Owner (3)
o Other (e.g. board member, advisor) (4)

Q1.4 Is this position full-time or part-time?
 Full-time (1)
 Part-time (2)


PART A: CEO / OWNER / OTHER QUESTIONS

Display following section:
If “Please characterize your position in the company you are most involved with at CIC” “Founder
and/or CEO”, “Owner”, or “Other (e.g. board member, advisor)” is selected

Q2.1 Experience with CIC

Q2.2 How long have you cumulatively been a client at CIC?
 < 6 months (1)
 6-18 months (2)
 18-36 months (3)
 3-5 years (4)
 5+ years (5)
Q2.3 How long do you plan to stay at CIC?
 < 6 months (1)
 6-18 months (2)
 18-36 months (3)
 3-5 years (4)
 5+ years (5)

Display the following questions for clients in MA (Cambridge and Boston)

Q2.4 Which building are you currently located in?
 50 Milk Street (1)
 1 Broadway (2)
 101 Main Street (3)

Display This Question:
If “Which building are you currently located in?” “50 Milk Street” Is Selected in Q2.4
Q2.5 Which floor are you located on?
 Floor 5 (1)
 Floor 11 (2)
 Floor 12 (3)
 Floor 14 (4)
 Floor 15 (5)
 Floor 16 (6)
 Floor 17 (7)
 Floor 18 (8)

If “Which building (and floor) are you currently located in?” “1 Broadway” Is Selected in Q2.4
Q2.6 Which floor are you located on?
 Floor 3 (1)
 Floor 4 (2)
 Floor 5 (3)
 Floor 7 (4)
 Floor 9 (5)
 Floor 11 (6)
 Floor 14 (7)

If “Which building are you currently located in?” “101 Main Street” Is Selected in Q2.4
Q2.7 Which floor are you located on?
 Floor 1 (1)
 Floor 14 (2)
 Floor 15 (3)
    Display the following question for clients in St. Louis

    Q2.4 Which building are you currently located in?
     CET - Doris (1)
     CET - Lab (2)
     CIC@4240 (3)


    Display the following questions for all clients

    Q2.8 How do you rate CIC overall? (1= very poor; 5= very good)
     1 (very poor) (1)
     2 (2)
     3 (3)
     4 (4)
     5 (very good) (5)

    Q2.9 Impact of CIC

    Q2.10 If you have prior or multiple current ventures at CIC, please consider the most recent venture
    in your responses.

    Q2.11 Why did you locate your company at CIC. Please rate the following:
    (1= not at all important; 5= very important)
                                                   1 not at all                                 5 very
                                                                   2 (2) 3 (3)       4 (4)
                                                 important (1)                               important (5)
      Networking opportunities (Q2.11_1)                                                      
              Location (Q2.11_2)                                                              
    Physical space and resources (Q2.11_3)                                                    
           Office support (Q2.11_4)                                                           
            Affordability (Q2.11_5)                                                           
   Flexibility of rental agreements (Q2.11_6)                                                 
Ability to move office space within CIC (Q2.11_7)                                             
  Q2.12 How does being located within CIC help your business?
  (1= not at all; 5= very much)
                                                           1 not at                               5 very
                                                                         2 (2)   3 (3)   4 (4)
                                                            all (1)                              much (5)
  Lower financial costs of starting a business (Q2.12_1)                                        
Lower non-financial costs of starting a business (e.g. save
                                                                                                
           time, access to talent) (Q2.12_2)
Raise sales/revenue prospects of the business (Q2.12_3)                                         
          Achieve stronger products (Q2.12_4)                                                   
 Achieve more innovative/creative products (Q2.12_5)                                            
Better understand the business environment (Q2.12_6)                                            
   Better network among other businesses (Q2.12_7)                                              
         Recruit talented employees (Q2.12_8)                                                   
      Make for an exciting place to work (Q2.12_9)                                              
                 As a whole (Q2.12_10)                                                          


  Display This Question:
  If “How does being located at CIC help your business? (1=not at all; 5 = very much)”
           “Better network among other businesses” Is Greater Than or Equal to 3
  Q2.13 Where/How do you network at CIC?
       Please mark all that apply:
   Informally: Conversations or introductions at Venture Café (1)
   Informally: Conversations or introductions in a CIC kitchen (2)
   Other public spaces at CIC (3)
   Other informal channels (4)
   Purposefully seek out meetings with firms located inside CIC (ask via email, phone, LinkedIn,...)
       (5)
   Purposefully seek out meetings with firms located nearby / outside CIC (ask via email, phone,
       LinkedIn,...) (6)
   Other CIC-based firms purposefully ask to meet with me (7)
   Other (8)

  Q2.14 Outside of the employees of your company, how many persons at CIC do you know well
  enough to believe that they could be of benefit to your business over the next 6 months?
   None (1)
   1-4 persons (2)
   5-10 persons (3)
   11-20 persons (4)
   More than 20 persons (5)
Q2.15 Outside of the employees of your company, roughly how many people at CIC do you know
well enough to believe you would remember his or her name in six months if they left today?
 None (1)
 1-4 persons (2)
 5-10 persons (3)
 11-20 persons (4)
 More than 20 persons (5)

Display This Question:
If answer to Q2.15 is Greater than None:

Q2.16 These contacts were mostly developed...
 after coming to CIC (1)
 known in advance prior to coming to CIC (2)

Q2.17 How purposeful are you in building your business network?
 Not at all (1)
 Somewhat (2)
 Average (3)
 Purposeful (4)
 Very purposeful (5)

Q2.18 CIC Activities and Networking
Q2.19 How important are the following CIC activities and features to you? (1= not at all important;
5= extremely important)
                                         1 not at all                                 5 extremely
                                                           2 (2)   3 (3)    4 (4)
                                        important (1)                                important (5)
       Venture Café (Q2.19_1)                                                         
    Communal kitchen (Q2.19_2)                                                        
    Other public spaces (Q2.19_3)                                                     
    Lectures and events held at CIC
                                                                                      
              (Q2.19_4)
  CIC Community building gatherings
                                                                                      
            (Q2.19_5)

Q2.20 How often do you provide advice on the following topics to people outside of your company
at CIC?
                                    Never (1)       Infrequent (2)     Monthly (3)    Weekly (4)
 Business operations (Q2.20_1)                                                          
   Venture funding (Q2.20_2)                                                            
      Technology (Q2.20_3)                                                              
       Suppliers (Q2.20_4)                                                              
   People to recruit (Q2.20_5)                                                          
      Customers (Q2.20_6)                                                               
Q2.21 How often do you receive advice on the following topics from people outside of your
company at CIC?
                                     Never (1)       Infrequent (2)   Monthly (3)     Weekly (4)
  Business operations (Q2.21_1)                                                          
    Venture funding (Q2.21_2)                                                            
      Technology (Q2.21_3)                                                               
       Suppliers (Q2.21_4)                                                               
    People to recruit (Q2.21_5)                                                          
       Customers (Q2.21_6)                                                               

Q2.22 To what extent do you agree with the following statements? (1= strongly disagree; 5=
strongly agree)
                                                     1 strongly                            5 strongly
                                                                   2 (2) 3 (3) 4 (4)
                                                    disagree (1)                           agree (5)
 CIC is important because of access to companies
                                                                                              
               within CIC (Q2.16_1)
     What makes CIC important is access to
                                                                                              
    companies in the vicinity of CIC (Q2.16_2)
 CIC is important because of access to companies
                                                                                              
       in the Greater Boston area (Q2.16_3)
  The value that CIC provides is worth more than
                                                                                              
          the cost to tenants (Q2.16_4)
   Compared to other co-working facilities, CIC
     offers better opportunities for valuable                                                 
             connections (Q2.16_5)



Q2.23 CIC Location

Display the following questions for clients in MA (Cambridge and Boston)

Display This Question:
If “Which building are you currently located in?” “50 Milk Street” Is Not Selected
Q2.24 Please mark all of the following factors if they were an important consideration for your
decision to locate the company at CIC:
Mark all that apply
 Commute to Kendall Square (1)
 Ability to live close to where I work (2)
 Access to MIT faculty (e.g. collaboration) (3)
 Access to MIT students (e.g. availability of interns, employees) (4)
 Access to Kendall Square services (e.g. restaurants) (5)
 Closeness to other innovative companies around Kendall Square (6)
 Just wanted to be in Cambridge; Kendal Square was not of particular importance (7)
 Other (8)
Display This Question:
If “Which building are you currently located in?” “50 Milk Street” Is Selected
Q2.25 Please mark all of the following factors if they were an important consideration for your
decision to locate the company at CIC:
Mark all that apply
 Access to local universities (1)
 Commute to downtown (2)
 Proximity to Government Center and State House (3)
 Proximity to the Seaport Innovation District (4)
 Access to businesses downtown (5)
 Ability to live close to where I work (6)
 Access to downtown Boston services (e.g. restaurants) (7)
 Closeness to other innovative companies around downtown Boston (8)
 Just wanted to be in Boston; Milk Street was not of particular importance (9)
 Other (10)

Q2.26 Would you consider a future CIC facility in Allston near Harvard Business School and the new
engineering school a viable alternative to current locations?
(1= strongly disagree, 5= strongly agree)
 1 (strongly disagree) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (strongly agree) (5)

Display the following questions for clients in St. Louis

Q2.21 Please mark all of the following factors if they were an important consideration for your
decision to locate the company at CIC/CET: Mark all that apply
 Commute to Cortex (1)
 Ability to live close to where I work (2)
 Access to Washington University faculty (e.g. collaboration) (3)
 Access to St. Louis University faculty (e.g. collaboration) (4)
 Access to other universities' faculty (e.g. collaboration) (5)
 Access to Washington University students (e.g. availability of interns, employees) (6)
 Access to St. Louis University students (e.g. availability of interns, employees) (7)
 Access to other universities' students (e.g. availability of interns, employees) (8)
 Access to CET programming (9)
 Access to entrepreneurial support services (e.g. marketing, accounting, banking, etc.) (10)
 Access to talent within CIC/CET (11)
 Closeness to other innovative companies around Cortex (12)
 Just wanted to be in St Louis; Cortex was not of particular importance (13)
 Other (14)
Q2.22 Would you utilize a CIC facility in 39 North District (Danforth Plant Science Center Corridor)?
(1= strongly disagree, 5= strongly agree)
 1 (strongly disagree) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (strongly agree) (5)


Display the following questions for all clients

Q2.27 Respondent Characteristics

Q2.28 What is your age?
 Under 25 (1)
 25-34 (2)
 35-44 (3)
 45-54 (4)
 over 55 (5)
 Prefer not to say (6)

Q2.29 What is your gender?
 Male (1)
 Female (2)
 Non-binary / genderqueer (3)
 Prefer to self-describe: (4) ____________________
 Prefer not to say (5)

Q2.30 Were you born in the United States?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)
 Prefer not to say (3)

Q2.31 What is your race / ethnicity? Mark all that apply
 American Indian or Alaska Native (1)
 Asian (2)
 Black or African American (3)
 Hispanic/Latino/Spanish origin (4)
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander (5)
 White (6)
 Other (7)
 Prefer to self-describe: (8) ____________________
 Prefer not to say (9)
Q2.32 Highest level of education
 No college education (1)
 Some college education (2)
 BA or equivalent degree (3)
 MA or equivalent degree (4)
 Doctorate or equivalent degree (5)

Q2.33 Field of highest degree:
 STEM field (1)
 Business or Economics (2)
 Other field (3)

Q2.34 Prior industry experience: Have you previously worked in the same industry as the current
firm?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Q2.35 Prior start-up experience: Have you previously worked in a startup?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Q2.36 Prior start-up experience: Have you previously founded a business?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Q2.37 How many firms have you founded? (previous or concurrent startups)
 1 (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (5)
 6 (6)
 7 (7)
 8 (8)
 9 (9)
 10 (10)
 >10 (11)


Q2.38 Owner, Founder, or CEO Expectations
Q2.39 Facts about the current business: Number of employees
 1 (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (5)
 6-10 (6)
 11-20 (7)
 21-50 (8)
 More than 50 (9)

Q2.40 Your expectations regarding the future of this new firm. What would you expect the total
sales, revenues, or fees to be in 5 years’ time (from now)?
 Smaller than now (1)
 Same as now (2)
 Larger than now (3)
 More than 5 times larger than now (4)

Q2.41 In 5 years’ time, how do you expect the company’s employment to change in FTE?
 Smaller than now (1)
 Same as now (2)
 Larger than now (3)
 More than 5 times larger than now (4)


Q2.42 Financing

Q2.43 What was the source(s) of capital used to start or acquire this business? Mark all that apply.
 Savings / assets of owner(s) (1)
 Home equity loan (2)
 Credit card of owner(s) (3)
 Business loan (4)
 Outside investor / VC (5)
 Grants (6)
 Other sources of capital (7)
 Don’t know (8)
Q2.44 During the last 12 months, were any of the following sources of capital used to finance
expansion or capital improvement(s) for this business? Mark all that apply.
 Savings / assets of owner(s) (1)
 Home equity loan (2)
 Credit card of owner(s) (3)
 Business loan (4)
 Outside investor / VC (5)
 Business profits and/or assets (6)
 Grants (7)
 Other source(s) of capital (8)
 Don’t know (9)
 Wanted to expand/make capital improvement(s), but could not obtain funding (10)
 Did not expand or make capital improvement(s) (11)

Q2.45 In total, how much external capital has been raised?
 Less than $250k (1)
 $250k - $900k (2)
 $900k - $3m (3)
 $3m - $9m (4)
 More than $9m (5)


Q2.46 Innovation

Q2.47 Have you ever been an inventor on a patent?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Q2.48 Has your company worked on (or is currently working on) a new innovation?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Display This Question:
If “Has your company worked on (or is currently working on) a new innovation?” “Yes” Is Selected
Q2.49 Does your company patent these innovations?
 No (1)
 Yes, it already has some patents (2)
 Yes, it intends to patent in future (none yet) (3)

Q2.50 Did individuals working at other CIC companies provide important insights to your company?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)
Display This Question:
If “Did individuals working at other CIC companies provide important insights to your
company?” “Yes” Is Selected
Q2.51 Were these insights typically about the marketplace, the technology, or something else?
(Please mark all that apply)
 Marketplace (1)
 Technology or innovation (including the product, process) (2)
 Strategy and business operations (3)
 Something else (4) ____________________

Display This Question:
If “Did individuals working at other CIC companies provide important insights to your company?”
“Yes” Is Selected
Q2.52 How central were these insights to your business model?
(1= not at all; 5= essential)
 1 (not at all) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (essential) (5)

Display This Question:
If “Did individuals working at other CIC companies provide important insights to your company?”
“Yes” Is Selected
Q2.53 What share of these insights came through unplanned interactions (vs. intentional meetings)?
 1 (mostly unplanned) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (even mix) (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (mostly planned) (5)

Display This Question:
If “Did individuals working at other CIC companies provide important insights to your company?”
“Yes” Is Selected

Q2.54 Would this expertise have been available within your company?
 Rarely or never (1)
 Sometimes (2)
 Frequently (3)
Q2.55 The next and final section uses personality assessment tools. It takes 3 minutes to
complete.

Q2.56 Personality
Q2.57 How much do you typically enjoy taking risks?
(1= not at all happy to take risks; 10= very happy to take risks)
 1 (not at all happy to take risks) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (5)
 6 (6)
 7 (7)
 8 (8)
 9 (9)
 10 (very happy to take risks) (10)

Q2.58 Some activities involve a "financial" risk, such as starting a business, investing, or gambling
and betting — that is, there is a risk of losing money or other assets. In general, what is your
propensity for accepting financial risks?
(1= very low; 10= very high)
 1 (very low) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (5)
 6 (6)
 7 (7)
 8 (8)
 9 (9)
 10 (very high) (10)
  Q2.59 How do the following statements agree with you? (1= strongly disagree; 5= strongly agree)
                                                     1 strongly                              5 strongly
                                                                   2 (2) 3 (3) 4 (4)
                                                    disagree (1)                             agree (5)
              I am talkative (Q2.59_1)                                                      
    I am very thorough in my actions (Q2.59_2)                                              
 I am original, come up with new ideas (Q2.59_3)                                            
              I am reserved (Q2.59_4)                                                       
     I am relaxed, handle stress well (Q2.59_5)                                             
        I have a forgiving nature (Q2.59_6)                                                 
     I get nervous easily and worry (Q2.59_7)                                               
      I have an active imagination (Q2.59_8)                                                
             I am often lazy (Q2.59_9)                                                      
 I value artistic, aesthetic experiences (Q2.59_10)                                         
  I am kind and considerate to others (Q2.59_11)                                            
         I do things efficiently (Q2.59_12)                                                 
        I am social and outgoing (Q2.59_13)                                                 
  If I work hard, I can successfully start a business
                                                                                            
                      (Q2.59_14)
 Overall, my skills and abilities will help me start a
                                                                                            
               business (Q2.59_15)
My past experience will be very valuable in starting
                                                                                            
             a business (Q2.59_16)
  I am confident I can put in the effort needed to
                                                                                            
            start a business (Q2.59_17)
I believe that I am primarily responsible for my own
                                                                                            
          successes and failures (Q2.59_18)
   I feel a great deal of pride when I complete a
                                                                                            
           project successfully (Q2.59_19)
 I have a strong desire to achieve positive results
 even when it requires a great deal of additional                                           
                 effort (Q2.59_20)
 I surprise people with my novel ideas (Q2.59_21)                                           
    People ask me for help in creative activities
                                                                                            
                   (Q2.59_22)
 I obtain more satisfaction from mastering a skill
                                                                                            
    than coming up with a new idea (Q2.59_23)
    I prefer work that requires original thinking
                                                                                            
                    (Q2.59_24)
I like a job which demands skill and practice rather
                                                                                            
            than inventiveness (Q2.59_25)
    I am not a very creative person (Q2.59_26)                                              
Q2.60 Please think of 5 people not directly connected with your company with whom you have had
important conversations related to your business in the last 6 months. These may be family
members, friends, former colleagues, instructors or other persons with whom you discussed aspects
of your business (e.g. strategy, business development, market conditions, financing) but NOT
employees, investors, or clients that have direct stake in the company.
Where are these external colleagues located?
                                 Same floor at     Another floor   Boston area     US     Overseas
                                     CIC (1)         at CIC (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)
     Person 1 (Q2.60_1)                                                                     
     Person 2 (Q2.60_2)                                                                     
     Person 3 (Q2.60_3)                                                                     
     Person 4 (Q2.60_4)                                                                     
     Person 5 (Q2.60_5)                                                                     

Q2.61 Think of the 5 most important persons you met at CIC specifically. How important were they
for your business?
 Not at all important (1)
 Slightly important (2)
 Moderately important (3)
 Very important (4)
 Extremely important (5)

Q2.62 Please select all types of events you would be interested to attend if held in listed locations.
                                                         Another CIC       District      Roxbury Innovation
                                                           site (1)        Hall (2)           Center (3)
Venture Café / entrepreneurial gathering (Q2.62_1)                                            
         Expert forum / lecture (Q2.62_2)                                                     
     Investor event / pitch contest (Q2.62_3)                                                 

Q2.63 Is there anything else about CIC, its impact on you / your company that you would like to
report?

Q2.64 Please let us know if you would like to receive a report with overall findings of this survey.
 Yes (5)
 No (6)

Q2.65 All respondents can either choose to receive a $5 Amazon gift card, or to participate in a
drawing for a $2,000 gift card of choice. We expect to receive around 1000 participants in the
drawing. Your email will only be used for this purpose, and no additional questions or other contact
attempts will be made using the email address provided below.
Please make your choice:
 Please send me a $5 Amazon gift card. My email is (1) ____________________
 Please enter me in a drawing for the $2,000 gift card. My email is (2) ____________________
PART B: EMPLOYEE QUESTIONS

Display following section:
If “Please characterize your position in the company you are most involved with at CIC”
“Employee” is selected

Q3.1 How long have you cumulatively been a client at CIC?
 < 6 months (1)
 6-18 months (2)
 18-36 months (3)
 3-5 years (4)
 5+ years (5)

Display the following questions for clients in MA (Cambridge and Boston)

Q3.2 Which building are you currently located in?
 50 Milk Street (1)
 1 Broadway (2)
 101 Main Street (3)

Display This Question:
If “Which building are you currently located in?” “50 Milk Street” Is Selected
Q3.3 Which floor are you located on?
 Floor 5 (1)
 Floor 11 (2)
 Floor 12 (3)
 Floor 14 (4)
 Floor 15 (5)
 Floor 16 (6)
 Floor 17 (7)
 Floor 18 (8)

Display This Question:
If “Which building are you currently located in?” “1 Broadway” Is Selected
Q3.4 Which floor are you located on?
 Floor 3 (1)
 Floor 4 (2)
 Floor 5 (3)
 Floor 7 (4)
 Floor 9 (5)
 Floor 11 (6)
 Floor 14 (7)
 Display This Question:
 If “Which building are you currently located in?” “101 Main Street” Is Selected
 Q3.5 Which floor are you located on?
  Floor 1 (1)
  Floor 14 (2)
  Floor 15 (3)

 Display the following questions for clients in St. Louis

 Q3.2 Which building are you currently located in?
  CET - Doris (1)
  CET - Lab (2)
  CIC@4240 (3)

 Display the following questions for all clients

 Q3.6 How do you rate CIC overall?
 (1= very poor; 5= very good)
  1 (very poor) (1)
  2 (2)
  3 (3)
  4 (4)
  5 (very good) (5)

 Q3.7 How does being located within CIC help the business you work for?
 (1=not at all; 5 = very much)
                                                          1 not at                                  5 very
                                                                     2 (2)         3 (3)   4 (4)
                                                           all (1)                                 much (5)
 Lower financial costs of starting a business (Q3.7_1)                                           
Lower non-financial costs of starting the business (e.g.
                                                                                                 
        save time, access to talent) (Q3.7_2)
  Raise the sales/revenue prospects of the business
                                                                                                 
                      (Q3.7_3)
         Achieve stronger products (Q3.7_4)                                                      
Achieve more innovative/creative products (Q3.7_5)                                               
Better understand the business environment (Q3.7_6)                                              
  Better network among other businesses (Q3.7_7)                                                 
        Recruit talented employees (Q3.7_8)                                                      
     Make for an exciting place to work (Q3.7_9)                                                 
                As a whole (Q3.7_10)                                                             
Q3.8 To what extent to do you agree with the following statements?
(1= strongly disagree; 5= strongly agree)
                                               1 strongly                               5 strongly
                                                              2 (2)   3 (3)   4 (4)
                                              disagree (1)                              agree (5)
   CIC is important because of access to
                                                                                      
         companies at CIC (Q3.8_1)
  What makes CIC important is access to
                                                                                      
 companies in the vicinity of CIC (Q3.8_2)
   CIC is important because of access to
   companies in the Greater Boston area                                               
                 (Q3.8_4)
   The value that CIC provides is worth
                                                                                      
  more than the cost to tenants (Q3.8_5)
 Compared to other co-working facilities,
   CIC offers better opportunities for                                                
     valuable connections (Q3.8_6)


Q3.9 CIC Location

Display the following questions for clients in MA (Cambridge and Boston)

Display This Question:
If “Which building are you currently located in?” “50 Milk Street” Is Not Selected
Q3.10 Beyond the company you work for, were any of the following factors an important
consideration for your decision to work at CIC: (mark all that apply)
 Commute to Kendall Square (1)
 Ability to live close to where I work (2)
 Access to MIT faculty (e.g. collaboration) (3)
 Access to MIT students (e.g. availability of interns, employees) (4)
 Access to Kendall Square services (e.g. restaurants) (5)
 Closeness to other innovative companies around Kendall Square (6)
 Just wanted to be in Cambridge; Kendal Square was not of particular importance (7)
Display This Question:
If “Which building are you currently located in?” “50 Milk Street” Is Selected
Q3.11 Beyond the company you work for, were any of the following factors an important
consideration for your decision to work at CIC: (mark all that apply)
 Access to local universities (1)
 Commute to downtown (2)
 Proximity to Government Center and State House (3)
 Proximity to the Seaport Innovation District (4)
 Access to businesses downtown (5)
 Ability to live close to where I work (6)
 Access to downtown Boston services (e.g. restaurants) (7)
 Closeness to other innovative companies around downtown Boston (8)
 Just wanted to be in Boston; Milk Street was not of particular importance (9)
 Other (10)

Q3.12 Would you consider a future CIC facility in Allston near Harvard Business School and the new
engineering school a viable alternative to current locations? (1= strongly disagree, 5= strongly agree)
 1 (strongly disagree) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (strongly agree) (5)


Display the following questions for clients in St. Louis

Q3.7 Beyond the company you work for, were any of the following factors an important
consideration for your decision to work at CIC/CET:
(mark all that apply)
 Commute to Cortex (1)
 Ability to live close to where I work (2)
 Access to Washington University faculty (e.g. collaboration) (3)
 Access to St. Louis University faculty (e.g. collaboration) (4)
 Access to other universities' faculty (e.g. collaboration) (5)
 Access to Washington University students (e.g. availability of interns, employees) (6)
 Access to St. Louis University students (e.g. availability of interns, employees) (7)
 Access to other universities' students (e.g. availability of interns, employees) (8)
 Access to CET programming (9)
 Access to entrepreneurial support services (e.g. marketing, accounting, banking, etc.) (10)
 Access to talent within CIC/CET (11)
 Closeness to other innovative companies around Cortex (12)
 Just wanted to be in St Louis; Cortex was not of particular importance (13)
 Other (14)
Q3.8 Would you utilize a CIC facility in 39 North District (Danforth Plant Science Center Corridor)?
(1= strongly disagree, 5= strongly agree)
 1 (strongly disagree) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (strongly agree) (5)


Display the following questions for all clients

Q3.13 CIC Connections

Q3.14 Outside of the employees of your company, how many persons at CIC do you know well
enough to believe that they could be of benefit to your business over the next 6 months?
 None (1)
 1-4 persons (2)
 5-10 persons (3)
 11-20 persons (4)
 More than 20 (5)

Q3.15 Outside of the employees of your company, how many persons at CIC do you know well
enough to believe you would remember his or her name in six months if they left today?
 None (1)
 1-4 persons (2)
 5-10 persons (3)
 11-20 persons (4)
 More than 20 (5)

Display This Question:
If “Outside of the employees of your company, how many persons at CIC do you know well enough to
believe they could be of benefit to your business over the next 6 months” or “Outside of the
employees of your company, roughly how many people at CIC do you know well enough that you
believe you would remember his or her name in six months if they left today?”
         Is greater than “None”
Q3.16 These contacts were mostly...
 developed after coming to CIC (1)
 known in advance prior to coming to CIC (2)

Q3.17 How purposeful are you in building your business network?
 Not at all (1)
 Somewhat (2)
 Average (3)
 Purposeful (4)
 Very purposeful (5)
Q3.18 Where/How do you network at CIC?
Please mark all that apply:
 Informally: Conversations or introductions at Venture Café (1)
 Informally: Conversations or introductions in a CIC kitchen (2)
 Other public spaces at CIC (3)
 Other informal channels (4)
 Purposefully seek out meetings with firms located inside CIC (ask via email, phone, LinkedIn,...)
    (5)
 Purposefully seek out meetings with firms located nearby / outside CIC (ask via email, phone,
    LinkedIn,...) (6)
 Other CIC-based firms purposefully ask to meet with me (7)
 Other (8)

Q3.19 CIC Activities and Networking

Q3.20 How important are the following CIC activities and features to you?
(1= not at all important; 5= extremely important)
                                          1 not at all                                5 extremely
                                                          2 (2)     3 (3)    4 (4)
                                         important (1)                               important (5)
      Venture Café (Q3.20_1)                                                          
   Communal kitchen (Q3.20_2)                                                         
   Other public spaces (Q3.20_3)                                                      
  Lectures and events held at CIC
                                                                                      
            (Q3.20_4)
CIC Community building gatherings
                                                                                      
          (Q3.20_5)


Q3.21 How often do you provide advice on the following topics to people outside of your company
at CIC?
                                     Never (1)     Infrequent (2)    Monthly (3)      Weekly (4)
   Business operations (Q3.21_1)                                                        
     Venture funding (Q3.21_2)                                                          
       Technology (Q3.21_3)                                                             
        Suppliers (Q3.21_4)                                                             
     People to recruit (Q3.21_5)                                                        
        Customers (Q3.21_6)                                                             
Q3.22 How often do you receive advice on the following topics from people outside of your
company within CIC?
                                       Never (1)     Infrequent (2)   Monthly (3) Weekly (4)
   Business operations (Q3.22_1)                                                  
     Venture funding (Q3.22_2)                                                    
       Technology (Q3.22_3)                                                       
        Suppliers (Q3.22_4)                                                       
     People to recruit (Q3.22_5)                                                  
        Customers (Q3.22_6)                                                       


Q3.23 Respondent Characteristics

Q3.24 What is your age?
 Under 25 (1)
 25-34 (2)
 35-44 (3)
 45-54 (4)
 over 55 (5)
 Prefer not to say (6)

Q3.25 What is your gender?
 Male (1)
 Female (2)
 Non-binary / genderqueer (3)
 Prefer to self-describe: (4) ____________________
 Prefer not to say (5)

Q3.26 Were you born in the United States?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)
 Prefer not to say (3)

Q3.27 What is your race / ethnicity?
Mark all that apply.
 American Indian or Alaska Native (1)
 Asian (2)
 Black or African American (3)
 Hispanic/Latino/Spanish origin (4)
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander (5)
 White (6)
 Other (7)
 Prefer to self-describe: (8) ____________________
 Prefer not to say (9)
Q3.28 Highest level of education
 No college education (1)
 Some college education (2)
 BA or equivalent degree (3)
 MA or equivalent degree (4)
 Doctorate or equivalent degree (5)

Q3.29 Field of highest degree:
 STEM field (1)
 Business or Economics (2)
 Other (3)

Q3.30 Prior industry experience: Have you previously worked in the same industry as the current
firm?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Q3.31 Prior start-up experience: Have you previously worked in a startup?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Q3.32 Prior start-up experience: Have you previously founded a business?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Q3.33 Future start-up plans: Do you think you will ever start your own firm?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)
 Maybe (3)

Q3.34 Innovation and Risk Attitudes

Q3.35 How much do you typically enjoy taking risks? (1= not at all happy to take risks; 10= very
happy to take risks)
 1 (not at all happy to take risks) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (5)
 6 (6)
 7 (7)
 8 (8)
 9 (9)
 10 (very happy to take risks) (10)
Q3.36 Some activities involve a "financial" risk, such as starting a business, investing, or gambling
and betting — that is, there is a risk of losing money or other assets. In general, what is your
propensity for accepting financial risks? (1= very low; 10= very high)
 1 (very low) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (5)
 6 (6)
 7 (7)
 8 (8)
 9 (9)
 10 (very high) (10)

Q3.37 Have you ever been an inventor on a patent?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Q3.38 Has your company worked on (or is currently working on) a new innovation?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Display This Question:
If “Has your company worked on (or is currently working on) a new innovation?” “Yes” Is Selected
Q3.39 Does your company patent these innovations?
 No (1)
 Yes, it already has some patents (2)
 Yes, it intends to patent in future (none yet) (3)

Q3.40 Did individuals working at other CIC companies provide important insights to your company?
 Yes (1)
 No (2)

Display This Question:
If “In your judgment, did individuals working at other companies at the CIC provide important
insight...” “Yes” Is Selected
Q3.41 Were these insights typically about the marketplace, the technology, or something else?
(Please mark all that apply)
 Marketplace (1)
 Technology or innovation (including the product, process) (2)
 Strategy and business operations (3)
 Something else (4)

Display This Question:
If “In your judgment, did individuals working at other companies at the CIC provide important
insight...” “Yes” Is Selected
Q3.42 How central were these insights to your business model?
(1= not at all; 5= essential)
 1 (not at all) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (essential) (5)

Display This Question:
If “In your judgment, did individuals working at other companies at the CIC provide important
insight...” “Yes” Is Selected
Q3.43 What share of these insights came through unplanned interactions (vs. through intentional
meetings)?
 1 (mostly unplanned) (1)
 2 (2)
 3 (even mix) (3)
 4 (4)
 5 (mostly planned) (5)

Display This Question:
If “In your judgment, did individuals working at other companies at the CIC provide important
insight...” “Yes” Is Selected
Q3.44 Would this expertise have been available within your company?
 Rarely or never (1)
 Sometimes (2)
 Frequently (3)

Q3.45 The next and final section uses personality assessment tools. It takes 3 minutes to
complete.

Q3.46 Personality
      Q3.47 How do the following statements agree with you? (1= strongly disagree; 5= strongly agree)
                                                              1 strongly                              5 strongly
                                                                             2 (2) 3 (3) 4 (4)
                                                             disagree (1)                             agree (5)
                   I am talkative (Q3.47_1)                                                          
         I am very thorough in my actions (Q3.47_2)                                                  
      I am original, come up with new ideas (Q3.47_3)                                                
                   I am reserved (Q3.47_4)                                                           
          I am relaxed, handle stress well (Q3.47_5)                                                 
             I have a forgiving nature (Q3.47_6)                                                     
          I get nervous easily and worry (Q3.47_7)                                                   
           I have an active imagination (Q3.47_8)                                                    
                   I am often lazy (Q3.47_9)                                                         
      I value artistic, aesthetic experiences (Q3.47_10)                                             
       I am kind and considerate to others (Q3.47_11)                                                
               I do things efficiently (Q3.47_12)                                                    
             I am social and outgoing (Q3.47_13)                                                     
If I work hard, I can successfully start a business (Q3.47_14)                                       
 Overall, my skills and abilities will help me start a business
                                                                                                     
                          (Q3.47_15)
    My past experience will be very valuable in starting a
                                                                                                     
                   business (Q3.47_16)
   I am confident I can put in the effort needed to start a
                                                                                                     
                     business (Q3.47_17)
    I believe that I am primarily responsible for my own
                                                                                                     
              successes and failures (Q3.47_18)
    I feel a great deal of pride when I complete a project
                                                                                                     
                    successfully (Q3.47_19)
I have a desire to achieve positive results even if it requires a
                                                                                                     
              lot of additional effort (Q3.47_20)
      I surprise people with my novel ideas (Q3.47_21)                                               
   People ask me for help in creative activities (Q3.47_22)                                          
      I get more satisfaction from mastering a skill than
                                                                                                     
             developing a new idea. (Q3.47_23)
   I prefer work that requires original thinking (Q3.47_24)                                          
  I like a job which demands skill and practice rather than
                                                                                                     
                   inventiveness (Q3.47_25)
         I am not a very creative person (Q3.47_26)                                                  
Q3.48 Please select all types of events you would be interested in attending if held in the listed
locations.
                                                             Other CIC District        Roxbury Innovation
                                                              site (1)    Hall (2)          Center (3)
   Venture Café / entrepreneurial gathering (Q3.48_1)                                        
             Expert forum / Lecture (Q3.48_2)                                                
         Investor event / Pitch contest (Q3.48_3)                                            


Q3.49 Is there anything else about CIC and its impact on you and your company that you would like
to report?

Q3.50 Please let us know if you would like to receive a report with overall findings of this survey.
 Yes (5)
 No (6)

Q3.51 All respondents can either choose to receive a $5 Amazon gift card, or to participate in a
drawing for a $2,000 gift card of choice. We expect to receive around 1000 participants in the
drawing. Your email will only be used for this purpose, and no additional questions or other contact
attempts will be made using the email address provided below. Please make your choice:
 Please send me a $5 Amazon gift card. My email is (1) ____________________
 Please enter me in a drawing for the $2,000 gift card. My email is (2) ____________________
