NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STORABLE VOTES AND QUADRATIC VOTING. AN EXPERIMENT ON FOUR
CALIFORNIA PROPOSITIONS
Alessandra Casella
Luis Sanchez
Working Paper 25510
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25510

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019

We thank Bora Erdamar, Andrew Gelman, Antonin Mace’, and participants to the Columbia Experimental
Lunch and to the 2018 ETH Workshop on Democracy for useful comments, and the National Science
Foundation (grant SES-0617934) for financial support. The research was approved by Columbia University
Institutional Review Board. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Alessandra Casella and Luis Sanchez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Storable Votes and Quadratic Voting. An Experiment on Four California Propositions
Alessandra Casella and Luis Sanchez
NBER Working Paper No. 25510
January 2019
JEL No. D02,D71,D72
ABSTRACT
Storable Votes and Quadratic Voting are voting systems designed to account for voters’ intensity
of preferences. We test their performance in two samples of California residents using data on
four initiatives prepared for the 2016 California ballot. We bootstrap the original samples and
generate two sets of 10,000 multi-elections simulations. As per design, both systems induce
minority victories and result in higher expected welfare relative to majority voting. In our
parametrization, quadratic voting induces more minority victories and achieves higher average
welfare, but causes more frequent inefficient minority victories. The results are robust to different
plausible rules-of-thumb in casting votes.

Alessandra Casella
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118 Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ac186@columbia.edu
Luis Sanchez
Department of Economics
Cornell University
404 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
las497@cornell.edu

Experimental Instructions are available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25510

Storable Votes and Quadratic Voting.
An Experiment on Four California Propositions
Alessandra Casella and Luis Sanchez∗
January 19, 2019

Abstract
Storable Votes and Quadratic Voting are voting systems designed to
account for voters’ intensity of preferences. We test their performance in
two samples of California residents using data on four initiatives prepared
for the 2016 California ballot. We bootstrap the original samples and
generate two sets of 10,000 multi-elections simulations. As per design,
both systems induce minority victories and result in higher expected welfare relative to majority voting. In our parametrization, quadratic voting
induces more minority victories and achieves higher average welfare, but
causes more frequent ineﬃcient minority victories. The results are robust
to diﬀerent plausible rules-of-thumb in casting votes.

1

Introduction

Traditional political parties in Western democracies are in decline. From the
Gilets Jaunes in France to Cinque Stelle in Italy, voters call for direct democracy and continuous electronic polling. If these calls are heard, we need to
rethink how to protect the system from the tyranny of the majority, a classic
problem in political design.1 The protection of basic rights is the domain of
the judicial branch. Here we are concerned instead with the expression and
weighing of political preferences. There are diﬀerent reasons for such concern:
∗ Columbia University, ac186@columbia.edu, and Cornell University, las497@cornell.edu.
We thank Bora Erdamar, Andrew Gelman, Antonin Mace’, and participants to the Columbia
Experimental Lunch and to the 2018 ETH Workshop on Democracy for useful comments, and
the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0617934) for financial support. The research was
approved by Columbia University Institutional Review Board.
1 See discussions in Dahl (1956, 1989), Guinier (1994), Issacharoﬀ et al. (2002).

1

fairness and legitimacy are foremost, but straightforward utilitarian eﬃciency
is an additional one, and is the object of this study. The numerical size of the
two opposing groups does not account for varying intensities of preferences and
even in binary decisions the outcome of majority voting can be ineﬃcient.
An ideal solution does not superimpose additional rules—quota systems, preset rotation in positions of power—but amends the voting system to allow for
the expression of preference intensity. Outcomes then reflect preferences endogenously, mirroring changes over time, and reverting to majority voting when
intensities do not diﬀer substantially. Two voting schemes with such properties
have been proposed recently: storable votes (SV) (Casella, 2005, 2012, HortalaVallve, 2015), and quadratic voting (QV) (Posner and Weyl, 2015, Goeree and
Zhang, 2017, Lalley and Weyl, 2018a). This paper analyzes their performance
by eliciting preferences and voting behavior over four state-wide propositions in
two samples of California respondents. We find that both voting schemes generate non-negligible minority victories and result in consistently higher eﬃciency
than majority voting.
Both schemes induce voters to express the intensity of their preferences by
allowing them to distribute a budget of votes across diﬀerent binary decisions.
In each decision, the side with more votes then prevails. In large elections, SV
advocates granting voters a "regular" vote to cast on each decision, complemented by a single "bonus vote" to be spent as desired. QV grants voters a
budget of "voices" to be distributed freely, with the defining feature that the
cost of bundling votes is quadratic: casting one vote in an election costs one
voice, but casting ten votes cost 100 voices. Under both systems, voters have an
incentive to cumulate votes to express intensity, but the incentive is tempered:
with SV by the existence of regular votes and the single bonus vote; with QV
by the convex cost of bundling.
In our experiment, we polled California subjects registered on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) on their preferences and voting choices over four propositions that, at the time of polling, were being considered for the 2016 ballot.
The four propositions concern: (1) the reestablishment of bilingual education
in public schools; (2) the cooperation of the state’s enforcement agencies with
federal immigration agents; (3) new requirements for voters’ approval of large
public infrastructure projects; and (4) longer required teaching experience for
teachers’ tenure. We collected data simultaneously from two samples of about
300 respondents each, exposing one to SV and one to QV.
Because the voting systems rely on the single budget constraint tying the
2

diﬀerent voting decisions, the unit of analysis is the joint four-proposition election. Our data then correspond to two data points, one for storable votes, and
one for quadratic voting, inadequate for any extrapolation. Ideally, we would
want a large number of identical joint elections, all with electorates drawn from
our population. We cannot have such data, but we can bootstrap our original
samples to generate two sets of 10,000 simulated multi-elections, one with SV
and one with QV. This is the dataset on which we base our analysis.2

2

The Theory

A large number  of voters are asked to vote, contemporaneously, on a set of
  1 unrelated proposals. Each proposal can either pass or fail. Voter ’s
preferences over proposal  are summarized by a valuation v , where v 
0 indicates that  is in favor of the proposal, and v  0 that  is against. If
the proposal is decided in ’s preferred direction, then ’s realized utility from
proposal , denoted  , equals  = |v |, otherwise it is normalized to 0.
Thus the sign of v indicates the direction of ’s preferences, and  their
intensity. Preferences are separable across proposals, and the voter’s objective
P
is to maximize total utility  , where  =   .
Each individual’s valuations {v1 ,..,v } are privately known. They are a
random sample from a joint distribution F(v1     v ) which is common knowledge. There is no cost of voting, and voters vote sincerely. We consider three
voting systems: majority voting, SV, and QV. In all three, each proposal is
decided in the direction preferred by a majority of the votes cast. The voting
systems diﬀer in the rules under which votes are cast.
Under majority voting, each voter has  votes and casts a single vote on
each proposal. The voting scheme gives weight to the extent of support for a
proposal. Storable votes and quadratic voting allow voters to express not only
the direction of their preferences but also their intensity.

2.1

Storable votes

SV grants each voter a budget of "bonus votes" to be distributed freely over
the diﬀerent proposals. In large elections, it is typically optimal to cumulate
all bonus votes on a single proposal, and the simplest practical implementation
2 We

borrowed the methodology from Casella et al. (2010).

3

is then to endow each voter with one bonus vote to spend as desired, complemented with  "regular" votes, one per proposal, that cannot be bundled.3 The
addition of the bonus vote, simple as it is, grants some weight to intensities of
preferences: the voter’s choice of where to cast it signals the voter’s priorities.
If voters’ valuations are independent across voters and proposals, ex ante
welfare in the unique symmetric Bayesian Nash equilibrium is higher than ex
ante welfare under majority voting, under a range of plausible assumptions
about the marginal distributions  .4 In particular, as is to be expected, the
benefits of SV increase if there are asymmetries in intensities between voters on
the opposite side of a proposal and the minority holds more intense preferences—
the case in which the desirability of majority voting is most disputed.

2.2

Quadratic voting

QV has been studied in the context of a single binary election: voters purchase
votes with a numeraire and pay a price that equals the square of the number of
votes purchased. Goeree and Zhang (2017) and Lalley and Weyl (2018a) show
that if valuations are independent across voters and the distribution  satisfies some plausible conditions, then any symmetric Bayesian Nash equilibrium
converges asymptotically to utilitarian eﬃciency. As in the case of SV, the possibility of casting more than one vote, at a cost, allows for the expression of a
voter’s intensity of preferences and gives it weight over the final outcome.
In the case of multiple elections, QV could be implemented by paying for
votes in an artificial currency: "voices", which can be translated into votes at a
quadratic cost. Casting  votes on proposal  requires spending 2 voices on
 (Posner and Weyl, 2015). QV becomes similar to SV, but for the quadratic
cost, and the quadratic cost limits the incentive to cumulate votes.
There is no theoretical analysis of the equilibrium properties of QV in multiple elections. However, a simple model5 shows that eﬃciency can extend to this
case if voters believe that, on any election, the marginal impact of their votes
on the probability of their preferred side prevailing is constant for any number
of votes they cast. We know from Lalley and Weyl (2018a) that the condition
is generally not satisfied in equilibrium, but the deviations may be too subtle
for voters to take into account.
3 Casella

and Gelman (2008).
and Gelman (2008). We summarize the arguments in the appendix.
5 The model was suggested by Glen Weyl and is reported in the appendix. It is similar but
more transparent than the one in Lalley and Weyl (2018b).
4 Casella

4

3

The Experiment

In May 2016 we selected four propositions that were being prepared for inclusion in the November 2016 California ballot. We then recruited 647 California
subjects via MTurk, and randomly assigned them either to the SV treatment
(324 subjects; 306 after data cleaning6 ) or to the QV treatment (323 subjects;
313 after cleaning). We asked how each subject would vote on each of the four
propositions, presented in random order, allowing for the option to abstain,
and how important each of these propositions was to the subject. Respondents
assigned to the SV (QV) treatment were then presented with a version of SV
(QV) and asked how they would cast their votes. Outcomes were computed
using simple majority, and either SV or QV. We incentivized voting choices
by promising $250 for an organization working in favor of any proposal that
passed under either SV or QV, depending on the sample. The questions were
programmed in Qualtrics, and copies of all screenshots are reproduced in the
appendix.

3.1

The four propositions

We needed propositions whose outcome was unlikely to be a landslide, about
which some voters would feel strongly, and that would be clear enough to the
average MTurk subject. In March 2016 we had presented an original set of ten
propositions, all with the potential to reach the November ballot, to a sample
of 94 California MTurk subjects. Based on their responses, we selected for the
experiment the following four propositions:7
(1) Bilingual education (BE): re-instate the possibility of bilingual classes in
public schools. The proposition was included in the November 2016 ballot and
passed.
(2) Immigration (IM): require all state law enforcement oﬃcials to verify
immigration status in case of an infraction and report undocumented immigrants
to federal authorities. The proposition was not included in the ballot.
(3) Teachers’ tenure (TT): increase required pre-tenure experience for teachers from two to five years. The proposition was not included in the ballot.
(4) Public Vote on Bonds (PB): require voters’ approval for all public infrastructure projects of more than $2 billion. The proposition was included in
6 See

the appendix for details.
March survey also yielded a small poll we reported at the end of the experiment. It
had no eﬀect and we ignore it in what follows.
7 The

5

the ballot and failed.

3.2

Direction and intensity of preferences

The two novel voting rules appeared only in the second part of the survey.
The first part—eliciting voters’ direction and intensity of preferences—allowed
us to compute outcomes under majority voting and construct a measure of
utilitarian welfare. We asked each subject to distribute 100 points among the
four propositions, with the number of points a scale of the importance attributed
to each proposal ("How important is this issue to you?"). We used examples
to clarify that importance is unrelated to preferred direction and summarized
responses in terms of priorities, allowing for revisions, and asking for a final
confirmation. We interpret points as proxy for valuations, and the common
total of 100 points as a normalization preventing factors of scale from distorting
welfare.8
Denoting by  the number of points attributed to proposition  by indiP
vidual , we set  =  . Thus  =
:∈  , where  ∈ {
   } indicates the voting scheme, and  the side casting the
majority of votes on  under . Realized aggregate welfare   is given by
P P
  =  :∈   . Utilitarian eﬃciency requires that each proposition be

P P
won by the side which collectively values it most, or  ∗ =  :∈  where
 denotes the side with higher total number of points on .
If the two opposite sides attribute similar aggregate values to a proposition,
any outcome for that proposition is close to eﬃcient. To control for this, we
normalize the welfare measures by a floor corresponding to expected welfare
under random decision making, where either side of any proposition has equal
P P
probability of winning:  =    2. For each voting scheme , we call
the ratio (  − )( ∗ − ) ’s realized share of surplus, and consider it our
primary performance measure.

3.3

The voting schemes

The second part of the survey tests the new voting schemes. In the SV sample,
subjects are told that each is granted a bonus vote—one extra vote—in addition
8 The report was not incentivized. The simplest procedure—a bonus proportional to the
value attributed to propositions in which the subject is on the winning side—distorts replies
towards least contentious propositions. We concluded that incentive compatible methods
would be too cumbersome for MTurk.

6

to the regular votes cast earlier. Each subject is asked to choose the proposition
in which to use it; the vote is then cast automatically in the direction indicated
in the first part of the survey. The final outcome is calculated summing regular
and bonus votes.
The design of the QV scheme is less straightforward because it must convey
clearly that cumulating votes has a quadratic cost.9 Our survey presents the
subjects with four diﬀerent classes of votes, distinguished by color, and asks
them to choose one class. Blue votes are regular votes, four in number. Votes
cannot be cumulated, and thus a person choosing blue votes casts one vote on
each proposition. Green votes are only three, but each is worth more than a
regular blue vote and beats a blue vote if the two are opposed. Yellow votes are
two, each stronger than a green vote. Finally, a subject can choose to cast a
single red vote, stronger than a yellow vote. More precisely, the weights of the
diﬀerent votes are 1 for blue votes, 1.2 for green votes, 1.5 for yellow votes, and
2 for the red vote. A subject who chooses green/yellow/red votes casts votes on
only three/two/one propositions.
QV: Vote classes

Figure 1: The design of the QV scheme in the MTurk survey.
The simple four-class classification respects the convex cost of concentrating
votes. A voter using all four votes on diﬀerent propositions—choosing blue votes—
9 Quarfoot et al. (2017) employed QV to elicit opinions in a large electronic survey, but
did so with proprietary software developed for the purpose, and after showing respondents a
training video. We chose instead to simplify the QV scheme.

7

has a total weight of 4, but the total weight declines as votes are concentrated:
a voter using all her voting power on a single referendum has a total weight of 2,
the square root of 4, exactly in line with QV logic. For the intermediate cases of
concentration on three or two propositions, the total weights are 3.6 and 3. The
decline in total voting weight is increasing with concentration, and increasing
at an increasing rate, capturing the core feature of QV. On the other hand, our
streamlined version of QV forces subjects to cast votes of equal weight on all
propositions on which the subject casts votes, a constraint that is not part of
the original idea. In the uncontrolled and fast MTurk environment, the hope
is that our simplified QV benefits from its easier comprehension more than it
loses in flexibility.
We asked each subject to choose a class of votes, and then select the proposition(s) on which to cast the vote(s). As with SV, votes were then cast automatically according to the preferences indicated in the first part of the survey.
The final outcome was calculated on the basis of the QV votes cast.
Under both voting systems, and in all calculations we report, ties were resolved randomly.

3.4
3.4.1

The experimental data
Preferences and outcomes

In each sample, the survey yielded a distribution of preferences—the empirical counterpart to the theoretical distribution F—and voting outcomes. We
reproduce the histograms of respondents’ preferences over each proposition in
the appendix. Here we summarize preferences and voting choices by reporting
percentage margins in favor of each proposition, in terms of aggregate points,
number of voters, and number of votes (Figure 2).10
1 0 Because each subject must allocate 100 points, within each sample the distributions of
points across propositions are not independent, but with four initiatives no individual distribution is redundant.

8

Margins in favor
SV sample

QV sample

0.6

SV/QV
Maj voting

0.4

total points
0.2

0

IM

BE

PB

TT

IM

BE

PB

TT

‐0.2

Figure 2: Margins in favor. Two-sided KS tests assessing whether the distributions of points are drawn from the same population yield bootstrapped p-values
equal to 0.629 (IM), 0.66 (BE), 0.092 (PB), 0.384 (TT).
In both samples, a majority of respondents is in favor of BE and PB and
against TT and IM, although the margin in the IM proposition is very small.
In both samples and all propositions, the outcome is unchanged whether using
majority voting, SV, or QV. When the aggregate point margin has the same
sign as the majority voting outcome (all propositions in the QV sample; all but
IM in the SV sample), the outcome is eﬃcient. Thus both majority voting and
QV appropriate the full surplus in the QV sample, while both majority and SV
fall short in the SV sample (aggregating over all propositions, they realize 60.4%
of full surplus).11
The IM proposition stands out under several dimensions. It is the most
contested: although it fails in both samples and with all three voting systems,
it always does so with very small vote margins.12 It is also the most salient: as
reported in the appendix, it receives the highest number of total points in both
samples, the highest number of bonus votes in the SV sample, and the highest
number of red votes and of total votes in the QV sample. In addition, the voting
result shows that under SV in the IM proposition the bonus vote was not used
1 1 The ineﬃcient victory in the IM proposition is heavily penalized because in the SV sample
all margins of victory are small, and thus welfare under random outcomes, the floor of our
welfare measure, is relatively high.
1 2 The vote tallies under majority are 129 to 125 (SV sample) and 136 to 130 (QV sample);
under SV the tally is 181 to 170, and under QV a bare 124.6 to 124.4.

9

symmetrically by supporters and opponents: supporters’ higher total intensity
is not reflected in the SV results, and the ineﬃciency of majority voting is not
corrected.13
3.4.2

Voting choices: SV and QV

We report details on the voting choices in the appendix. Here we summarize
them through two statistical models, to be read as compact representations of
the data.
With SV, inspired by Casella et al. (2010), we conjecture that each subject
follows one of four mutually exclusive behaviors: with probability  , the
bonus vote is cast on the subject’s highest value proposition; with probability
 on the one with closest outcome (IM); with probability   on the
most familiar (either BE or TT, the two education propositions, with equal
probability); and with probability  according to some other criterion that
appears to us fully (uniformly) random. Each choice observed in the data,
matched with the individual’s reported valuations, can be expressed as function
of the four probabilities.
With QV, we posit a noisy two-step process that starts with choosing a
vote class and then, given the vote class, proceeds to casting the vote(s) on
the diﬀerent propositions in order of intensity. Denoting by () the voter’s th
highest value, we summarize behavior through five parameters: {    }.
With probability (1−), the voter chooses the vote class that reflects her relative
priorities: red if (4) (3) ≥ , yellow if (4) (3)   but (3) (2) ≥ , green
if (4) (3)  , (3) (2)  , but (2) (1) ≥ , and blue otherwise; with total
probability , the voter chooses one of the other classes (uniformly). Given a vote
class, with probability (1−) all votes are cast monotonically, i.e. on the highest
intensity propositions; with probability , votes are cast non-monotonically,
with uniform probability over the diﬀerent options.
For both SV and QV, parameters are estimated by MLE, assuming independence across subjects. We reproduce them in Table 1.
1 3 On average, opponents who cast their bonus vote on IM did so at lower intensity than
supporters (43.7 points for opponents versus 55.9 for supporters, a significant diﬀerence ( 
001)).

10

SV

QV
95% CI



 


0.63

[0.56, 0.76]

0.04

[0, 0.14]

0.09

[0.04, 0.21]

0.23

[0.15, 0.37]

95% CI







1.33

[1.21, 2.10]

1.19

[1.04, 1.21]

1.39

[1.18, 1.79]

0.50

[0.44, 0.54]

0.21

[0.17, 0.26]

Table 1. Voting choices: two simple statistical models. MLE estimates of
the statistical models.14 The confidence intervals are obtained by bootstrapping
and reflect the distribution of the estimated parameters in 10,000 simulations.
In the SV sample, the bonus vote is cast primarily on the proposition that
the voter considers her highest priority, but a relatively large role is left for
randomness. In the QV sample, the thresholds in relative values determining
the choice of vote class are significantly higher than 1 but quantitatively not
far, indicating a strong tendency towards cumulating votes.15 About half of the
time, the vote class does not obey the threshold rules estimated by the model.
Given the vote class, however, the tendency towards monotonicity is strong.

4

10,000 Multi-election Samples

On all four propositions, both SV and QV confirmed the outcome reached with
simple majority voting. The observation, however, is not very informative: because the votes cast across propositions are tied by a budget constraint, each
sample reduces to a single data point. We would want to replicate the same
elections many times, with diﬀerent electorates all drawn from the same population distribution. We cannot rerun the elections, but we can approximate
such iterations by bootstrapping our data.16
The objective is to estimate the impact of the voting rules in a population
for which our samples are representative. The maintained assumption is that
preferences are independent across individuals, but not necessarily across elections for a single individual. We sample with replacement  individuals from
1 4 Under the constraints that all probabilities be non-negative and smaller than 1, and all
threshold parameters be larger or equal to 1. In the SV model, the estimated probabilities
must sum to 1.
1 5 As described in the appendix, a full 40 percent of subjects choose the single red vote.
1 6 See the discussion in Casella et al. (2010). For a discussion of bootstrapping, see Davidson
and MacKinnon (2006).

11

each of our datasets, where  = 306 for SV and  = 313 for QV. For each
individual, we sample the direction of preferences over each proposition, the
number of points assigned to each, and the votes cast according to either the
SV or the QV scheme. We replicate this procedure 10,000 times for each original
dataset, SV or QV.17 A replication generates a distribution of preferences over
each proposition and a voting decision for all voters, and thus a voting outcome
for all four propositions. The focus is on the fraction of simulations in which the
two voting systems reach diﬀerent results from majority voting, and on their
welfare properties.
Generating voting outcomes by matching individuals with the SV or QV
voting choices they reported is an obvious option, and the first one we consider.
But an additional goal is to evaluate the robustness of the two voting schemes
to a range of plausible behaviors, and with this in mind, we posit four alternative rules-of-thumb governing the use of the votes: A, as just mentioned, i.e., as
the individual did in the original sample; B, as in the descriptive models of the
original samples described above; C, as optimal in a simplified environment; D,
introducing randomness in rule C. If the MTurk sample is not fully representative, the welfare implications of the voting choices reported by our respondents
are diﬃcult to evaluate because they presumably reflect beliefs about the full
electorate. By abstracting from reported choices, rules C and D allow a comparative evaluation of SV and QV that is not aﬀected by the possible lack of
representativeness of the MTurk sample.
In the simulations, we implement rule B by having each drawn subject behave according to the corresponding estimates in Table 1, given the subject’s
allocation of points and voting system. Rule C supposes that individuals take
their probability of pivotality as constant (across propositions in SV, and across
the number and weight of votes in QV). Under SV, the optimal rule is then to
cast the bonus vote on one’s highest intensity proposition. Under QV, individuals choose a vote class so as to minimize the distance between the weights of the
votes they cast and their normalized values. Rule D suppose that individuals
act as under C with probability 1/2, and randomly with probability 1/2.18
1 7 We verified that with 10,000 simulations the sampling error is negligible. Doubling the
number of simulations to 20,000 has barely detectable eﬀects.
1 8 See the appendix for details.

12

Simulation Results
With all four rules, both SV and QV resulted in frequent minority victories
(Figure 3:A). More than one fourth of the 10,000 simulations in each of the two
data sets, using any rule, had at least one minority victory: the average across
rules was 30% for QV and 35% for SV.19 Remarkably, under all four rules both
voting systems consistently delivered welfare gains over majority voting, and
this even though majority voting works well in these data, especially in the QV
samples. Averaging across rules and simulations, the realized share of surplus
was 86% for SV and 98% for QV, compared to 72% and 95% for majority in
the two sets of simulations (Figure 3:B). However, many minority victories also
came with welfare losses. Averaging across all rules, SV causes welfare losses in
11% of all simulations in which it delivers at least one minority victory, while
the percentage rises to 31% for QV (Figure 3:C).

0.5

A: Frequency of at least one
minority victory

C: Frequency of welfare losses
(at least one minority victory)

B: Realized share of surplus
1

0.5

0.4

0.9

0.4

0.3

0.8

0.3

0.2

0.7

0.2

0.1

0.6

SV
Maj SV

0.1

QV
Maj QV

0.5

0
A

B

C

D

0
A

B

C

D

A

B

C

Figure 3: Bootstrap results. In panel B, note the diﬀerence in majority welfare
in the SV and QV samples.
Reporting the realized share of surplus over all simulations, whether or not
any outcome diﬀers from simple majority, (as in Figure 3:B) allows us to give
weight to foregone eﬃciency gains. But only a fraction of simulations include a
minority victory, and none of the diﬀerences in means in panel B are statistically
significant. If we consider only simulations with at least one minority victory,
the probability of a positive increase in welfare is the complement to 1 of the
numbers shown in Figure 3:C. Such probability is significant at conventional
levels for SV-B ( = 0047), SV-C ( = 0019), and SV-D ( = 010), but in no
1 9 Most minority victories were concentrated on the IM and BE initiatives. See the appendix
for details.

13

D

other case.
In the SV simulations, the outlier is rule A, which implements the actual
voting choice indicated by the subject drawn in the simulation (Figure 3:C).
The problem comes from the IM proposition, where, as noted earlier, bonus
votes are predominantly cast against the proposition, while high points are
predominantly attributed by subjects in favor. The asymmetry in behavior
concerns a small number of subjects, and we cannot rule out that it reflects
pure noise20 , but is suﬃcient to aﬀect the results. Rules B, C, and D implement
voting behavior that is symmetric relative to the direction of preferences, and
ineﬃcient minority victories are fewer.
The diﬀerence in performance between SV and QV is largely driven by
the diﬀerent potential for improvement over majority voting: such potential
is smaller under QV, and as a result errors are more likely and more frequent.
The discrepancy in the performance of majority voting across the two samples is
surprising because the two samples were populated randomly during the MTurk
survey. Again, it is due primarily to the IM proposition, where, as we saw, in
the MTurk data eﬃciency favors the majority outcome in the QV sample but
not in the SV sample. Over the 10,000 simulations, considering the IM proposition alone, majority captures 24% of the surplus in the SV sample, versus 85%
in the QV sample. The diﬀerence between the two original samples is random,
but persists in the simulations, which draw from the original samples. We can
attempt to correct the problem by recalibrating the bootstrap exercise.

4.1

Comparing SV and QV: Recalibrating the samples

The data are not suﬃciently rich to restrict simulations to subjects with similar
preferences over all propositions. We must limit ourselves to simulate electorates
with more similar distributions of preferences over the proposition that appears
most problematic. More precisely, we construct two sets of 10,000 recalibrated
samples by restricting the distributions of preferences over the IM proposition
so as to replicate, on average, the distribution of preferences over IM in the total
population of our original data (that is, over the two MTurk samples combined):
we draw subjects, with replacement, from the IM preference histogram of the
relevant dataset—SV to construct the SV samples, and QV for the QV samples—
but constrain each draw to come from any bin of the histogram with probability
equal to the corresponding frequency in the population IM preference histogram.
2 0 See

the appendix.

14

The resulting SV and QV samples are more closely comparable: over 10,000
simulations, the average share of surplus appropriated by majority voting in
the IM proposition is now 49% for SV and 54% for QV—a diﬀerence of 5%, as
opposed to more than 60% before recalibration. Averaging over all propositions,
majority voting now appropriates 84% of the surplus on average in the SV simulations (vs. 72% in the non-recalibrated data), and 91% in the QV simulations
(vs. 95%).21
We have verified that the recalibration does not distort the distributions of
preferences over the other propositions, creating new disparities across SV and
QV data: majority voting’s average performance becomes more similar across
both datasets in three of the four propositions; in the fourth (PB), majority
appropriates on average more than 90% of the available surplus in both datasets,
even as the share declines slightly with recalibration in the SV samples.
Three regularities emerge clearly from the recalibrated simulations (Figure
4). First, QV now results in a consistently higher fraction of minority victories than SV (averaging over all rules, 38% of QV simulations have at least
one minority victory, vs. 29% per SV).22 Second, under any rule, both voting
systems continue to appropriate a higher share of surplus than majority does:
QV captures 98% of surplus on average (vs. 91% with majority), and SV 91%
percent (vs. 84% with majority). Third, as expected, the frequency of welfare
losses mirrors the available room for improvement over simple majority. In the
recalibrated simulations, majority becomes more eﬃcient in the SV sample, and
the frequency of ineﬃcient minority victories increases (averaging over all rules,
22% of all simulations with at least one minority victory induce welfare losses,
up from 11% in the original simulations); majority becomes less eﬃcient in the
QV sample, and the frequency of errors declines (down to 17%, from 30% originally). Conditional on at least one minority victory, the probability of welfare
improvement over majority is significant at the 10% level for SV-C ( = 008)
and for QV-C ( = 006).
2 1 In the population, the majority of voters is against the IM proposition, but aggregate
points are higher among voters in favor: majority voting is ineﬃcient.
2 2 Under any rule, the diﬀerence is statistically significant at the 1% level.

15

Simulations calibrated on population IM preferences
A: Frequency of at least one
minority victory
0.5
0.4

C: Frequency of welfare losses
(at least one minority victory)

B: Realized share of surplus
1

0.5

0.9

0.4

0.8

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.7

QV

maj QV

0.1

0.6

SV

maj SV

0.2
0.1
0

0.5

0
A

B

C

D

A

B

C

A

D

B

C

D

D: Distribution of percentage welfare gains over majority (at least one minority victory)
Rule D
Rule B
Rule C

Rule A

600
500
400

QV
300

SV

200
100
0
‐10 ‐7 ‐4 ‐1

2

5

8 11 14 17 20‐10 ‐7 ‐4 ‐1 2

5

8 11 14 17 20 ‐10 ‐7 ‐4 ‐1 2

5

8 11 14 17 20 ‐10 ‐7 ‐4 ‐1 2 5 8 11 14 17 20

Figure 4: Bootstrap results with recalibrated samples. In the D panels, the scale
is constant. The black vertical line separates losses and gains.
SV-A remains an outlier, and again the reason is the impact of the bonus
vote on the IM proposition. The recalibration leads to samples where defeats
of the proposition are more frequent, whether under majority voting, or under
SV-A, or under eﬃciency. Overall, the frequency with which SV-A leads to
eﬃcient outcomes over the IM proposition increases. However, increasing the
frequency of voters who oppose the proposition also increases the frequency
of voters who, under SV-A, cast their bonus vote against IM at relatively low
intensities, and thus the frequency of ineﬃcient minority victories. As before,
the problem arises from the asymmetry of behavior in the original SV sample
between voters favoring or opposing the IM proposition. Rules B, C, and D,
on the other hand, perform noticeably better, and under these rules SV yields
results comparable to QV (Figure 4, panels B, C, and D).
The QV performance is remarkably consistent across rules, and appropriates, on average, close to the totality of the available surplus. QV appears more
sensitive to potential improvements than SV, inducing more minority victories
than SV even though majority performs better in the QV samples. A natural

16

question is the extent to which this sensitivity reflects the specific parametrization we have implemented. For SV we have followed the theory in Casella and
Gelman (2008), where background "regular" votes dull the impact of the bonus
vote. With QV, the convex cost by itself moderates the incentive to cumulate
votes, and formal QV models do not include background votes. With multiple
decisions, however, and the maintained assumption of constant marginal pivot
probability, neither a voter’s optimal choice nor the eﬃciency properties of the
voting system would change when adding regular votes.23
We report in the appendix how the QV simulations results are aﬀected by
the addition of regular votes. As expected, regular votes strengthen the majority
side and reduce the frequency of minority victories. Because this is particularly
true when the total intensities on the two sides are comparable, the result is a
strong decline in ineﬃcient minority victories, with little if any impact on average extracted surplus. With our data, the modification is to be recommended.

Conclusions
We report the results of a Mechanical Turk experiment designed to test the
performance of Storable Votes (SV) and Quadratic Voting (QV), two voting
systems designed to incentivize the expression of voters’ intensities of preferences and allow for minority victories. We elicited subjects’ preferences and
voting choices over four propositions intended for the 2016 California ballot. By
bootstrapping our data, we generated two samples of 10,000 joint elections (i.e.
10,000 instances of voting on all four propositions) on which the performances
of the two voting systems can be compared, and compared to majority voting.
We find that both systems indeed result in non-negligible minority victories: depending on diﬀerent details of the bootstrapping procedure, between 30
and 40% of simulations in both samples have at least one proposition won by
the minority side. And while making minority victories possible, both systems
consistently raise our measure of total welfare, appropriating at least 80 and
as much as 99% of the available surplus. In the main parametrizations we implement, QV is more sensitive to minority preferences than SV, inducing more
minority victories and appropriating a larger share of the surplus. When the
scope for improvement over majority voting is small, however, such sensitivity
can have a cost and induce frequent ineﬃcient minority victories. SV is simpler,
2 3 The model sketched in the appendix accommodates background votes with no change in
behavior.

17

a strong argument in its favor. However, its performance is less consistent across
plausible subjects’ behaviors.
Minority victories can be desirable not only for their direct impact on welfare, but also because, if preferences are correlated across decisions, the same
part of the electorate can be on the losing side on multiple decisions and come
to feel disenfranchised, questioning the legitimacy of the voting system. An
additional question, important in its own right, is the impact of SV and QV
on the inequality of realized ex post utilities. We show in the appendix that
in our data both SV and QV not only increase welfare but also reduce ex post
inequality. Under both aggregate welfare and inequality criteria, we find their
performance to be desirable.
There is widespread demand for more reliance on direct democracy, together
with justified concerns about possible misuses and abuses. It is important to
understand what the weaknesses of direct democracy are, and to think of better,
more robust designs. Both SV and QV contribute to this discussion and are
suﬃciently well understood to be ready for testing. This paper is one step in
that direction.

18

References
1. Bartneck, C., A. Duenser, E. Moltchanova and K. Zawieska, 2015, “Comparing the Similarity of Responses Received from Studies in Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk to Studies Conducted Online and with Direct Recruitment”, PLoS ONE 10(4): e0121595. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0121595.
2. Casella, A., 2005, "Storable Votes", Games and Economic Behavior, 51,
391-419.
3. Casella, A., 2012, "Storable Votes. Protecting the Minority Voice", Oxford
Un. Press: Oxford and New York.
4. Casella, A. and A. Gelman, 2008, "A Simple Scheme to Improve the Eﬃciency of Referenda", Journal of Public Economics, 92, 2240-2261.
5. Casella, A, S. Ehrenberg, A. Gelman and J. Shen, 2010, "Protecting Minorities in Binary Elections: A Test of Storable Votes Using Field Data",
The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy (Advances), 10(1).
6. Cliﬀord, S, R. Jewell and P. Waggoner, 2015, “Are Samples Drawn from
Mechanical Turk Valid for Research on Political Ideology?”, Research &
Politics, 2(4), 1-9.
7. Dahl, R., 1956, A Preface to Democratic Theory, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press (third edition in 2006).
8. Dahl, R., 1989, Democracy and Its Critics, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
9. Davidson, R. and J. G. MacKinnon, 2006, "Bootstrap Methods in Econometrics", in K. Patterson and T. C. Mills (eds.), Palgrave Handbook of
Econometrics: Vol. 1 Econometric Theory, Palgrave Macmillan Ltd,
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG61 6XS, UK.
10. Goeree, J., and J. Zhang, 2017, "One Person, One Bid", Games and Economic Behavior , 101, 151-171.
11. Guinier, L., 1994, The Tyranny of the Majority, Free Press: New York.
12. Hortala-Vallve, R., 2012, “Qualitative Voting”, Journal of Theoretical Politics, 24(4), 526-554.

19

13. Huﬀ C and D. Tingley, 2015, “Who are these people?” Evaluating the
demographic characteristics and political preferences of MTurk survey respondents”, Research & Politics, 2(3): 1—12.
14. Issacharoﬀ, S., P. Karlan and R. H. Pildes, 2002, The Law of Democracy:
Legal Structure and the Political Process, Foundation Press: New York,
2nd edition.
15. Lalley, S. and G. Weyl, 2018a, "Nash Equilibria for Quadratic Voting",
unpublished, Un. of Chicago.
16. Lalley, S. and G. Weyl, 2018b, "Quadractic Voting. How Mechanism
Design Can Radicalize Democracy", American Economic Review, P&P,
108, 33-37.
17. Matsusaka, J. G., 2004, For The Many or The Few: The Initiative Process,
Public Policy, and American Democracy, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
18. Posner, E. and G. Weyl, 2015, "Voting Squared: Quadratic Voting in
Democratic Politics", Vanderbilt Law Review, 68(2), 441—499.
19. Quarfoot, D., D. Kohorn, K. Slavin, R. Sutherland, D Goldstein and E.
Konar, 2017, "Quadratic Voting in the Wild: Real People, Real Votes",
Public Choice, 172(1), 283-303.

20

5
5.1
5.1.1

Online Appendix
Theory
Storable Votes

We summarize here the main results of Casella and Gelman (2008) (CG), to
which we refer the reader for details. As mentioned in the text, if voters are
endowed with multiple votes to distribute over multiple proposals, in a large electorate with independent values, the optimal strategy is to cumulate all votes on
a single proposal (section 7.11 in CG). Thus a simple design becomes desirable.
Each voter is asked to cast one vote on each proposition, and in addition is
given one extra bonus vote. It is natural to think of the bonus vote as equivalent to a regular vote—and that is indeed the parametrization we use in the
experiment—but we can suppose, more generally, that the bonus vote is worth 
regular votes, with   0 and either an integer or the inverse of an integer. The
optimal value of  is part of the design of the mechanism.
A voter’s strategy is a mapping from the voter’s set of valuations to the vote
or votes cast on each proposition. The theoretical analysis in CG assumes that
valuations are independent across voters and propositions and restricts attention
to symmetric Bayesian equilibria in undominated strategies where, conditional
on their set of valuations, all voters vote sincerely. The only decision is the
proposition on which to cast the bonus vote.
SV behaves well, in the precise sense that ex ante expected utility improves
over majority voting under multiple scenarios, as summarized by diﬀerent assumptions on the marginal distributions of values over each proposition. CG
show that the result holds in the following environments. (1) If  (v) =  (v)
for all , where  (v) is a distribution with known median (the median can be
0, if the distribution is symmetric, or diﬀer from 0, if the distribution is asymmetric). (2) If 00 (v) 6= 0 (v) for  00 6= 0 , but  (v) is symmetric around a
known median of value 0 for all  ∈ {1  }. (3) If  (v) = (v) for all ,
where (v) is symmetric around a random median with expected value at 0.
With independent voters and large  , assumptions about the shape of the
distributions  (v) have immediate implications about the results of the referenda. In particular, assuming specific medians for the distributions  (v)
amounts to assuming that a random voter’s probability of approval of each
proposition is eﬀectively known ex ante. It is then possible to predict the majority voting outcome with accuracy that converges to 1 as  becomes large.

21

The literature has remarked that allowing for a random median, as in environment (3) above, is a better assumption.24 We report here in more detail the
results that refer to that case.
Suppose that ex ante each voter  has a probability   of being in favor of
proposal  (v  0), and 1 −   of being against (v  0). The probability  
is distributed according to some distribution  defined over the support [0 1]
and symmetric around 12: the probability of approval is uncertain and there
is no expected bias in favor or against the proposition. Each realized   is an
independent draw from  .
Recall that |v | ≡  is ’s intensity over proposal . To rule out systematic expected biases in intensities, both within and across proposals, assume
that, regardless of the direction of preferences, the distribution of intensities is
described by  (), defined over support [0 1], with  () = () for all .
We want to evaluate the welfare impact of the bonus vote, relative to a
scenario with majority voting. We construct the measure:
≡

  − 
 − 

(1)

where  is a voter’s ex ante expected utility under majority voting, 
is a floor, given by expected utility under random decision making (when any
proposal passes with probability 1/2), and   is ex ante expected utility
under SV.25
CG show that in equilibrium voters cast their bonus vote in the proposition
to which they attach the highest intensity. It is then possible to derive:
=

() + ()
()( + )

(2)

2 4 See for example Good and Mayer (1975), Margolis (1977) and Chamberlain and Rothschild
(1981). Gelman et al. (2002) discuss the implications of a number of alternative models.
2 5 If we denote by  the expected intensity over any proposal, and by 
() the expected
th order statistic among each individual’s  intensities, we have:



=

2



=



 

=

()  +

−1


() 

=1

where  is the ex ante probability of a desired outcome in any referendum under majority
voting, and  and  are the corresponding probabilities under SV when casting and when
not casting the bonus vote. The challenge is characterizing these probabilities in the assumed
stochastic environment.

22

It follows that   1 for all   0, for all distributions  () and (), and
for all   1.
By using the bonus vote to give weight to the intensity of their preferences,
voters’ actions work towards increasing the probability of achieving their preferred outcome in the proposition they consider their highest priority, at the
cost of some reduced influence over the resolution of the other proposals. The
result is an increase in expected welfare.
The conclusion, with some minor qualifications, holds in the diﬀerent environments listed earlier.
5.1.2

Quadratic Voting

As described in the text, QV is an auction-type mechanism designed for a large
population faced with a single binary proposal (Goeree and Zhang, 2017, Lalley
and Weyl, 2018a). Each voter is endowed with a numeraire and bids for the
direction in which the proposal is decided. The winning side is the one with
the larger total bid. The important innovation is that each voter’s bid is proportional to the square root of the numeraire the voter commits. Goeree and
Zhang, and Lalley and Weyl show that if values are independent across voters
and the distribution  is common knowledge, the equilibrium strategy for almost all voters is to bid an amount proportional to one’s valuation. It then
follows that the decision must be eﬃcient in utilitarian terms: it mirrors the
preferences of the side with higher total valuation.26
The model relies on the use of a numeraire, valuable in the private market,
and the absence of credit constraints. However, Posner and Weyl (2015) first
suggested that the numeraire could be substituted by an "artificial currency"
whose value derives from being the bidding currency over multiple binary proposals. In this formulation, QV becomes equivalent to SV, but with a square
root rule translating the artificial currency budget into bids (or votes) over each
proposal. The theoretical extension to this case has not been worked out and
is likely to be complex. Still, under some approximation its intuition is simply
captured by the following model, suggested to us by Glen Weyl.
There are   1 independent binary proposals; each voter is endowed with
a budget of "voices"  , for simplicity set equal to 1 and fully divisible. Voices
2 6 If  is symmetric, bidding in proportion to one’s values is the unique equilibrium strategy
for all voters. If  is not symmetric, the characterization of the equilibrium is more delicate,
and bids in the tails of distribution need not be proportional to values. Nevertheless the
eﬃciency results continues to hold (Lalley and Weyl, 2018a).

23

are allocated across proposals and are transformed into a number of votes on
each proposal equal to the square root of the dedicated voices. Note that votes
too are fully divisible. If  denotes the votes cast on proposal  by voter , and
P
P
√
2
 the corresponding voices, then  =  , or 
=1 ( ) =
=1  = 1.
Each voter  faces the constrained maximization problem:
 { } 2


X

 ( ) subject to

=1


X
( )2 = 1

=1

where 2 is a normalizing constant and  ( ) is the probability that proposal 
is decided as  prefers when casting  votes. Voters adopt weakly undominated
strategies and thus vote sincerely over each proposal.
Suppose now that the marginal impact of any additional vote is constant for
any number of votes cast:
 ( )
≡ 
(3)

Then for each proposal , the first order condition yields:
 =

 


where  is the Lagrange multiplier linked to the budget constraint. Substituting
P
the budget constraint =1 ( )2 = 1, we obtain:

=


and thus:

s

P

1

=1 ( )

 = qP


1

2



(4)

2
=1 ( )

Equation 4 says that the optimal number of votes cast on each proposal
equals the voter’s value, normalized by the Euclidean norm of the voter’s values
across all proposals. If such norms are similar across voters—for example because
the number of issues is very large—or if they are used to normalize cardinal
values in the welfare criterion, then utilitarian eﬃciency follows immediately by
equation 4: because the number of votes cast in each proposal is proportional
to the voter’s value (or equal to the voter’s normalized value), each proposal is
won by the side with larger total values.
The model relies on two approximations. First, voices and votes are assumed

24

to be fully divisible. Theoretically, the assumption simplifies the analysis by
avoiding the complications caused by discrete vote distributions. In practice,
it suggests giving voters a large number of voices. Experiments, on the other
hand, routinely suggest that subjects have diﬃculties making decisions when the
set of options is large. In our experimental implementation, we take a diﬀerent
route and simplify the subjects’ problem by limiting the number of options.
The second approximation is more substantive and is the assumption of
constant marginal impact of additional votes, the simplification embodied in
equation 3 above. Theoretically the simplification is strong and unlikely to
hold in general. The practical question is how large the deviation is and how
is it reflected in voters’ actual choices. As long as voters believe that votes
have constant marginal impact, the characterization of their behavior follows
correctly.

5.2
5.2.1

Experimental data
Cleaning procedures

In designing the survey, we added an attention check to both samples. The
check took the form of a fictitious fifth proposition, titled the "Eﬀective Workers
Initiative", whose accompanying text asked the reader not to hit any of the
three "For", "Against" and "Abstain" buttons and continue directly to the
next screen. The order of this fifth "initiative" was random.
Before analyzing the data, we excluded all subjects who either did not conclude the survey or failed the attention check. In addition, we excluded subjects
in the QV sample who chose the red vote and cast it on a proposition on which
they abstained—these subjects eﬀectively abstained on all propositions under the
QV scheme, and left us no alternative. We also excluded all subjects in the SV
sample who cast the bonus vote on a proposition on which they abstained—a
behavior that may correspond to rejecting the use of the bonus vote, but seems
more likely to denote confusion or lack of interest, as in the QV sample. (Results
are eﬀectively unchanged if we maintain these subjects in the sample). These
exclusions reduced the two samples to 306 (from 324) subjects for SV, and 313
(from 323) for QV.
In both samples, we set to zero the number of points assigned by a subject
to a proposition on which the subject abstained (again note that we have no
alternative since we do not know the direction of the subject’s preferences on
such a proposition). Finally, we set to +1 (or -1) the points attached to a
25

proposal on which a subject voted in favor (or against) but to which the subject
assigned zero points. Out of 100 total points, this very minor adjustment allows
us to give at least minimal weight to the direction of preferences expressed by
the subject.
5.2.2

Subjects’ preferences

Subjects’ preferences over each proposition are summarized in histograms reporting the number of respondents assigning to a proposition diﬀerent numbers
of points. Points are coded as negative when the subject voted against the proposal, and as positive when the subject voted in favor, with bins of size 10 (0,
colored light blue in the figures, corresponds to abstentions). Figure 5 below
reports the histograms relative to the IM proposition for the two samples. It
says, for example, that in the SV sample 38 respondents assigned it between 1
and 10 points and voted against it, while 27 assigned to the proposition equally
low points but voted in favor (the corresponding numbers for QV are 29 and
20). The figure also reports, for each sample, the total number of subjects for
and against, the abstentions, and the total number of points, for and against
(bold indicates the larger number).
Figures 6, 7, and 8 report the histograms for the other propositions.

Subjects: +125 / ‐129 / abs. 52
Points: +4340 / ‐3468

Subjects: +130 / ‐136 / abs. 47
Points: +4137 / ‐4269

Figure 5: Distribution of preferences: the IM proposition.

26

Subjects: +146 / ‐134 / abs. 26
Points: +4350 / ‐2836

Subjects: +159 / ‐139 / abs. 15
Points: +4345 / ‐2776

Figure 6: Distribution of preferences: the BE proposition.

Subjects: +139 / ‐114 / abs. 53
Points: +3779 / ‐2694

Subjects: +162 / ‐102 / abs. 49
Points: +4464 / ‐2008

Figure 7: Distribution of preferences: the PB proposition.

27

Subjects: +126 / ‐155 / abs. 25
Points: +3129 / ‐4061

Subjects: +112 / ‐176 / abs. 25
Points: +2969 / ‐4391

Figure 8: Distribution of preferences: the TT proposition.
5.2.3

The voting choices

SV The optimal selection of the proposition on which to cast one’s bonus vote
is not trivial. If there are asymmetries among the propositions, it should reflect
not only relative valuations, but also pivotality (all else equal, higher if the
proposition is expected to be close and lower if it is salient). If voters are not
well-informed, however, or unable or unwilling to compute equilibria, a plausible
rule-of-thumb is to treat all propositions equally and cast the bonus vote on the
proposal on which one’s preferences are most intense. The approximation is
analogous to the posited behavior under QV. Figure 9 shows, for each of the
four propositions, a measure of the relative intensity of preferences for all voters
who cast their bonus vote on that proposition (with points slightly jittered for
visibility). The vertical axis is the number of points assigned to the proposition;
the horizontal axis is the maximum number of points assigned to any other.27
2 7 A few subjects cast the bonus vote on a proposition to which they had not assigned any
points. As described earlier, if they nevertheless voted on that proposition they are recoded
as assigning +/- 1 point, depending on the direction of preferences.

28

SV – IM (N=97)

SV – BE (N=76)

SV – TT (N=72)

SV – PB (N=61)

Figure 9: The Bonus Vote Decision.
If all voters had cast their bonus vote on the proposition to which they
assigned the highest number of points, all dots in each panel would be above
the 45 degree line. In total, three fourths of all subjects (74%) did so.
The salience of the IM proposition is supported by the high number of bonus
votes (97, vs. 76 for BE, 61 for PB and 72 for TT) . As noted in the text,
when accounting for bonus votes the margin of victory for opponents of the
proposition increases, although IM supporters report higher average and total
intensity. The result reflects two sources of asymmetry. Of the 23 subjects who
identify the IM proposition as their first priority and yet do not target it with
their bonus vote, more than twice (16) are supporters rather than opponents
(7); of the 20 subjects who cast their bonus vote on IM and yet do not identify
it as their priority, more than twice (14) are opponents rather than supporters
(6). However these diﬀerences are numerically very small and in neither case
are the diﬀerences in proportions statistically significant.

29

QV: fraction of vote classes
0.5
0.4
0.4

0.35 0.35
0.28

0.3
0.24

0.2

0.16
0.13

0.09

0.1
0
R

Y

G

B

Figure 10: QV sample. Frequency of vote classes. The solid columns correspond to the observed frequencies in the MTurk sample. The striped columns
correspond to optimal choices, given the observed distributions of preferences,
if voters perceive the marginal pivotal probability to be constant (as under
rule-of-thumb QV-C, described below).
QV Under QV, voters need to make two choices: the class of votes, and, given
the class, the propositions on which the votes are cast. Figure 10 reports the
frequencies with which subjects chose the diﬀerent classes.
As the figure shows, even with the convex penalty from cumulating voting
power, a full 40 percent of subjects chose the red vote, and thus cast their vote on
a single proposition; less than 10 percent cast votes on all four propositions. As
described in Table 2 below, we calculated the shares of the diﬀerent vote classes
subjects would have chosen had they followed the theoretical model sketched
in Section 5.1.2. The corresponding values, with lower vote cumulation, are in
the shaded columns. The theory suggests a lower frequency of red votes, and a
higher frequency of green and blue votes.
Across propositions, IM received the highest total number of votes (97 vs.
76 for BE, 61 for PB and 72 for TT), as well as the highest number of red votes
(45 vs. 19 for BE, 26 for PB and 34 for TT). confirming its salience.

5.3
5.3.1

Bootstrap Simulations
QV: rules C and D

Under rule C, voters act optimally under the belief that the marginal impact of
their votes is constant. As shown in section 5.1.2, assuming constant marginal

30

pivot probabilities, the optimal number of votes under QV is proportional to
P
2
the voter’s value, or  =   . The budget constraint 
=1 ( ) = 4 then
implies  = 2  , where   is the Euclidean norm of the voters’ values, or   =
q
P
2
=1 ( ) . Under QV, rule C attributes to each subject a vote class by selecting the vector, out of {2 0 0 0}, {15 15 0 0}, {12 12 12 0}, {1 1 1 1 }
ª
©
that minimizes the distance from 2(4)    2(3)    2(2)    2(1)   .28
Given a vote class, votes should be assigned monotonically.
We reestimated the QV statistical model reported in Table 1 after having
imposed the normative choice on the MTurk sample. As shown in Table 2 below,
estimated thresholds  and  are significantly higher than in Table 1, supporting
the hypothesis that MTurk respondents concentrated votes excessively.
95% CI







2.35

[2.33, 2.56]

1.95

[1.85, 2.04]

1.63

[1.42, 1.79]

0.05

[0.03, 0.08]

0.0

[0.0, 0.0]

Table 2. Reestimating the QV statistical model imposing rule C. MLE estimates. The confidence intervals are obtained by bootstrapping and reflect the
distribution of the estimated parameters in 10,000 simulations.
Rule D leaves a larger role to randomness. With QV, it means choosing the
vote class according to rule C with probability 1/2, and choosing any of the
four classes with probability 1/8 each. Given a vote class, the voter casts the
available votes on the propositions with highest values with probability 1/2, and
randomly, treating all propositions equally, otherwise.
5.3.2

Rule E

To evaluate the welfare costs of misusing the voting systems, we have simulated,
for both SV and QV, a fifth rule, E, that captures random behavior. Following
rule E, voters vote in the direction of their preferences but choose randomly
2 8 Requiring subjects to indicate intensity by allocating 100 points among the four initiatives implies that values are normalized linearly. It is easy to verify however that
the linear


normalization does not aﬀect the transformation described here: if 
 =  
=1  ,




2
 )2 =  
then 
 
=1 (
=1 ( ) 

31

the proposition on which to cast the bonus vote under SV, and both the vote
class and the propositions under QV. As intuition suggests, over the 10,000
simulations, average welfare under both SV and QV replicates average welfare
under majority voting. (The results are available upon request.)
5.3.3

Results: Diﬀerences across propositions

Because both SV and QV constrain the use of the votes across propositions,
each bootstrapped sample corresponds to an outcome for all four propositions.
The discussion in the text focuses on the frequency of samples in which at least
one minority victory is observed, without distinguishing among propositions.
Yet, large diﬀerences exist. As the preference histograms in Figures 5, 6, 7, and
8 show, the potential for minority victories is largest in IM and BE, while SV
and QV have a much smaller eﬀect on the other two propositions. Figures 11-14
below report the results.
SV. Frequency of minority victories by initiative
No recalibration
Rule A
0.3

Rule B
0.3

non efficient
efficient

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0
IM

BE

PB

TT

IM

Rule C

BE

PB

TT

PB

TT

Rule D

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0
IM

BE

PB

TT

IM

BE

Figure 11: Minority victories by initiative. SV simulations.The eﬃcient frequency of minority victories by initiative is: 0.52 (IM), 0.24 (BE), 0.05 (PB),
and 0.04 (TT).

32

QV. Frequency of minority victories by initiative
No recalibration
Rule B

Rule A
0.3

0.3
non efficient
0.2

0.2

efficient

0.1

0.1

0

0
IM

BE

PB

IM

TT

BE

PB

TT

Rule D

Rule C
0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0
IM

BE

PB

IM

TT

BE

PB

TT

Figure 12: Minority victories by initiative. QV simulations: bootstrapping the
original QV sample. The eﬃcient frequency of minority victories by initiative
is: 0.18 (IM), 0.12 (BE), 0 (PB), and 0.002 (TT).

SV. Frequency of minority victories by initiative
Simulations calibrated on the population IM preferences
Rule A

Rule B

0.3

0.3
non efficient

0.2

0.2

efficient

0.1

0.1

0

0
IM

BE

PB

TT

IM

BE

PB

TT

Rule D

Rule C
0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0
IM

BE

PB

IM

TT

BE

PB

TT

Figure 13: Minority victories by initiative. SV simulations calibrated on the population IM preferences.The eﬃcient frequency of minority victories by initiative
is: 0.37 (IM), 0.16 (BE), 0.09 (PB), and 0.03 (TT).

33

QV. Frequency of minority victories by initiative
Simulations calibrated on the population IM preferences
Rule A

Rule B

0.3

0.3
non efficient

0.2

0.2

efficient

0.1

0.1

0

0
IM

BE

PB

IM

TT

BE

PB

TT

Rule D

Rule C
0.3

0.3
0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0
IM

BE

PB

0

TT

IM

BE

PB

TT

Figure 14: Minority victories by initiative. QV simulations calibrated on the
population IM preferences. The eﬃcient frequency of minority victories by initiative is: 0.34 (IM), 0.14 (BE), 0 (PB), and 0.002 (TT).

5.4

QV cum regular votes

We report here the simulations results when we add to QV four regular votes,
to be cast one on each proposition. Because the MTurk survey described QV
as consisting exclusively of the classes of votes chosen by the respondents, applying the subjects’ responses to a diﬀerent environment is not fully legitimate.
We proceed with this caveat in mind, but noting again that if marginal pivot
probability is perceived to be constant, behavior should not change. We suppose that each subject casts the regular votes according to the voter’s declared
preferences in the first part of the survey, as we do for SV. We call the voting
system QVV—QV with Vote.
In both sets of simulations, whether bootstrapping the original raw data
or recalibrating the samples to reflect the population preferences over the IM
proposition, QVV behaves as predicted: relative to QV, the frequency of minority victories declines; so does the frequency of welfare losses, and the share
of appropriated surplus barely changes.
In the QV simulations based on the original samples, without recalibration,
majority voting appropriates a full 95% of the available surplus. As noted in
the text, although on average QV improves over majority under each of the four
rules-of-thumb, the small margin for improvement translates into a relatively
34

high frequency of ineﬃcient minority victories. QVV addresses this problem
eﬀectively: averaging over all rules, the frequency of minority victories declines
from 30 to 19%, with a corresponding decline (from 31 to 18%) in the frequency
of welfare losses, in the simulations with at least one minority victory. (All
diﬀerences in frequencies, for any rule, are significant at the 1 percent level).
The impact on the average realized share of surplus is positive, if very small
and not statistically significant (averaging over all simulations and rules, an
improvement of one percentage point, barely noticeable in Figure 15).
Simulations based on the original samples (no recalibration)
A: Frequency of at least one
minority victory
0.5
0.4

C: Frequency of welfare losses

B: Realized share of surplus

(at least one minority victory)

1.00

0.5
0.4

0.90

0.3

0.3
0.80

0.2

0.2
0.70

0.1
0
A

B

C

D

QV
SV
maj SV

0.1

QVV
maj QV QVV

0

0.60
A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

Figure 15: QV, SV, and QVV. Simulations based on the original QV sample.
Figure 16 depicts the results for the recalibrated simulations. Relative to
QV, QVV forfeits minority victories with small welfare changes, whether in
terms of gains or losses. On the whole, it is quite comparable to SV—but for
SV’s weak performance under rule A.

35

Simulations calibrated on population IM preferences
A: Frequency of at least one
minority victory

B: Realized share of surplus

C: Frequency of welfare losses
(at least one minority victory)

1

0.5

0.5
0.9

0.4

0.4
0.8

0.3

0.7

0.2
0.1

0.6

0

0.5
A

B

C

QV

maj QV/QVV

SV

maj SV

0.3
0.2
0.1

QVV

0
A

D

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

D: Distribution of percentage welfare gains over majority (at least one minority victory)
Rule B

Rule A

600

Rule C

Rule D

500
400
QV

300

SV
200

QVV

100
0
‐10 ‐7 ‐4 ‐1

2

5

8 11 14 17 20‐10 ‐7 ‐4 ‐1 2

5

8 11 14 17 20 ‐10 ‐7 ‐4 ‐1 2

5

8 11 14 17 20 ‐10 ‐7 ‐4 ‐1 2 5 8 11 14 17 20

Figure 16: QV, SV and QVV. Simulations calibrated on the population IM
preferences.

5.5

Inequality

Majority voting becomes problematic when the composition of majority and
minority does not change across decisions. An important question is whether
voting systems that make minority victories possible also reduce the inequality
in voters’ probability of achieving their preferred outcomes. In our data, the
frequency with which voters’ preferences are satisfied is reflected in their ex
post utility: by construction, a voter who loses all propositions has an ex post
utility of 0; and one who wins them all of 100. Thus, under majority voting
(and supposing disagreement), correlation in individual voters’ directions of
preferences across proposals would result into high inequality in ex post utility,
reflecting the disenfranchisement of voters who find themselves on the minority
side disproportionally often.
To evaluate SV and QV’s impact on inequality, we calculate the Gini coefficient of the realized utility distribution for each of our simulations, and under
each of the four rules-of-thumb, under the relevant voting system and simple
majority. Focusing on simulations with at least one minority victory and averaging across the four rules, the frequency of Gini declines, relative to majority

36

voting, is 73% for SV and 69% for QV when bootstrapping the original samples,
and 65% for SV and 84% for QV in the simulations recalibrated on the population IM preferences. The average Gini decline is 10% for SV and 8% for QV
when the simulations are not recalibrated, and 6% and 12% respectively, when
they are. Figures 17 and 18 report the results.
Simulations bootstrapping the original samples
(at least one minority victory)
B: Average Gini change re majority (%)

A: Frequency of Gini declines
1

SV

0.00

QV

A

0.9

B

C

D

‐0.05

0.8
‐0.10

0.7
0.6

‐0.15

0.5
‐0.20

0.4
A

B

C

D

Figure 17: Gini coeﬃcients. Simulations based on the original samples.

Simulations calibrated on the population IM preferences
(at least one minority victory)
B: Average Gini change re majority (%)

A: Frequency of Gini declines
1

SV

0.9

QV

0.05
0.00
A

0.8

B

C

D

‐0.05

0.7
‐0.10
0.6
‐0.15

0.5
0.4

‐0.20
A

B

C

D

Figure 18: Gini coeﬃcients. Simulations recalibrated on the population IM preferences.
The average Gini coeﬃcients are reported in Tables 3 and 4. (The results
for QVV, not reproduced here, are eﬀectively identical to QV).

37

SV

QV
95% CI







0.37

[0.30, 0.43]

0.35

[0.28, 0.40]

0.32

[0.28, 0.40]

0.315

[0.28, 0.39]

0.33

[0.28, 0.40]

95% CI







0.325

[0.27, 0.37]

0.29

[0.26, 0.345]

0.30

[0.26, 0.35]

0.30

[0.26, 0.35]

0.30

[0.26, 0.35]

Table 3. Gini coeﬃcient: Simulations based on the original samples (at least
one minority victory). The confidence intervals are obtained by bootstrapping.
SV

QV
95% CI







0.36

[0.30, 0.43]

0.36

[0.29, 0.40]

0.33

[0.28, 0.39]

0.33

[0.28, 0.39]

0.34

[0.28, 0.40]

95% CI







0.33

[0.28, 0.37]

0.28

[0.26, 0.34]

0.29

[0.26, 0.35]

0.28

[0.26, 0.34]

0.30

[0.26, 0.35]

Table 4. Gini coeﬃcient: Simulations recalibrated on the population IM
preferences (at least one minority victory). The confidence intervals are obtained
by bootstrapping.
The summary message is that both SV and QV have a positive impact on
ex post inequality. With the exception of SV-A, the probability of a decline
in Gini is statistically significant at any level, for either system and with any
rule in both sets of simulations. The magnitude of the eﬀect, however, is not
statistically significant. Both SV and QV can be compared to majority, but
comparing inequality across the two voting system is more problematic because
the two samples diﬀer. All Gini indices are higher in the SV sample, whether
under SV or majority, reflecting the smaller margins of victory in that sample.

38

References for the appendix
1. Casella, A. and A. Gelman, 2008, "A Simple Scheme to Improve the Eﬃciency of Referenda", Journal of Public Economics, 92, 2240-2261.
2. Chamberlain, Gary and Michael Rothschild, 1981, "A Note on the Probability of Casting a Decisive Vote", Journal of Economic Theory, 25, 152162.
3. Gelman, Andrew, Jonathan N. Katz and Francis Tuerlinckx, 2002, "The
Mathematics and Statistics of Voting Power", Statistical Science, 17, 420435.
4. Goeree, J., and J. Zhang, 2017, "One Person, One Bid", Games and Economic Behavior , 101, 151-171.
5. Good I.J. and Lawrence S. Mayer, 1975, "Estimating the Eﬃcacy of a
Vote", Behavioral Science, 20, 25-33.
6. Lalley, S. and G. Weyl, 2018, "Nash Equilibria for Quadratic Voting",
unpublished, Un. of Chicago.
7. Margolis, Howard, 1977, "Probability of a Tie Election", Public Choice,
31, 135-138.
8. Posner, E. and G. Weyl, 2015, "Voting Squared: Quadratic Voting in
Democratic Politics", Vanderbilt Law Review, 68(2), 441—499.

39

