                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           PARENTAL BELIEFS ABOUT RETURNS TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF
                     INVESTMENTS IN SCHOOL CHILDREN

                                       Orazio Attanasio
                                       Teodora Boneva
                                       Christopher Rauh

                                      Working Paper 25513
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25513


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019




This project has been funded by the Nuffield Foundation (EDU/42718) and it has been approved
by the UCL Research Ethics Committee (Project ID number: 9287/001). We are grateful to
Akash Raja and Jack Light for excellent research assistance. We thank Flavio Cunha, Armin Falk
and Costas Meghir as well as seminar participants at the University College Dublin for providing
us with valuable comments. Boneva acknowledges financial support from the British Academy
and the Jacobs Foundation. While this project was funded by the Nuffield Foundation the views
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Orazio Attanasio, Teodora Boneva, and Christopher Rauh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Parental Beliefs about Returns to Different Types of Investments in School Children
Orazio Attanasio, Teodora Boneva, and Christopher Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 25513
January 2019
JEL No. I24,I26,J13,J24,J62

                                           ABSTRACT

Parental investments as well as school quality are important determinants of children’s later-life
outcomes. In this paper, we shed light on what determines parental investments and study how
parents perceive the returns to parental time investments, material investments and school quality,
as well as the complementarity/substitutability between the different inputs. Using a
representative sample of 1,962 parents in England, we document that parents perceive the returns
to 3 hours of weekly parental time investments or £30 of weekly material investments to matter
more than moving a child to a better school. Parents perceive the returns to time and material
investments to be diminishing and perceive material investments as more productive if children
attend higher quality schools. Perceived returns do not differ with the child’s initial human capital
or gender and, surprisingly, we find no differences in perceived returns by the parents’
socioeconomic background. Consistent with parental beliefs playing an important role in parental
investment decisions, perceived returns are found to be highly correlated with actual investment
decisions.

Orazio Attanasio                                  Christopher Rauh
Department of Economics University                Département de sciences économiques
College London                                    Université de Montréal
Gower Street                                      C.P.6128, succ. Centre-Ville
London WC1E 6BT                                   Montréal, QC
United Kingdom                                    Canada H3C 3J7
and NBER                                          christopher.raphael.rauh@umontreal.ca
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk

Teodora Boneva
University of Oxford
10 Manor Road
OX1 3UQ Oxford
United Kingdom
teodora.boneva@economics.ox.ac.uk
1     Introduction

There are many ways in which parents can provide a stimulating educational environment for their

children. Parents can devote attention to their children by spending time with them. They can also

invest money by, for instance, purchasing educational games/toys or hiring a private tutor. Moreover,

parents can choose to send their children to private schools or can move to a better neighborhood where

schools are of higher quality. While it has been well documented that these parental investments are

highly predictive of important life outcomes such as educational attainment, earnings and health, it

has also been established that the time and financial resources, which parents allocate towards their

children, varies considerably across different families (e.g. Cooksey and Fondell 1996; Guryan, Hurst

and Kearney 2008; Lareau 2011; Attanasio et al. 2013; Carneiro, Meghir and Parey 2013; Putnam

2015). This raises the question of what drives those differences in parental investment decisions.

    To understand why some parents invest more into their children than others, it is imperative to

understand how parents think about the returns to investments. While differences in available resources

might explain some of the variation in investments, parental beliefs about the returns to investments

are likely to play a crucial role in parents’ educational investment decisions. In order to get to the

source of differential investments, it is therefore essential to shed more light on how parents differ in

their beliefs about the returns to different types of investments and how their beliefs are related to

actual investment choices. While estimating the actual returns to different investments is important

for understanding which parental investments matter, shedding more light on how parents perceive the

returns to investments is crucial for our understanding of how parental investments respond to policy

changes. With this aim in mind, we collect and describe a novel representative dataset on parental

beliefs about the productivity and usefulness of their investments.

    We make several contributions to the literature. First, we document how parents perceive the

returns to different types of educational investments made in school children (i.e. time investments,

material investments and school quality) using a large nationally representative sample of parents with

school-age children. Second, given that the returns to different activities might not be independent, we

investigate how parents perceive the complementarity/substitutability between the different types of

investments. In analyzing our data, we pay particular attention to studying the extent to which beliefs

about returns are heterogeneous in different dimensions. Finally, we investigate whether differences in

perceived returns are predictive of actual investment decisions made by parents.

    Observed educational choices are consistent with many different alternative specifications of preferences


                                                    2
and beliefs, which is why it is not possible to investigate the role of beliefs in educational investment

decisions using choice data alone (Manski 2004). For this reason, we conduct a novel representative

survey and elicit parental beliefs directly using hypothetical investment scenarios. The approach we

use is related to the elicitation of information on subjective expectations about certain events. When

applied to future earnings this approach was pioneered by Dominitz and Manski (1996) and it has been

successfully used in a growing number of studies (e.g. Jensen 2010; Attanasio and Kaufmann 2014;

Kaufmann 2014).1 In a recent study, Cunha, Elo and Culhane (2013) make an important contribution

to the literature by developing a methodology for eliciting parental beliefs about the returns to parental

investments using hypothetical scenarios. In a sample of parents with low socioeconomic status, they

document beliefs about the returns to parental investments made in children aged 0-2. In this paper, we

build on Cunha, Elo and Culhane (2013) and investigate how parents perceive the returns to different

types of parental investments made in school children. By constructing hypothetical scenarios we can

vary one educational input at a time while keeping other factors constant, which allows us to elicit

individual perceived returns to different types of investments as well as their interactions.

   To elicit parental beliefs about the properties of the process of skill formation and to collect

information on parents’ actual investment decisions, we administer a survey to a representative sample

of 1,962 parents living in England. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to elicit parental

beliefs about the returns to parental investments in a nationally representative sample. To be eligible

to participate in the study, parents had to have at least one child aged 5-16 years living with them in

their home. The sample was selected to be representative of the English population of interest in terms

of region, gender and education level of the responding parent, as well as the age and gender of the

respondent’s child. To elicit parental beliefs about the productivity of different types of investments

made in school children, we present all parents with hypothetical investment scenarios which vary

along three dimensions: (i) the level of parental time investments, (ii) the level of parental material

investments, and (iii) the quality of the school the child currently attends. For each scenario, parents

are asked to state what the future earnings of the child will be at age 30. This research design allows

us to investigate how parents perceive the returns to these three different inputs and it allows us to

examine whether parents perceive the different inputs as substitutes or complements. Mapping the

scenarios considered into expected returns hence allows us to characterize parental perceptions of the

process of skill formation and of the role played by different inputs. By asking about hypothetical
  1 See   Manski (2004) for a review and discussion of different survey elicitation approaches.




                                                             3
families rather than the respondents’ own family we can vary inputs across scenarios and abstract

from individual (unobserved) differences across respondents. In addition, we also investigate whether

perceived returns are diminishing, and whether the perceived returns differ with the characteristics of

the child. For this purpose, we randomize parents into different groups that vary along four different

dimensions: (i) the initial level of time and money invested, (ii) the initial skill level of the child in the

scenario, (iii) the gender of the child, and (iv) the age at which the educational investments are made.

   Some clear results emerge from our study. While parents think that school quality matters, they

also think that parental home inputs play a very important role. In fact, they believe that an additional

3 hours per week in terms of time investments or an additional £30 per week in terms of material

investments matter more than moving a child from a school which ‘Requires Improvement’ to a school

that is ‘Outstanding’. The average perceived return to this change in school quality is 10% in terms of

earnings at age 30, while the average perceived return to 3 additional hours of weekly time investments

is 21%, and the average perceived return to £30 additional weekly material investments is 15%. All

these perceived average returns are significantly different from each other. Moreover, we find that there

is a perceived complementarity between home and school inputs, i.e. parents perceive the returns to

material resources at home to be higher if the children also attend better schools. We further document

that parents perceive the productivity of time and material inputs to be diminishing, i.e. the returns

per hour/£ invested decrease with an additional hour/£ invested. We find no significant differences

in perceived returns to school, time or material investments by the initial skill level or the gender of

the child in the scenario. This suggests that parents believe that children of low and high ability, as

well as boys and girls respond similarly to each type of investment. We further document that parents

believe that the returns to school quality are higher for older children.

   Turning to the question how perceived returns vary across respondents, we document a substantial

amount of heterogeneity in perceived returns. We find that perceived returns to the different types

of investments correlate strongly. Those parents who perceive the returns to school quality to be

high are also more likely to perceive high returns to parental time and material investments. Perhaps

surprisingly, we do not find detectable systematic differences in perceived returns by socioeconomic

background or income variables in this nationally representative sample of parents. This evidence

contrasts with some of the discussions in the literature, for instance with the hypotheses proposed by

Lareau (2011) or with the findings in Boneva and Rauh (2018).

   Importantly, we find that perceived returns are correlated with actual reported investment decisions.



                                                      4
Parents who perceive the returns to time investments to be higher spend more time interacting with

their children, parents who perceive the returns to material investments to be higher spend more

money on learning resources, and parents who perceive the returns to school quality to be higher

spend significantly more money on school fees. While we do not provide direct evidence for a causal

link between beliefs and investments, our descriptive results are consistent with parental beliefs playing

an important role in parental investment decisions.

   Given that parental beliefs to the different types of investments correlate strongly, a natural question

which arises is why some parents perceive all types of investments as very important while other parents

do not. While we are not be able to provide an ultimate answer to the question of how beliefs about

returns are formed, we note that one underlying reason for why some parents may perceive all returns

as higher is that those parents believe that children’s skills are more malleable in general and more

responsive to any type of input. Using a supplementary parental mindset questionnaire, which builds

on the work by Dweck (2006), we find evidence that is consistent with this interpretation. These

results are important as previous studies have shown that individual investments are responsive to

interventions which alter individual beliefs regarding the malleability of skills (see, e.g., Alan, Boneva

and Ertac 2015).

   Our study relates to several different strands of the literature. First, it relates to the literature on

investments made by parents in their children which was pioneered by Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986).

While traditionally this literature has assumed that parents are endowed with perfect information

regarding the production function, recent studies have relaxed this assumption and have drawn attention

to the role of parental beliefs. For example, Kinsler and Pavan (2016) and Dizon-Ross (2018) investigate

how parental beliefs evolve and how parents tailor educational investments according to their (inaccurate)

beliefs about their children’s ability, while Caucutt, Lochner and Park (2017) provide a theoretical

framework in which they explore how information-based frictions can lead to inefficiently low investments.

In contrast to these studies, we do not consider parental beliefs about their children’s ability but about

the returns to parental investments. Our study most closely relates to Cunha, Elo and Culhane (2013)

and Cunha (2014) who use hypothetical scenarios to elicit maternal beliefs about the productivity of

investments made in children aged 0-2. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to document

parental beliefs about the returns to different types of educational investments made in school children

and to show that these beliefs are significantly related to actual investment choices.




                                                    5
   The present study complements recent work by Boneva and Rauh (2018).2 There are several

important differences between this study and Boneva and Rauh (2018). First, the present study

uses data from a representative sample of parents in England. To the best of our knowledge, this

is the first attempt to measure parental beliefs in a large representative sample of the population.

Second, and more importantly, Boneva and Rauh (2018) only focus on the perceived returns to parental

time investments while this study investigates how parents perceive the returns to three different

types of investments made by parents, namely parental time and material investments as well as

school quality. This allows us to investigate how parents perceive the complementarity/substitutability

between different inputs. To gain a better understanding of how parents react to policy changes (e.g.

an increase school quality), it is important for us to know how parents perceive the interaction between

different inputs.

   Second, our study relates to the literature which examines the importance of individual beliefs

about returns to educational investment decisions made by students (e.g., Dominitz and Manski 1996,

Jensen 2010, Abramitzky and Lavy 2014, Attanasio and Kaufmann 2014, Kaufmann 2014, Almas et al.

2016, Attanasio and Kaufmann 2017, Boneva and Rauh 2017, Belfield et al. forthcoming). It is also

related to how students’ beliefs about returns are related to students’ choice of major (Montmarquette,

Cannings and Mahseredjian 2002; Arcidiacono 2004; Arcidiacono, Hotz and Kang 2012; Beffy, Fougere

and Maurel 2012; Zafar 2013; Arcidiacono et al. 2014; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2014; Wiswall

and Zafar 2015a,b; Hastings et al. 2016; Wiswall and Zafar 2017; Baker et al. 2017), high-school track

(Giustinelli 2016), and which specific university to attend (Delavande and Zafar 2014). Relative to

these studies we focus on the beliefs of parents and how these beliefs are related to the educational

choices they make for their children.

   The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 presents a stylized model of the production

technology that highlights the importance of parental beliefs in parents’ educational investment decisions

and motivates our survey design. Section 3 presents the survey design that we use to elicit parental

beliefs about the characteristics of the production technology, and provides details on the characteristics

of the sample. Section 4 presents the results, while Section 5 concludes.
  2 It is also related to recent work by Biroli et al. (2018) who investigate parental beliefs about returns to health
investments as well as to Lergetporer, Werner and Woessmann (2018) who examine beliefs about the returns to university
education in a representative sample of adults in Germany.




                                                          6
2     Theoretical Framework

In this section, we present a stylized model to highlight how parental beliefs about the process of

development and the returns to investment are likely to be critical for parents’ investment decisions.

More specifically, we present a simple conceptual framework that describes parents’ investment decisions

as a result of an optimization problem. In our framework, parents care about the development of their

child as well as their own consumption and leisure, and they face a time and a budget constraint as

well as a perceived production technology that maps educational investments made by parents into

future child outcomes. The technology of skill formation is based on the general skill accumulation

framework developed in Cunha, Heckman and Schennach (2010).3 However, rather than assuming

that the parents know the actual process of skill formation, we assume that they have some beliefs

about it, which might be different from the actual process.

    We assume that parents care about their own consumption Ci , the use of their time, and their

children’s adult outcomes yi , such as their earnings and, more generally, well-being. The parents of

child i can allocate their total available time T to activities that help child i accumulate skills, IiT ,

leisure activities that do not directly promote the child’s human capital, which we henceforth refer

to as ‘own’ leisure time, Loi , as well as work, Lw
                                                  i . Let the hourly wage be denoted as wi . Parents

can spend their total income, wi Lw
                                  i , on own consumption, Ci , monetary investments that help their

children acquire skills, IiM , as well as expenses related to the quality of the school their child attends,

IiS . While there are many schools in the UK that do not charge school fees, we can think of school

expenditures in this context as any additional expenses the parents have to incur for their child to

attend a better school (e.g. higher rents in neighborhoods with good schools). We also assume that

parents might enjoy (or not) spending ‘investment’ time with their children.

    We assume that parents perceive child outcomes to depend on the child’s characteristics Zi , such

as the child’s stock of skills at the beginning of the period considered or the child’s gender, and on

three types of investment: time investment, IiT , material investment, IiM , and the quality of the school

the child attends, IiS , according to the function f as in


                                           yi = f (Zi , IiT , IiM , IiS , i ),                                (1)


where i denotes some random shocks.
   3 For the purpose of our analysis, we simplify the framework presented in Cunha, Heckman and Schennach (2010) in

several ways, e.g. we do not distinguish between cognitive and non-cognitive skills.



                                                            7
   f is assumed to be monotonically increasing, twice continuously differentiable and concave in IiT ,

IiM and IiS . We stress that the function f , which represents one of the relevant constraints parents face

in choosing how to allocate time and financial resources, does not necessarily coincide with the true

production function of skills. Parents might have beliefs about the production process that might be

distorted. The process of skill formation is complex, it may well be that parents do not have complete

or accurate information about how the different inputs map into child outcomes.

   We also note that unlike other studies, which elicit the returns to investments on skills (e.g. Cunha,

Elo and Culhane 2013) or the returns to skills on the labor market (e.g. Jensen 2010, Attanasio and

Kaufmann 2014, Kaufmann 2014) we directly elicit parental beliefs about the returns to investments

on labor market outcomes. These beliefs will be a combination of parental beliefs about the process

that produces skills but also their beliefs about the returns to these skills on the labor market. We

assume that parents care about children’s outcomes, rather than children’s skills, which is why we

directly elicit the returns to investments on future outcomes.

   In addition to the constraint that describes the perceived process that generates child outcomes in

equation (1), parents face a time constraint:



                                            IiT + Loi + Lw
                                                         i = T,                                          (2)


and a budget constraint:

                                      Ci + pM IiM + pS IiS = wi LW
                                                                 i ,                                     (3)


where the price of own consumption is normalized to 1 and pM and pS are the relative prices of monetary

investments and school quality respectively, and where we are neglecting savings for expositional

simplicity.

   If one considers the optimization problem faced by parents, which involves a utility function that

depends on yi , Ci and possibly IiT and the three constraints in equations (1), (2) and (3), it is clear that

parents’ investment decisions will depend on: (i) how much they care about their children; (ii) their

financial and time resources; and (iii) their perceptions about the process that generates children’s

outcomes. In particular, from the parents’ optimization problem it is apparent that the perceived

partial derivatives of the production technology are critical for parents’ investment decisions:

                                          ∂f (·) ∂f (·) ∂f (·)
                                                ,      ,       .                                         (4)
                                          ∂IiT    ∂IiM   ∂IiS



                                                     8
Moreover, we also note that the perceived marginal returns to any given input may depend on the level

of the other inputs. For example, it may well be that time investments are perceived as more or less

productive if they are complemented with high monetary investments. It is therefore crucial to also

investigate how parents perceive the complementarity/substitutability between the different inputs:

                                  ∂f (·)       ∂f (·)                ∂f (·)
                                           S0           S0                    S0.                                  (5)
                                 ∂IiT ∂IiM    ∂IiT ∂IiS             ∂IiM ∂IiS

    In addition, it is also of interest whether parents perceive the returns to the different types of

investments to differ with the baseline characteristics of the child, e.g. it may be that parents perceive

the returns to differ with the initial human capital of the child.

    The features of the true process of skill formation can be estimated from actual data (subject to a

number of identification problems that arise from the possible endogeneity of investment choices, see

the discussion in Attanasio et al. 2015 and Attanasio, Meghir and Nix 2015). However, investment

decisions might not be informed by the features of such processes but by individual perceptions.

Without additional information such as the one we elicit, it is not possible to identify the role of

parental beliefs from information on parental investments, as beliefs cannot be separated from other

factors, such as taste.4

    While the literature has recognized the importance of parental beliefs in parental investment

decisions, not much is known about how parents perceive the returns to different types of investments

and how they perceive the complementarity/substitutability between different inputs. We use a novel

survey design to elicit these beliefs, which allows us to gain deeper insights into how parents perceive

the technology which maps educational inputs into future child outcomes.



3     Eliciting Parental Beliefs

To elicit parental beliefs about the properties of the production technology and to collect information

on parents’ actual investment decisions, we administer a survey to a representative sample of almost

2,000 parents living in England. As motivated by the theoretical framework, parental beliefs about

several partial and cross derivatives of the production technology are likely to be critical for the level

and composition of educational investments made by parents. We build on Cunha, Elo and Culhane

(2013) and use hypothetical investment scenarios to elicit parental beliefs about the characteristics of
   4 Attanasio, Cunha and Jervis (2016) show how to identify parental taste within a structural model using information

on investment and subjective beliefs.


                                                          9
the production technology.5 By constructing hypothetical scenarios we can vary one input at a time

while keeping other factors constant, which allows us to elicit individual perceived returns to different

educational inputs.

    Hypothetical Scenarios:             We present all parents with eight different hypothetical scenarios

that vary along three key dimensions: (i) the level of parental time investments, I T , (ii) the level of

parental material investments, I M , and (iii) the quality of the school the child attends, I S . For each of

these eight scenarios, we ask parents to state what they believe the earnings of the child in the scenario

will be at age 30. By comparing parents’ responses across the different scenarios, we can infer parents’

beliefs about the returns to the different types of investments, as well as parental beliefs about the

complementarity/substitutability of the different inputs. Our questions allow us to get an estimate of

individual expected returns.6

    More specifically, we ask parents to imagine two hypothetical average British families (the “Jones”

and the “Smiths”). In both hypothetical families, there is one child who is currently in school. Parents

are told that while the Jones and the Smiths live in the same neighbourhood and are identical in

many different respects (e.g., in terms of parental income and education, as well as the intellectual

ability of the child), there is one difference between the two families. In particular, they are told that

the child of the Jones attends a high quality school that has been rated as ‘Outstanding’, while the

child of the Smiths attends a low quality school that has been rated as ‘Requires Improvement’.7 We

deliberately made it explicit that the two hypothetical families are otherwise identical, as this allows

us to abstract from other potential differences between the families. Different respondents might have

different beliefs about the returns to parental investment, an important dimension of heterogeneity

which is at the center of this study.

    For each of these two hypothetical families, parents are then presented with four different investment

scenarios that vary in the levels of parental time investments, I T , and the level of parental material

investments, I M . Put together, the four different investment scenarios are (1) low time investments/low

material investments, (2) low time investments/high material investments, (3) high time investments/low
   5 Cunha, Elo and Culhane (2013) do not elicit parental beliefs about the returns to different types of investments.

Another important difference between the two studies is that while we elicit parental beliefs about how parental
investments made during a child’s school life map into later-life outcomes, Cunha, Elo and Culhane (2013) elicit parental
beliefs about how parental investments in very early childhood (i.e. age 0-2) map into increased skill levels at age 2.
   6 Given that we did not want to burden respondents with a very long questionnaire, we did not elicit information

about individual uncertainty about human capital investment returns.
   7 In England, schools are regularly inspected by Ofsted, a non-ministerial department of the UK government. A school

can obtain one of the following ratings: ‘Outstanding’, ‘Good’, ‘Satisfactory/Requires Improvement’, ‘Inadequate’. In
2017, 21% of all schools in England are rated as ‘Outstanding’, 68% as ‘Good’, 9% as ‘Requires improvement’, and 2%
as ‘Inadequate’.




                                                           10
material investments, and (4) high time investments/high material investments. Parents saw all four

scenarios for each hypothetical family simultaneously on one screen, i.e. they could compare across

the four scenarios while responding to the questions. The order of the four scenarios on the screen

was randomized across respondents. We highlighted the differences across scenarios by underlining

the aspects we varied (see Appendix B). In total, each parent is thus presented with eight different

scenarios, which are illustrated in Table 1. For each of these eight scenarios j, parents are asked to

state what they expect the earnings of the hypothetical child to be at age 30 (ỹj ). We ask parents

about the likely future earnings of the child, instead of asking about some interim test result, because

this allows us to calculate expected returns without having to rely on assumptions about the returns

of arbitrarily scaled test scores.

   Interpreting this approach through the lenses of a production function that relates different inputs

to outcomes, we see that the way our questions are constructed map eight different points of a three-

dimension space (time, material and school quality) into possible outcomes. We can therefore estimates

the returns to specific investments over the variations considered by the different scenarios. We cannot

measure individual beliefs about the returns to investments outside the scenarios considered without

some arbitrary extrapolation.

   By asking quantitative questions we avoid the pitfalls of interpreting value judgements such as “very

important” on a Likert scale. While the questions were not straightforward to answer, we note that

randomness in responses would increase measurement error, and therefore would make it less likely

for us to find significant returns and meaningful differences across scenarios, as well as significant

correlations between beliefs and actual investments. We are aware of the presence of measurement

error, which inspires us to reduce the problem by taking the average, when meaningful, of different

measures. We purposely also did not provide any information about average earnings in order not to

prime respondents.8

   We can use the parents’ responses to the eight different scenarios to infer how parents perceive

the returns to the three different educational inputs (i.e. the partial derivatives in (4)) by comparing

parents’ responses in scenarios in which a specific educational investment is low to the corresponding

scenario in which the educational investment is high. In addition, the survey design allows us to

document how parents perceive the complementarity/substitutability between the different inputs (i.e.

the cross derivatives in (5)). For example, by comparing the perceived return to time investments
  8 A similar methodology has also been successfully used in Boneva and Rauh (2018) who focus exclusively on beliefs

about the returns to time investments.



                                                        11
when school quality is high to the perceived return to time investments when school quality is low,

we can learn something about the perceived complementarity/substitutability between parental time

investments and school quality.

                     Table 1: Overview of the Eight Different Scenarios (2 × 2 × 2)


                     The Jones                                            The Smiths
                 High School Quality                                   Low School Quality

                   Low Material     High Material                       Low Material     High Material
                    Investment       Investment                          Investment       Investment
                        ỹ1              ỹ2                                 ỹ5              ỹ6
     Low Time       Low Time/        Low Time/             Low Time      Low Time/        Low Time/
    Investment     Low Material     High Material         Investment    Low Material     High Material
                        ỹ3              ỹ4                                 ỹ7              ỹ8
    High Time       High Time/       High Time/           High Time      High Time/       High Time/
    Investment     Low Material     High Material         Investment    Low Material     High Material


   While each parent is presented with these eight different scenarios, we additionally randomize

parents into different groups that vary along four different dimensions: (i) the initial level of time and

money invested, (ii) the initial skill level of the child in the scenario, (iii) the gender of the child, and

(iv) the age at which investments are made. We describe each of these four randomizations in turn

and summarize the key facts in Table 2.

   Randomization 1 - Initial Level: While all parents see the eight scenarios presented in Table 1,

we vary the amount of time and money which is associated with low and high levels of time and

material investments between parents. Respondents are randomized into two different groups. For

the first group (‘Group 0’), a low (high) level of time investment refers to spending 0 hours (3 hours)

every week helping the child acquire new skills, while a low (high) level of material investment refers

to spending £0 (£30) every week on educational resources which help the child acquire new skills.

For the second group (‘Group 1’), a low (high) level of time investment refers to spending 1 hour (4

hours) every week helping the child acquire new skills, while a low (high) level of material investment

refers to spending £10 (£40) every week on educational resources which help the child acquire new

skills. This research design allows us to investigate whether parents perceive the returns to parental

time and material investments to be diminishing.




                                                     12
                    Table 2: Overview of the Sixteen Different Groups (2 × 2 × 2 × 2)

                                         Randomization 1: Initial Level

                           Group 0                                             Group 1
            Low levels of investments: 0h and £0               Low levels of investments: 1h and £10
           High levels of investments: 3h and £30              High levels of investments: 4h and £40

                                          Randomization 2: Initial Skill

                               Low                                               High
                      Initial skills are low                            Initial skills are high
               (‘did not achieve expected level’)                    (‘achieved expected level’)

                                            Randomization 3: Gender

                            Female                                              Male
                Children in scenarios are female                   Children in scenarios are male
                      (‘Jane’ and ‘Sarah’)                              (‘John’ and ‘Simon’)

                                              Randomization 4: Age

                           Years 3-6                                         Years 7-10
                 Child in scenario is in Year 3                    Child in scenario is in Year 7
                Investments made in Years 3-6                     Investments made in Years 7-10


    Randomization 2 - Initial Skill: To investigate whether parental beliefs differ with the initial

skill level of the child, we also randomize the skill levels of the two children in the hypothetical families

across respondents. One group of parents is presented with two children whose initial skills are low,

while the other group of parents is presented with two children whose initial skills are high. More

specifically, the children with low initial skill levels are described as not having achieved the expected

level on the most recent key stage examination, which is a national standardized test all children in

England need to take, while children with high initial skill levels are described as having achieved the

expected level. If the parent is presented with a child in Year 3 then the key stage examination which

is being referred to is the Key Stage 1 examination, which is taken in Year 2. If the parent is presented

with a child in Year 7 then the key stage examination which is being referred to in the scenario is the

Key Stage 2 examination, which is taken in Year 6.9

    Randomization 3 - Gender: To investigate whether parental beliefs about the characteristics of

the production function differ by the gender of the child, we randomize the gender of the hypothetical
   9 In 2016, the percentage of students in England achieving the expected levels in the Key Stage 1 examination is 74%,

65% and 73% in reading, writing and mathematics, respectively. The percentage of students achieving the expected
levels in the Key Stage 2 examination is 66%, 74%, 73% and 70% in reading, writing, grammar/spelling/punctuation,
and mathematics, respectively.


                                                          13
child in the scenario across parents. While one group of parents is presented with scenarios in which

the children are boys (‘John’ and ‘Simon’), the other group is presented with scenarios in which the

children are girls (‘Jane’ and ‘Sarah’). Not only does this design allow us to establish whether parents

perceive the potential earnings of girls to be different from those of boys, but we can also investigate

whether parents perceive the productivity of investments to differ by gender.

   Randomization 4 - Age: Finally, we randomize the age at which investments are made across

respondents. While one group is presented with scenarios in which the hypothetical children are in

Year 3 of primary school, the other group is presented with scenarios in which the hypothetical children

are in Year 7 of secondary school. The school years during which investments are made for the first

group of respondents are school years 3-6, while the school years during which investments are made

for the second group are school years 7-10.


3.1     Summary Statistics

All data was collected by a professional survey company in Oct-Nov 2016. All participating parents

were part of the company’s online panel and participated in the survey online. Parents received modest

incentives for completing the survey in the form of points that they could collect and later exchange for

small gifts. To be eligible to participate in the survey, parents had to have at least one child aged 5-16

years living with them in their home. If the parent had more than one child, they were asked about

one randomly selected child (henceforth referred to as the ‘target’ child). The sample was selected

to be representative in terms of region in England, the gender and education level of the responding

parent, as well as the age and gender of the respondent’s child. The survey company used quota-based

sampling when contacting parents to participate. To correct for any imbalances in response rates, we

re-weight the sample using survey weights when performing the analyses.

   The sample consists of 1,962 parents who completed the survey and the characteristics are reported

in Table 3.10 In terms of parental characteristics, 50% of the parents in the sample are male with the

average parent being 42 years old. Parents have on average 1.5 children in their household. 58% and

17% work full-time and part-time respectively, and 13% of respondents are single parents. 45% of

responding parents have a university degree, and in 55% of cases, at least one of the child’s parents

has a degree. The mean annual household income is £44,890.
  10 We drop observations where the target child is home-schooled or boards at a school. This removed 55 observations.

Participating parents could skip questions they did not wish to answer which resulted in some missing values for some
of the collected variables.




                                                         14
   We use data from the Family Resources Survey (FRS) 2013-2014 to compare our sample statistics

to the statistics of a representative sample of parents with 5-16 year old children in England. The

average annual household income in the representative sample is £44,296, which is very similar to the

average household income of £44,890 we report in our sample. Figure C.1 in the Appendix depicts the

distribution of household incomes both in our sample as well as in the Family Resources Survey. We

also find similar employment statistics in both samples. In the FRS, 53% of parents work full-time,

while 21% work part-time. In terms of education, we find that the parents in our sample are somewhat

better educated than the parents in the FRS. More specifically, we find that in the FRS 31% of parents

have a university degree, while 42% of households have at least one parent with a university degree.

To make our sample comparable to the nationally representative sample, we use inverse probability

weights in the analysis in order to re-weigh the observations to account for the differences in education

levels. We note that our results are not materially affected by the use of these survey weights.

   In terms of characteristics of the target child, for whom the parents completed the survey, 50% are

male, and the average child is 10 years old and in Year 6 at school. Table A.1 shows the distribution of

Ofsted ratings for the school of the selected child. 85% of children in the sample attend either a Good

or an Outstanding school. Ofsted data for the 2016-17 academic year shows that 89% of all schools in

England are rated as either Good or Outstanding. Sample characteristics are well balanced over the

sixteen groups into which respondents were randomly allocated.

                                        Table 3: Summary statistics

                                Variable                     Mean       Std. Dev.        N
                     Male parent                             0.504        0.500         1962
                     Age of parent                           42.043       8.165         1962
                     Other parent in household                0.873       0.333         1962
                     Foreign language at home                 0.197       0.398         1962
                     Parent works full-time                   0.578       0.494         1962
                     Parent works part-time                   0.174       0.379         1962
                     Parent has degree                        0.454       0.498         1957
                     Household income                        44889        24456         1836
                     At least one parent has degree           0.546       0.498         1962
                     Number of children                       1.543       0.700         1962
                     Own child goes to private school         0.045       0.207         1945
                     Own child is male                       0.504        0.500         1962
                     Own child’s school year                 6.223        3.535         1962
                     Age of own child                        10.412       3.464         1962
                      Note: Individual parent characteristics refer to those of the responding
                     parent. ‘Foreign language at home’ denotes whether the parent speaks any
                     language other than English at home. Household income refers to the total
                     gross income obtained from all sources over the last 12 months, summed
                     over all members of the household.


   Parental Investments: In order to determine whether parental beliefs about the returns to


                                                        15
investments can be used to predict actual investments in their own children, we also ask parents about

the investments they currently make in their child. Tables A.2 and A.3 in the Appendix provide

summary statistics for the responses to the own investment questions. Parents are asked about both

time and material investments. For time investments, we ask how much time they spend on weekdays

and weekends on activities with their child such as reading, conversing, playing and helping with school

work. For material investments, respondents are asked to report their average monthly spending on

various educational categories, namely books, educational games/toys, societies, private tuition and

school fees.

    As shown in Table A.2, parents spend on average more time per day with their children during

the weekend than on weekdays. In both cases, conversing with their child is the most time-consuming

activity with the average parent spending almost 80 minutes and close to two hours per day talking

with their child during weekdays and weekends respectively. Across all activities, parents spend on

average almost 25 hours per week with their children. Table A.3 provides summary statistics on

material investments. The average parent spends £150 per month on such investments, of which £110

are spent on school fees and societies. The order of the different survey blocks was randomized across

respondents.



4     Results

4.1    Characterising Subjective Beliefs Data

To get a better understanding of how parents perceive the properties of the process of skill formation,

we estimate an ordinary least squares regression relating child outcomes to different input scenarios,

allowing for interactions between different inputs. More specifically, we estimate variants of the

following empirical specification:



        log ỹji = α + β1 IjT + β2 IjM + β3 IjS + β4 IjT × IjM + β5 IjT × IjS + β6 IjM × IjS + γi + ji ,   (6)


where j indicates the scenario, ỹji are the earnings parent i expects in scenario j, α is the intercept,

IjT is a dummy variable which equals 1 if parental time investments are high (in scenario j), IjM is a

dummy variable which equals 1 if parental material investments are high, IjS is a dummy variable which

indicates whether school quality is high, and γi are parent fixed effects. As motivated in Section 2,

we are interested in the perceived returns to the different educational inputs. These perceived returns


                                                       16
will be captured by the estimates of β1 , β2 and β3 . In addition, if parents perceive the different inputs

as complements (substitutes), we expect the coefficients on the interaction terms (i.e. β4 , β5 and β6 )

to be positive (negative).

    As mentioned in the previous section, we additionally randomize respondents into different groups

which vary along four different dimensions: (i) the initial level of time and money invested, (ii) the

initial skill level, (iii) the gender and (iv) the age of the child. We investigate whether the main

results differ along any of these four dimensions by splitting the sample and performing the analyses

on the different subgroups. This approach allows us to study features such as the curvature of the

process relating inputs to child outcomes and the role of initial conditions and interactions. For

instance, equation (6) assumes that increasing investment (in time or material) will have the same

effect on child outcomes independently of the starting point. Estimating the equation allowing different

coefficients depending on whether the time investment started from 0 or 1 hours (or whether the

material investment started from £0 or £10) relaxes this assumption.


4.2     Parental Beliefs about the Production Technology

Figure 1 shows the expected earnings for the eight hypothetical scenarios averaged across all respondents.11

Expected earnings are increasing in all three investment types, namely school quality, time and material

investments. The average expected earnings for a child who attends a high quality school are £27,543

for low-time and low-material investments, £32,747 for low-time and high-material investments, £33,807

for high-time and low-material investments, and £40,083 for high-time and high-material investments.

When the quality of the school the child in the scenario attends is low, the average expected earnings are

£24,974 for low-time and low-material investments, £29,021 for low-time and high-material investments,

£30,382 for high-time and low-material investments, and £35,450 for high-time and high-material

investments. The average across these eight scenarios is £31,751.

    There are several patterns worth noting. First, parents seem to give meaningful responses in the

sense that higher levels of investments are also associated with higher levels of expected earnings.

Second, parents are on average remarkably close in their estimates to the true average. Using the

Family Resource Survey of 2013-14, we find the average annual earnings of women and men working

at least 30 hours who are 25-34 years old to be 25,630 and 30,977, respectively. It is also noteworthy

that in both panels, average expected earnings are higher for high-time and low-material investments
  11 To ensure that our results are not driven by outliers, we set the responses of those individuals to missing for whom

the implied returns to school, time or material investments are in the top or bottom 1% of the returns distribution.



                                                           17
                           Figure 1: Expected earnings under hypothetical scenarios


           40000       Low school quality (Smiths)                            High school quality (Jones)




                                                                   40000
           30000




                                                                   30000
           20000




                                                                   20000
           10000




                                                                   10000
           0




                                                                   0




                                    Low material/Low time                    High material/Low time
                                    Low material/High time                   High material/High time


Note: This figure shows expected earnings (in £s) of the child at age 30, averaged across all respondents, for each of the eight
hypothetical scenarios with 95% confidence intervals (see Table 1). The left panel shows the mean expected earnings in the
four scenarios with low school quality while the right panel shows the mean expected earnings in the scenarios with high school
quality.




(bar 3) relative to low-time and high-material investments (bar 2), thereby suggesting that parents

perceive the returns to 3 additional hours of weekly time investments to be higher than the returns to

a rise of £30 in weekly material investments.

    Table 4 shows the results from regressing log expected earnings of the child in scenario j as reported

by parent i on indicator variables for high school quality (I S ), high levels of time investments (I T )

and high levels of material investments (I M ). In this analysis, we pool all respondents irrespective of

which group they were randomized into (see Table 2), so the results average across respondents who

have seen different initial levels of investments and children with different skills at baseline, gender

and age.

    We begin by running the model without respondent fixed effects (Column 1). We then subsequently

add in respondent fixed effects (Column 2) and, in order to examine whether there is perceived

substitutability/complementarity between investment types, interaction terms between the indicator



                                                              18
                      Table 4: Determinants of log perceived earnings at age 30

                    Dependent variable: Perceived log earnings at age 30
                    High school quality         0.107∗∗∗      0.107∗∗∗                 0.096∗∗∗
                                                 (0.006)       (0.005)                  (0.008)

                    High time investment              0.203∗∗∗         0.208∗∗∗        0.210∗∗∗
                                                       (0.007)          (0.006)         (0.009)

                    High material investment          0.140∗∗∗         0.153∗∗∗        0.151∗∗∗
                                                       (0.007)          (0.006)         (0.009)

                    School x Time                                                        0.007
                                                                                        (0.007)

                    School x Material                                                   0.014∗
                                                                                        (0.007)

                    Time x Material                                                      -0.011
                                                                                        (0.010)

                    Constant                         10.020∗∗∗        10.011∗∗∗       10.014∗∗∗
                                                      (0.014)          (0.006)         (0.007)
                    Sample mean                       £32,875          £32,875         £32,875
                    Respondent fixed effects            No               Yes             Yes
                    Observations                       14402            14402           14402
                    R-squared                          0.051            0.228           0.228
                     Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                    Standard errors are clustered at the parent level. Observations are weighted
                    according to the age and gender of the parent’s own child and the education
                    level of the responding parent. Regressions are performed using the responses
                    to all eight hypothetical investment scenarios. The dependent variable is
                    the perceived log earnings of the hypothetical child at age 30. ‘High school
                    quality’ is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the hypothetical child attends a
                    school with an ‘Outstanding’ Ofsted rating (i.e. the child is from the Jones
                    family). ‘High time investment’ and ‘High material investment’ are dummy
                    variables equal to 1 if the scenario involves the higher level of time and
                    material investments respectively. Columns (1) and (2) give the results from
                    pooled OLS and fixed effects estimation respectively. The final column adds
                    in interaction terms between the three dummy variables corresponding to
                    high levels of the three investment types to the fixed effects model estimated
                    in Column (2). ‘Sample mean’ refers to the average expected earnings (in £s)
                    across all eight scenarios for the 14,402 observations used in the estimation.


variables (Column 3). Our results are robust to these different specifications. The results in Column 3

show that attending a high quality school is associated with a 9.6% increase in expected earnings.

Spending three more hours per week with the child translates to a rise in expected earnings of 21.0%,

while spending £30 more per week translates to a rise in expected earnings of 15.1%. All these estimates

are highly significant at the 1% level. Moreover, the coefficient on time investments is significantly

higher than the coefficient on material investments, suggesting, as in Figure 1, that parents perceive 3

hours of additional time investments to be more productive than £30 of additional material investments

(at the 1% level). Both of these perceived returns are in turn significantly greater than the perceived

returns to school quality (at the 1% level). As shown in column (3), parents do not perceive parental



                                                         19
time investments to be complementary to school quality or parental material investments. They do,

however, perceive the returns to parental material investments to be significantly higher if the child

attends a high quality school. In particular, parents perceive the returns to £30 of weekly material

investments to be 9.3% (or 1.4 percentage points) greater if the child attends a school which is rated

as ‘Outstanding’ rather than a school which ‘Requires Improvement’.

    Whether parental beliefs on the returns to different types of investment are roughly correct is an

interesting question, but one that would be very hard to answer with the data we have available.

In observational data, it is difficult to find exogenous variation in educational investments made by

parents that would allow us to obtain unbiased estimates of their returns to which we could compare

the beliefs data. Having said that, if the data on individual beliefs are accurate, they should be

informative about parental investment, regardless of whether beliefs about returns are correct.

    Tables 5 and 6 show the results from performing the analysis separately for the different subgroups

respondents were randomized in (see overview in Table 2). As in Table 4, expected earnings are

significantly increasing in the three investment types for each subgroup. With regards to differences

between subgroups, Panel A of Table 5 provides evidence of perceived diminishing returns to parental

time and material investments. More specifically, the returns are perceived as significantly higher when

investments rise from 0 hours to 3 hours and from £0 to £30 (‘Group 0’) than when investments rise

from 1 hour to 4 hours and from £10 to £40 (‘Group 1’). Note also that there is a significant difference

in the intercept, as Group 1’s baseline level of investment is higher, and no significant difference in

expected returns to school quality, as one would expect. Turning to differences across initial skill

levels (Panel B of Table 5), parents believe that high ability children will earn more in the future

(as indicated by the significantly different intercept). However, they do not perceive the returns to

investments to differ depending on the initial level of the child’s skill. Similarly, we do not find that

parents perceive the returns to be different depending on the gender of the child (Panel A of Table 6).

Finally, when we compare the perceived returns to investments by the year of school the child in the

scenario is currently in, we find that parents perceive the returns to school quality to be higher when

the child in the scenario is in Year 7 rather than in Year 3 (Panel B of Table 6).12

    We note that for all different subgroups we find a positive coefficient on the interaction term

between parental material investments and school quality. However, this coefficient is now less precisely
  12 We do not find that parents perceive the returns to parental time or material investments to be different depending
on the time period during which investments are made. In contrast, Boneva and Rauh (2018) which uses a within-
subject design to examine the perceived dynamic properties of the production function finds that parents also perceive
the returns to parental time investments to be higher in later time periods.



                                                          20
estimated than in Table 4, due to the loss in sample size and is no longer statistically significant at

conventional levels.

                       Table 5: Determinants of log perceived earnings at age 30 (2)

                                                A: Initial Level                             B: Initial Skill
                                     Group 0       Group 1          p-value    Low ability      High ability    p-value
    High school quality              0.092∗∗∗      0.109∗∗∗          0.234      0.097∗∗∗         0.104∗∗∗        0.596
                                      (0.024)       (0.022)                      (0.024)          (0.023)

    High time investment             0.225∗∗∗      0.186∗∗∗         0.020∗∗     0.213∗∗∗          0.196∗∗∗       0.305
                                      (0.024)       (0.022)                      (0.024)           (0.023)

    High material investment         0.161∗∗∗      0.124∗∗∗         0.030∗∗     0.146∗∗∗          0.135∗∗∗       0.547
                                      (0.024)       (0.022)                      (0.024)           (0.023)

    School x Time                     0.017          0.004           0.326        0.015            0.006         0.497
                                     (0.028)        (0.025)                      (0.027)          (0.026)

    School x Material                 0.005          0.013           0.561        0.008            0.009         0.939
                                     (0.028)        (0.025)                      (0.027)          (0.026)

    Time x Material                   -0.021         0.001           0.239        -0.008           -0.011        0.875
                                     (0.028)        (0.025)                      (0.027)          (0.026)

    Constant                         9.948∗∗∗      10.098∗∗∗        0.000∗∗∗    9.989∗∗∗         10.061∗∗∗      0.008∗∗∗
                                      (0.019)       (0.017)                      (0.018)          (0.018)
    Sample Mean                      £31,306        £34,407                     £32,143           £33,590
    R-Squared                           0.06          0.05                        0.06              0.05
    Observations                       7116          7286                         7113             7289
     Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the
    parent level. This table provides disaggregated results based on two group dimensions, namely the initial level of
    investment (columns 1-3) and the initial skill level (columns 4-6). The third columns provide p-values for testing
    the equality of individual coefficients between the two subsamples - these are obtained using seemingly unrelated
    regressions estimation. Regressions are performed using the responses to all eight hypothetical investment scenarios.
    The dependent variable is the perceived log earnings of the hypothetical child at age 30. ‘High school quality’ is
    a dummy variable equal to 1 if the hypothetical child attends a school with an ‘Outstanding’ Ofsted rating. ‘High
    time investment’ and ‘High material investment’ are dummy variables equal to 1 if the scenario involves the higher
    level of time and material investments respectively. The remaining three variables are interactions between these
    three dummy variables. ‘Sample mean’ refers to the average expected earnings (in £s) across all eight scenarios for
    observations used in each estimation.




                                                               21
                       Table 6: Determinants of log perceived earnings at age 30 (3)

                                                    A: Gender                                 B: Age
                                         Female         Male        p-value      Year 3         Year 7      p-value
       High school quality              0.112∗∗∗      0.089∗∗∗       0.118      0.088∗∗∗       0.114∗∗∗     0.076∗
                                         (0.023)       (0.024)                   (0.024)        (0.023)

       High time investment             0.208∗∗∗      0.201∗∗∗       0.654      0.217∗∗∗       0.192∗∗∗      0.141
                                         (0.023)       (0.024)                   (0.024)        (0.023)

       High material investment         0.140∗∗∗      0.140∗∗∗       0.991      0.147∗∗∗       0.133∗∗∗      0.430
                                         (0.022)       (0.024)                   (0.024)        (0.023)

       School x Time                      0.002         0.019        0.226        0.019         0.002        0.203
                                         (0.026)       (0.028)                   (0.027)       (0.026)

       School x Material                  0.009         0.008        0.941        0.015         0.003        0.377
                                         (0.026)       (0.028)                   (0.027)       (0.026)

       Time x Material                    -0.018        -0.000       0.332        -0.027        0.008        0.068∗
                                         (0.026)       (0.028)                   (0.027)       (0.026)

       Constant                         10.008∗∗∗     10.043∗∗∗      0.200      10.022∗∗∗     10.030∗∗∗      0.769
                                         (0.017)       (0.018)                   (0.018)       (0.018)
       Sample Mean                       £32,196       £33,551                   £32,861       £32,890
       R-Squared                           0.06          0.05                      0.05          0.05
       Observations                       7183          7219                      7175          7227
        Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the
       parent level. This table provides disaggregated results based on two group dimensions, namely gender (columns
       1-3) and the investment period (columns 4-6). The third columns provide p-values for testing the equality of
       individual coefficients between the two subsamples - these are obtained using seemingly unrelated regressions
       estimation. Regressions are performed using the responses to all eight hypothetical investment scenarios. The
       dependent variable is the perceived log earnings of the hypothetical child at age 30. ‘High school quality’ is
       a dummy variable equal to 1 if the hypothetical child attends a school with an ‘Outstanding’ Ofsted rating.
       ‘High time investment’ and ‘High material investment’ are dummy variables equal to 1 if the scenario involves
       the higher level of time and material investments respectively. The remaining three variables are interactions
       between these three dummy variables. ‘Sample mean’ refers to the average expected earnings (in £s) across
       all eight scenarios for observations used in each estimation.



4.3    Heterogeneity in Perceived Returns

The estimates presented in the previous section mask a substantial degree of heterogeneity in perceived

returns across respondents. For each respondent, we can calculate the perceived return to time,

material and school investments. To obtain a measure of individual perceived returns to time investments,

riT ime , we compare the parent’s responses in the four scenarios in which time investments are high to the

parent’s responses in the four corresponding scenarios in which time investments are low. We average

across these differences and divide by three to obtain the average perceived return to 1 additional hour

of time investments:


                                        1 1 y3 − y1   y4 − y2   y7 − y5   y8 − y6
                            riT ime =      [        +         +         +         ].
                                        34     y1        y2        y5        y6


                                                            22
   We analogously calculate individual perceived returns to £10 of material investments, which we

denote as riM aterial , as well as the perceived returns to high school quality for each respondent, riSchool .

   Appendix Figure A.1 shows the cumulative distributions of individual perceived returns. The

distributions for perceived returns to material and time investments are similar, though perceived

returns to time investments are slightly larger indicated through the shift to the right. For school

quality, the perceived returns are somewhat more dispersed. Figure A.2 in the Appendix shows the

joint distribution of perceived returns to time and material investments (Panel A), time and school

investments (Panel B) and material and school investments (Panel C). Again we can see that there

is a substantial degree of heterogeneity in perceived returns. Moreover, we can see that parents who

perceive one type of investment to be more productive are also more likely to perceive the other types

of investments as more productive. This can also be seen in Table 7 which shows the Spearman rank

correlations between the different perceived returns. All correlations are positive and significant at

the 1% level. The correlation between the perceived returns to parental time and parental material

investments seems to be especially high (corr=0.42).

                    Table 7: Spearman rank correlations between perceived returns

                                               Time          Material    School
                                   Time        1.000
                                   Material    0.420∗∗∗      1.000
                                   School      0.198∗∗∗      0.095∗∗∗    1.000
                                    Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                                   ‘Time’, ‘Material’ and ‘School’ refer to the
                                   perceived returns to time, material and school
                                   quality investments, respectively.


   While the variation in perceived returns across parents is high, we document in Table 8 that

neither parent, nor child or household characteristics can explain a substantial part of the variation in

perceived returns. The R-squared of the regressions are low and only few characteristics are associated

with parental beliefs about the returns to investments. We document that fathers perceive the returns

to school quality as significantly lower compared to mothers, and that older parents as well as parents

who are working perceive the returns to time investments as significantly lower. We do not find any

significant associations between perceived returns and education of parents or income, irrespective of

whether we control for additional household and child characteristics as in Table 8 or not. Parents

with a university degree or parents with above median income do not perceive the returns to any of

the three types of investments to be greater. To allow for potential non-linearities we also estimate the

specification using income quartiles as regressors (see Appendix Table A.4). Again we find no significant


                                                        23
associations between income and perceived returns. These results are surprising and contrast with the

findings in Boneva and Rauh (2018) who document differences in perceived returns to time investments

by the socioeconomic background of the respondent. We also do not find any notable differences in

perceived returns by the perceived academic ability of the respondent’s own child. In the following

section, we investigate whether the heterogeneity in perceived returns is associated with actual parental

investment decisions.

                                 Table 8: Determinants of perceived returns

                                                          Time       Material       School      Mindset
               Male parent                                 -0.001       -0.001     -0.048∗∗     -0.183∗∗∗
                                                          (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.019)       (0.057)
               Age of parent                             -0.001∗∗       -0.000       0.001       0.018∗∗∗
                                                          (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.001)       (0.003)
               Number of children                          -0.002       -0.000       -0.003     -0.098∗∗∗
                                                          (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.013)       (0.033)
               Other parent in household                    0.003       -0.002        0.022         0.007
                                                          (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.023)       (0.071)
               Parent works full-time                     -0.014∗       -0.005       0.023         -0.058
                                                          (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.019)       (0.054)
               At least one parent has degree              -0.002       -0.007        0.011         0.014
                                                          (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.017)       (0.051)
               Own child goes to private school            -0.006        0.012       0.062          0.104
                                                          (0.015)      (0.017)      (0.045)       (0.126)
               High Income                                 0.003        -0.004        0.004     0.207∗∗∗
                                                          (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.018)       (0.052)
               Own child’s academic ability                -0.000       -0.000      -0.001∗     0.009∗∗∗
                                                          (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.001)
               Own child’s school year                     -0.004       -0.005       0.011         -0.012
                                                          (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.011)       (0.029)
               Own child is male                           -0.004       -0.001      -0.027∗         0.034
                                                          (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.016)       (0.047)
               Age of own child                             0.003       0.005        -0.013        -0.014
                                                          (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.011)       (0.029)
               Foreign language at home                     0.003     0.033∗∗∗        0.015        -0.026
                                                          (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.023)       (0.064)
               Region FE                                   Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
               Sample Mean                                0.11          0.08         0.17         0.00
               R-squared                                  0.019        0.024         0.023        0.077
               Observations                               1633         1630          1638         1825
                Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions
               include a constant. Observations are weighted according to the age and gender of the
               parent’s own child and the education level of the responding parent. ‘Time’, ‘Material’
               and ‘School’ are the individual perceived returns to time investments, material investments
               and school quality, respectively, while ‘Mindset’ is the extracted factor from the growth
               mindset/malleability of skills questionnaire. ‘High Income’ equals 1 if the parent has above
               median income. ‘Sample mean’ gives the mean of the dependent variable using only those
               observations used in the relevant estimation.




                                                           24
4.4      Do Perceived Returns Predict Current Parental Investments?

Our data contains rich information on current parental investment decisions. We can use this information,

together with the elicited returns, to investigate whether parental beliefs about the returns to investments

are predictive of parents’ current investment choices while controlling for a range of parent and child

characteristics. In Table 9, we regress the time parents report to spend every week on different activities

(in minutes) on the individual perceived returns to time investments. We find that parental beliefs

about the returns to parental time investments are significantly associated with the amount of time

parents spend on different activities with their children (at the 1% level). Overall, an increase in the

perceived return by 10 percentage points is associated with parents spending 46 more minutes every

week on these activities (column 5). In contrast to the common finding in the literature that more

educated parents invest more time into their children, we do not find a significant positive effect of

parental education on time invested. However, we do find some evidence that household income is

positively related to time invested. We also find that time investments are increasing in the children’s

own ability, i.e. they are reinforcing in skills. In terms of household specialization, mothers seem to

invest significantly more time than fathers.

   Similarly, we find that parental beliefs about the returns to parental material investments significantly

predict the amount parents spend on different educational resources every month (such as books,

educational games etc.). Overall, an increase in the perceived return by 10 percentage points is

associated with an increase in monthly spending by approximately £14.8 (Column 5), which is significant

at the 1% level. When we use alternative measures to summarize how much time parents or how much

money parents spend on their children (e.g. when we extract a factor from the money/time spent

on the different categories), again we find a positive and significant association (see Columns 6 in the

respective tables). In the case of material investments, we find that they are positively and significantly

related to the education level, income and employment status of the parent. As for time investments,

material investments are also reinforcing in children’s skills.

   Finally, we regress the quality of the school the child currently attends on individual perceived

returns to high school quality. We do not find a significant association between these two variables.13

However, school quality can only be changed through rather large discrete investments, such as moving

neighborhoods. In order to look at a more continuous measure, we look at the amount of school fees

parents pay and find that the perceived returns to school quality significantly predict the amount of
 13 We   also do not find any significant association if we perform an ordered probit analysis.




                                                            25
school fees paid.

   We perform several robustness checks and find that our results are robust to us excluding all those

individuals from the analysis for whom the implied returns to any given type of investment are negative

(see Tables A.5, A.6 and A.7 in the Appendix). They are also robust to us controlling for individual

beliefs about returns to the other two types of investments (see Tables A.8, A.9 and A.10 in the

Appendix). Overall, parental beliefs about the returns to investments are predictive of the educational

investment decisions that parents make for their children. These results are consistent with a model

in which parental beliefs play an important role in parental investment decisions.


4.5    Beliefs about the Malleability of Skills

In the previous sections, we document several interesting patterns regarding the heterogeneity in

individual responses. Firstly, individuals differ substantially in their beliefs regarding the productivity

or usefulness of different investments. Secondly, parents who perceive one type of investment as more

productive are also more likely to believe that the other investments have a higher return. A natural

question which emerges is why some parents perceive all investment types as being important while

other parents perceive the returns to all types of investments to be low.

   One hypothesis one might have is that there is an underlying reason which can explain individual

beliefs about the returns to any type of investment made in children. For example, it could very well

be that parents differ in their mindsets regarding whether children’s skills are malleable in general

and whether they are responsive to any type of input. To investigate this question in more detail, we

administer an additional parental mindset questionnaire which aims to measure parents’ beliefs about

the malleability of children’s skills. This questionnaire is inspired by the work of Dweck (2006) who

documents that individuals differ substantially in their mindset regarding the malleability of their own

intelligence.

   To measure parental mindsets, we present parents with a series of items which pertain to the

malleability of children’s skills, and ask parents to rate these items on a Likert-type scale (e.g., My child

develops at his/her own pace and there is not much I can do about that’). The full list of all questions

can be found in Appendix B. We extract a factor from parents’ responses and first investigate how the

extracted factor correlates with the perceived returns to time investments, material investments and

school quality calculated in Section 4.3. The results reveal that parental mindsets are indeed positively

and significantly correlated with parental beliefs about the returns to time investments (corr=0.173, p-



                                                     26
value<0.001) as well as parental beliefs about the returns to school quality (corr=0.137, p-value<0.001).

Put differently, parents who do not perceive children’s skills to be malleable in general also perceive the

returns to investments to be lower. Column 4 of Table 8 documents which individual characteristics

predict parental mindset. We note that fathers are significantly less likely to perceive their children’s

skills to be malleable through home inputs and that wealthier parents perceive their children’s skills

as significantly more malleable.

    These results are important as previous studies have shown that it is possible to change the

investments individuals make into their own skills by changing individual beliefs regarding the malleability

of their skills (see, e.g., Alan, Boneva and Ertac 2015). Interventions that target parental beliefs about

the malleability of their children’s skills may hence be effective in altering parental beliefs about the

returns to educational investments and may therefore encourage parents to invest more into their

children.



5     Conclusion

To understand why some parents invest more into their children and to gain a better understanding

of how parents might respond to policy changes, it is important to understand how parents perceive

the returns to different types of investments. We elicit parental beliefs about returns to investments

in terms of time, money, and school quality, as well as their perceptions about the complementarity

or substitutability between these different inputs. Importantly, our research design allows us to relate

perceived returns to actual investments made by parents.

    Using a representative sample of parents in England, we find perceived returns to all three different

types of investments to be positive and of considerable magnitude. We document that parents perceive

the returns to 3 hours of weekly parental time investments or £30 of weekly material investments

to matter more than moving a child to a better school. Moreover, we find that parents perceive

school quality and material investments as complementary, i.e. parents perceive the returns to material

investments to be higher if the child attends a high quality school. Interestingly, parents who perceive

the returns to one type of investment to be high, are also more likely to perceive the returns to the other

types of investments to be high. Importantly, we establish that parents who perceive the returns to

investments to be higher also invest considerably more into their children. These results are consistent

with parental beliefs playing a very important role in parental investment decisions.

    The results of our study are important because they can help us identify bottlenecks which prevent


                                                    27
parents from investing into their children. They can also help us shed more light on the question

how policy changes may bring about changes in parental behavior. For instance, we find that parents

perceive that the returns to material investments are higher if school quality is higher. Therefore, if

a policy is introduced that improves school quality then our results suggest that parents are likely to

also increase material investments in response to this change. While this is desirable in a sense that

children would on average receive higher levels of investments, this may also deepen socioeconomic gaps

in investment levels as more affluent parents have greater means to increase the material investments

they make into their children.

   When we look at what drives perceived returns, we find, perhaps surprisingly, that the perceived

productivity of investments is not related to parental background. However, we find that the productivity

of investment is positively related to beliefs about the malleability of skills in general. This suggests

that one bottleneck to investments might be that some parents think that skills are not malleable.

One promising avenue for policy could be to engage parents in training and information campaigns

in which the idea is conveyed that skills are malleable and can be affected in the home environment.

A similar intervention which targets the beliefs of school children has produced promising results in

terms of the effort children exert to accumulate skills as well as students’ performance on standardized

tests (Alan, Boneva and Ertac 2015). Whether or not a home intervention that targets parental beliefs

would be successful in raising parental investment levels and child outcomes is an open question that

future research should address.




                                                   28
                      Table 9: Determinants of weekly time investments (in minutes)

                                                                         Weekly investments                                             Factor
                                        Reading         Helping          Talking        Playing         Other            Total        Activities
                                                                ∗∗∗                                            ∗∗                ∗∗
Perceived returns (time)                  37.428       208.715             32.345         52.541      131.742         462.772            0.543∗∗
                                         (36.386)       (65.324)         (96.236)        (59.051)       (53.546)       (209.778)         (0.212)
Male parent                             -18.813∗∗        -21.505       -108.247∗∗∗         14.168        -15.768     -150.166∗∗∗        -0.127∗∗
                                          (9.036)       (15.710)         (27.613)        (18.764)       (12.709)        (58.008)         (0.057)
Age of parent                              -0.188         -1.175           -2.488       -3.395∗∗∗          0.157        -7.089∗∗         -0.006∗
                                          (0.598)        (0.845)          (1.703)         (1.104)        (0.812)         (3.585)         (0.004)
Number of children                         3.307          11.005          -15.846          3.677          -0.791           1.353           0.012
                                          (5.276)       (10.190)         (16.537)        (11.536)        (8.296)        (36.446)         (0.035)
Other parent in household                 13.984          16.348           -5.178       47.416∗∗       30.544∗∗         103.113            0.120
                                         (12.183)       (22.869)         (36.668)        (19.506)       (15.208)        (75.744)         (0.073)
Parent works full-time                     8.434         -11.378        -56.123∗∗         -15.499        11.453          -63.112          -0.034
                                          (8.644)       (15.977)         (26.690)        (18.242)       (13.631)        (58.322)         (0.057)
At least one parent has degree              0.845        -17.925          -24.176          -4.353          2.958         -42.651          -0.036
                                          (8.061)       (13.753)         (24.973)        (17.113)       (12.000)        (53.354)         (0.052)
Own child at private school               26.059          18.461         -92.071∗          35.130        31.680           19.258           0.082
                                         (19.425)       (33.577)         (47.232)        (44.603)       (30.642)       (113.226)         (0.120)
High income                                 0.856         11.653         45.911∗           29.272        11.773         99.466∗            0.084
                                          (8.491)       (15.520)         (26.763)        (19.553)       (12.804)        (58.766)         (0.057)
Own child’s academic ability             0.639∗∗∗       1.206∗∗∗         2.362∗∗∗         1.028∗∗      1.864∗∗∗         7.099∗∗∗        0.007∗∗∗
                                          (0.211)        (0.379)          (0.705)         (0.489)        (0.304)         (1.490)         (0.001)
Own child’s school year                    4.960          10.753            9.474           8.914      15.828∗∗           49.929           0.054
                                          (6.521)        (9.466)         (14.284)        (12.712)        (6.563)        (35.232)         (0.036)
Own child is male                          -3.343         -8.290          -28.516          15.885         -2.711         -26.975          -0.021
                                          (7.655)       (12.918)         (23.624)        (15.689)       (11.548)        (49.771)         (0.048)
Age of own child                       -18.996∗∗∗        -13.854          -13.177       -27.263∗∗     -21.037∗∗∗      -94.328∗∗∗       -0.107∗∗∗
                                          (6.658)        (9.536)         (14.370)        (12.948)        (6.646)        (35.800)         (0.036)
Foreign language at home                29.996∗∗       55.694∗∗∗        -65.436∗∗          26.279      65.117∗∗∗        111.649          0.181∗∗
                                         (12.738)       (20.383)         (31.135)        (22.633)       (16.987)        (74.231)         (0.075)
Region FE                                  Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Sample Mean                              117.37          276.78           616.28         297.11         184.32          1491.86          -0.01
R-squared                                 0.124          0.041             0.051          0.087          0.068           0.075           0.090
Observations                              1603            1603             1603           1603           1603            1603            1603
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions include a constant. Observations are weighted
according to the age and gender of the parent’s own child and the education level of the responding parent. For Columns (1)-(5), the dependent
variable is the number of minutes spent (in minutes) with their own child per week on the five different activities shown in the column headings,
while Column (6) treats the sum across all activities as the dependent variable. ‘Reading’ refers to time spent per week (in minutes) during
term-time reading to/with the child, while ‘Talking’ refers to time spent talking with or listening to the child. ‘Helping’ denotes time spent
helping or teaching the child, and ‘Playing’ refers to time spent playing with him/her (including sports). ‘Other’ refers to all other activities
related to the child’s education. In the final column, the dependent variable ‘Activities’ is the extracted first principal component from the
responses to the five activities. ‘Perceived returns (time)’ refers to the perceived returns to time investments calculated in Section 4.3. ‘High
income’ is a dummy variable equal to 1 if gross annual household income is above the median for our sample, and zero otherwise. ‘Own child’s
academic ability’ refers to the academic ability of the child perceived by the parent on a scale of 0-100, where a higher response reflects higher
perceived ability. ‘Foreign language at home’ denotes whether the parent speaks any language other than English at home. ‘Sample mean’
gives the mean of the dependent variable using only those observations used in the relevant estimation.




                                                             29
                     Table 10: Determinants of monthly material investments (in £s)

                                                                Monthly investments                                     Factor
                                         Books       Educ. games        Societies      Tuition          Total        Expenditure
                                               ∗∗              ∗∗∗                                            ∗∗∗
Perceived returns (material)           54.445          30.249             31.127        32.178       148.000           1.581∗∗∗
                                       (24.005)         (11.124)         (20.147)      (21.477)        (52.129)         (0.538)
Male parent                              -0.484            0.123           -2.846         1.408          -1.800          -0.008
                                        (1.413)          (1.432)          (5.376)       (2.814)         (7.408)         (0.051)
Age of parent                             0.045           -0.106         0.888∗∗∗         0.097         0.923∗∗          0.003
                                        (0.096)          (0.102)          (0.235)       (0.174)         (0.409)         (0.003)
Number of children                       1.552            0.975            2.618         0.766            5.911          0.052
                                        (1.140)          (1.456)          (2.967)       (2.128)         (5.283)         (0.044)
Other parent in household                 0.297           -0.845           -0.511         2.821          1.761            0.006
                                        (1.741)          (2.196)          (5.017)       (2.277)         (8.362)         (0.066)
Parent works full-time                    1.641        3.973∗∗∗             0.530       5.160∗∗        11.304∗          0.112∗∗
                                        (1.166)          (1.285)          (5.298)       (2.161)         (6.840)         (0.044)
At least one parent has degree            1.704            0.973        17.121∗∗∗      7.344∗∗∗       27.141∗∗∗        0.140∗∗∗
                                        (1.508)          (1.447)          (4.395)       (2.466)         (6.716)         (0.052)
Own child goes to state school           -0.875           -7.948        -47.289∗∗     -22.938∗∗      -79.050∗∗∗        -0.413∗∗
                                        (3.411)          (5.009)         (20.220)       (8.952)        (26.456)         (0.163)
High income                            4.362∗∗∗          3.293∗∗        19.424∗∗∗         3.002       30.081∗∗∗        0.200∗∗∗
                                        (1.498)          (1.602)          (4.481)       (2.199)         (6.877)         (0.054)
Own child’s academic ability           0.108∗∗∗          0.064∗∗         0.359∗∗∗        -0.092        0.439∗∗∗        0.003∗∗∗
                                        (0.036)          (0.032)          (0.102)       (0.060)         (0.158)         (0.001)
Own child’s school year                   0.423          2.739∗∗          4.012∗          1.941         9.117∗           0.070
                                        (1.295)          (1.325)          (2.235)       (1.879)         (4.845)         (0.043)
Own child is male                         1.518          3.318∗∗           -3.675         1.479          2.640            0.067
                                        (1.191)          (1.341)          (4.314)       (2.091)         (6.078)         (0.044)
Age of own child                         -0.164        -3.421∗∗∗         -4.894∗∗        -1.567       -10.047∗∗         -0.077∗
                                        (1.380)          (1.290)          (2.265)       (1.911)         (4.909)         (0.044)
Foreign language at home                  3.284          5.654∗             3.696         6.918        19.552∗          0.183∗∗
                                        (2.649)          (2.985)          (6.212)       (4.604)        (10.946)         (0.090)
Region FE                                 Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes
Sample Mean                             £14.64          £11.90           £48.64         £12.32         £87.50             0.01
R-squared                                0.082           0.067            0.084         0.062          0.116             0.108
Observations                             1628            1628             1628           1628           1628             1628
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions include a constant. Observations
are weighted according to the age and gender of the parent’s own child and the education level of the responding parent. For
Columns (1)-(4), the dependent variable is the amount spent per month (in £s) on the respective category given by the column
headings. ‘Books’ refers to expenditures on books other than school books, while ‘Educ. games’ denotes spending on educational
games and toys. ‘Societies’ denotes monthly expenditure on sports clubs, music lessons and other societies/clubs, while ‘Tuition’
refers to private tuition. Column (5) treats the sum of these four expenditure categories (denoted as ‘Total’) as the dependent
variable. In the final column, the dependent variable ‘Expenditure’ is the extracted first principal component from the responses
to the four expenditure categories. ‘Perceived returns (material)’ refers to the perceived returns to time investments calculated in
Section 4.3. ‘High income’ is a dummy variable equal to 1 if gross annual household income is above the median for our sample,
and zero otherwise. ‘Own child’s academic ability’ refers to the academic ability of the child perceived by the parent on a scale
of 0-100, where a higher response reflects higher perceived ability. ‘Foreign language at home’ denotes whether the parent speaks
any language other than English at home. ‘Sample mean’ gives the mean of the dependent variable using only those observations
used in the relevant estimation.




                                                              30
Table 11: Determinants of school quality investments

                                          School         Fees
 Perceived returns (quality)                0.077      82.356∗
                                          (0.067)      (48.747)
 Male parent                               -0.003        14.413
                                          (0.039)      (19.990)
 Age of parent                           0.005∗∗        2.767∗∗
                                          (0.002)       (1.177)
 Number of children                         0.008        -4.067
                                          (0.023)      (10.099)
 Other parent in household                 -0.006         0.469
                                          (0.049)      (15.245)
 Parent works full-time                    -0.056       -12.805
                                          (0.039)      (19.989)
 At least one parent has degree             0.030         2.994
                                          (0.035)      (17.254)
 High income                             0.121∗∗∗     71.546∗∗∗
                                          (0.036)      (16.387)
 Own child’s academic ability            0.004∗∗∗         0.473
                                          (0.001)       (0.326)
 Own child’s school year                    0.014        -0.189
                                          (0.018)       (7.180)
 Own child is male                          0.012        4.888
                                          (0.033)      (15.377)
 Age of own child                          -0.022        3.352
                                          (0.018)       (8.054)
 Foreign language at home                   0.067        33.114
                                          (0.043)      (24.582)
 Region FE                                  Yes           Yes
 Sample Mean                                3.22        £59.89
 R-squared                                 0.048         0.050
 Observations                              1558          1647
  Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
 *** p<0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the parent
 level. All regressions include a constant. Observations are
 weighted according to the age and gender of the parent’s own
 child and the education level of the responding parent. The
 dependent variable ‘School’ is a discrete variable based on the
 Ofsted rating of the child’s school. ‘School’ takes value 1 if
 the school is rated as ‘Inadequate’, 2 if ‘Satisfactory/Requires
 improvement’, 3 if ‘Good’ and 4 if ‘Outstanding’. ‘Fees’
 refers to the amount spent per month (in £s) on school fees.
 ‘Perceived returns (school)’ refers to the perceived returns to
 school quality calculated in Section 4.3. ‘High income’ is a
 dummy variable equal to 1 if gross annual household income
 is above the median for our sample, and zero otherwise. ‘Own
 child’s academic ability’ refers to the academic ability of the
 child perceived by the parent on a scale of 0-100, where a higher
 response reflects higher perceived ability. ‘Foreign language at
 home’ denotes whether the parent speaks any language other
 than English at home. ‘Sample mean’ gives the mean of the
 dependent variable using only those observations used in the
 relevant estimation.




                                31
References

Abramitzky, Ran, and Victor Lavy. 2014. “How responsive is investment in schooling to changes

  in redistributive policies and in returns?” Econometrica, 82(4): 1241–1272.

Alan, Sule, Teodora Boneva, and Seda Ertac. 2015. “Ever Failed, Try Again, Succeed Better:

  Results from a Randomized Educational Intervention on Grit.” HCEO Working Paper No. 2015-009.

Almas, Ingvild, Alexander Cappelen, Kjell Salvanes, Erik Sorensen, and Bertil

  Tungodden. 2016. “What explains the gender gap in college track dropout? Experimental and

  administrative evidence.” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 106(5): 296–302.

Arcidiacono, Peter. 2004. “Ability Sorting and the Returns to College Major.” Journal of

  Econometrics, 121(1): 343–375.

Arcidiacono, Peter, V Joseph Hotz, and Songman Kang. 2012. “Modeling College Major

  Choices using Elicited Measures of Expectations and Counterfactuals.” Journal of Econometrics,

  166(1): 3–16.

Arcidiacono, Peter, V Joseph Hotz, Arnaud Maurel, and Teresa Romano. 2014. “Recovering

  ex ante returns and preferences for occupations using subjective expectations data.” National Bureau

  of Economic Research.

Attanasio, Orazio, and Katja Kaufmann. 2014. “Education Choices and Returns to Schooling:

  Intra-household Decision Making, Gender and Subjective Expectations.” Journal of Development

  Economics, 109: 203–216.

Attanasio, Orazio, and Katja Kaufmann. 2017. “Education choices and returns on the labor and

  marriage markets: Evidence from data on subjective expectations.” Unpublished manuscript.

Attanasio, Orazio, Costas Meghir, and Emily Nix. 2015. “Human Capital Development and

  Parental Investment in India.” NBER Working Paper No. 21740.

Attanasio, Orazio, Flavio Cunha, and Pamela Jervis. 2016. “Eliciting beliefs about the

  production function.” Unpublished manuscript.

Attanasio, Orazio, Sally Grantham-McGregor, Emla Fitzsimons, Marta Rubio-Codina,

  Costas Meghir, et al. 2013. “Enriching the home environment of low-income families in Colombia:

  a strategy to promote child development at scale.” Early Childhood Matters.


                                                  32
Attanasio, Orazio, Sarah Cattan, Emla Fitzsimons, Costas Meghir, and Marta Rubio-

  Codina. 2015. “Estimating the production function for human capital: Results from a randomized

  control trial in Colombia.” NBER Working Paper No. 20965.

Baker, Rachel, Eric Bettinger, Brian Jacob, and Ioana Marinescu. 2017. “The effect of labor

  market information on community college students’ major choice.” NBER Working Paper 23333.

Becker, Gary S, and Nigel Tomes. 1979. “An equilibrium theory of the distribution of income and

  intergenerational mobility.” The Journal of Political Economy, 1153–1189.

Becker, Gary S, and Nigel Tomes. 1986. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.”

  Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3 pt 2): 1–39.

Beffy, Magali, Denis Fougere, and Arnaud Maurel. 2012. “Choosing the field of study in

  postsecondary education: Do expected earnings matter?” Review of Economics and Statistics,

  94(1): 334–347.

Belfield, Chris, Teodora Boneva, Christopher Rauh, and Jonathan Shaw. forthcoming.

  “What drives enrollment gaps in further education? The role of beliefs in sequential schooling

  decisions.” Economica.

Biroli, Pietro, Teodora Boneva, Akash Raja, and Christopher Rauh. 2018. “Parental Beliefs

  about Returns to Child Health Investments.” HCEO working paper 2018-008.

Boneva, Teodora, and Christopher Rauh. 2017. “Socio-economic Gaps in University Enrollment:

  The Role of Perceived Pecuniary and Non-Pecuniary Returns.” HCEO Working Paper 2017-080.

Boneva, Teodora, and Christopher Rauh. 2018. “Parental Beliefs about Returns to Educational

  Investments - The Later the Better?” Journal of the European Economic Association, 16(6): 1669–

  1711.

Carneiro, Pedro, Costas Meghir, and Matthias Parey. 2013. “Maternal education, home

  environments, and the development of children and adolescents.” Journal of the European Economic

  Association, 11(s1): 123–160.

Caucutt, Elizabeth M, Lance Lochner, and Youngmin Park. 2017. “Correlation, Consumption,

  Confusion, or Constraints: Why do Poor Children Perform so Poorly?” The Scandinavian Journal

  of Economics, 119(1): 102–147.


                                                 33
Cooksey, Elizabeth C, and Michelle M Fondell. 1996. “Spending time with his kids: Effects of

  family structure on fathers’ and children’s lives.” Journal of Marriage and the Family, 693–707.

Cunha, Flávio. 2014. “Gaps in early investments in children.” Working Paper, University of

  Pennsylvania.

Cunha, Flávio, Irma Elo, and Jennifer Culhane. 2013. “Eliciting maternal expectations about

  the technology of cognitive skill formation.” NBER Working Paper No. 19144.

Cunha, Flávio, James J Heckman, and Susanne M Schennach. 2010. “Estimating the

  technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation.” Econometrica, 78(3): 883–931.

Delavande, Adeline, and Basit Zafar. 2014. “University choice: the role of expected earnings,

  non-pecuniary outcomes, and financial constraints.” FRB of New York Staff Report 683.

Dizon-Ross, Rebecca. 2018. “Parents’ perceptions and children’s education: Experimental evidence

  from Malawi.” NBER Working Paper No 24610.

Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles Manski. 1996. “Eliciting Student Expectations of the Returns to

  Schooling.” Journal of Human Resources, 31(1): 1–26.

Dweck, Carol. 2006. Mindset: The new psychology of success. Random House.

Giustinelli, Pamela. 2016. “Group Decision Making with Uncertain Outcomes: Unpacking Child-

  Parent Choice of the High School Track.” International Economic Review, 57(2): 573–602.

Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney. 2008. “Parental Education and Parental

  Time with Children.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(3): 23–46.

Hastings, Justine, Christopher Neilson, Anely Ramirez, and Seth Zimmerman. 2016.

  “(Un)informed college and major choice: Evidence from linked survey and administrative data.”

  Economics of Education Review, 51: 136–151.

Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling.” The

  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2): 515–548.

Kaufmann, Katja Maria. 2014. “Understanding the income gradient in college attendance in

  Mexico: The role of heterogeneity in expected returns.” Quantitative Economics, 5(3): 583–630.



                                                 34
Kinsler, Josh, and Ronni Pavan. 2016. “Parental beliefs and investment in children: The

  distortionary impact of schools.” HCEO working paper 2016-029.

Lareau, Annette. 2011. Unequal childhoods: Class, race, and family life. Univ of California Press.

Lergetporer, Philipp, Katharina Werner, and Ludger Woessmann. 2018. “Does ignorance of

  economic returns and costs explain the educational aspiration gap? Evidence from representative

  survey experiments.” CESifo Working Paper No. 7000.

Manski, Charles. 2004. “Measuring Expectations.” Econometrica, 72(5): 1329–1376.

Montmarquette, Claude, Kathy Cannings, and Sophie Mahseredjian. 2002. “How Do Young

  People Choose College Majors?” Economics of Education Review, 21: 543–556.

Putnam, Robert D. 2015. Our kids: The American dream in crisis. Simon and Schuster.

Stinebrickner, Ralph, and Todd R Stinebrickner. 2014. “A Major in Science? Initial Beliefs and

  Final Outcomes for College Major and Dropout.” The Review of Economic Studies, 81(1): 426–472.

Wiswall, Matthew, and Basit Zafar. 2015a. “Determinants of college major choice: Identification

  using an information experiment.” The Review of Economic Studies, 82(2): 791–824.

Wiswall, Matthew, and Basit Zafar. 2015b. “How do college students respond to public

  information about earnings?” Journal of Human Capital, 9(2): 117–169.

Wiswall, Matthew, and Basit Zafar. 2017. “Preference for the workplace, human capital and

  gender.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Zafar, Basit. 2013. “College major choice and the gender gap.” Journal of Human Resources,

  48(3): 545–595.




                                                35
Appendix A: Supplementary Analysis

             Table A.1: Ofsted rating of own child’s school and national distribution


     Ofsted rating                          N          Percent    National Distribution %
     Outstanding                            614         31.29                    21
     Good                                  1050         53.52                    68
     Satisfactory/Requires Improvement     166           8.46                    9
     Inadequate                              16          0.82                    2
     Don’t know                             116          5.91                     -



                      Table A.2: Parental time spent with child (in minutes)

Time investment                Weekday Weekend Week                 SD           Min         Max    Median
                                               total

Reading to/with child          16.82     17.16         118.39     158.22          0          1700     85
Talking to/with child           75.97     115.9        611.67     454.94          0          2100     500
Helping child with studies      36.54     47.17        277.03     254.01          0          2100     210
Playing with child              32.81     68.86        301.74     322.08          0          2100     220
Other educational activities   23.99     33.67         187.31     244.06          0          2100    120
Total time                     186.12    282.75        1496.13    1013.45         0          5480    1285



                     Table A.3: Material investments per month (in pounds)

                           Variable                Mean            SD       Min       Max

                  Books (exc. school books)        14.393         27.469     0         530
                  Educational games and toys       12.713         52.621     0        2000
                  Societies                        48.348         99.652     0        2000
                  Private tuition                 12.309          69.984     0        2000
                  School fees                     62.849         381.339     0        4000
                  Total expenditure               150.611        465.123     0        6700




                                                  36
     Figure A.1: Distributions of individual perceived returns




1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0




     −.4   −.2    0       .2      .4       .6      .8   1       1.2    1.4
                               Perceived return

                 School quality             Time            Material




                                   37
                                    Figure A.2: Joint distributions of individual perceived returns

                                                                     A: Time and material

           0.4




           0.3




           0.2
Material




           0.1




             0
                                                                                       0.2                                                                 0.3
                                                                                             0.1                                                   0.2
                                                                                                    0                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                    0
           -0.1                                                                                         -0.1                 -0.1
              -0.1          0         0.1             0.2     0.3        0.4                 Material          -0.2   -0.2          Time
                                             Time

                                                                      B: Time and school

           0.8



           0.6



           0.4
Time




           0.2



             0

                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                              0.2                                                    0.4
           -0.2                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                0
                     -0.2       0           0.2         0.4    0.6       0.8                    Time           -0.2   -0.2          School
                                             School

                                                                     C: Material and school

           0.8



           0.6



           0.4
Material




           0.2



             0

                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                              0.2                                                    0.4
           -0.2                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                0
                     -0.2       0           0.2         0.4    0.6       0.8                 Material          -0.2   -0.2          School
                                             School




                                                                               38
              Table A.4: Determinants of perceived returns (2)

                                           Time      Material       School      Mindset
                                                                          ∗∗
Male parent                                -0.001       -0.002     -0.048       -0.176∗∗∗
                                          (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.019)       (0.057)
Age of parent                             -0.001∗        0.000        0.001     0.017∗∗∗
                                          (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.001)       (0.003)
Number of children                         -0.002       -0.001       -0.002     -0.099∗∗∗
                                          (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.013)       (0.033)
Other parent in household                   0.004       -0.003        0.025        -0.009
                                          (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.023)       (0.072)
Parent works full-time                     -0.013       -0.005        0.027        -0.081
                                          (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.019)       (0.056)
At least one parent has degree             -0.001       -0.006        0.011        -0.001
                                          (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.017)       (0.052)
Own child goes to private school           -0.005        0.014        0.059         0.084
                                          (0.015)      (0.017)      (0.045)       (0.128)
2nd income quartile                        -0.007        0.003       -0.024       0.116∗
                                          (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.024)       (0.069)
3rd income quartile                         0.003        0.002       -0.011      0.210∗∗∗
                                          (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.022)       (0.064)
4th income quartile                        -0.005       -0.011        0.002      0.332∗∗∗
                                          (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.024)       (0.074)
Own child’s academic ability               -0.000       -0.000      -0.001∗      0.009∗∗∗
                                          (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.001)
Own child’s school year                    -0.004       -0.005       0.011         -0.014
                                          (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.011)       (0.029)
Own child is male                          -0.004       -0.001      -0.027∗         0.032
                                          (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.016)       (0.047)
Age of own child                            0.003        0.005       -0.013        -0.012
                                          (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.011)       (0.030)
Foreign language at home                    0.003     0.033∗∗∗        0.014        -0.021
                                          (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.023)       (0.064)
Region FE                                   Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Sample Mean                                 0.11        0.08         0.17          0.00
R-squared                                  0.019       0.024         0.023        0.077
Observations                               1633        1630          1638         1825
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions
include a constant. Observations are weighted according to the age and gender of the
parent’s own child and the education level of the responding parent. ‘Time’, ‘Material’
and ‘School’ are the individual perceived returns to time investments, material investments
and school quality, respectively, while ‘Mindset’ is the extracted factor from the growth
mindset/malleability of skills questionnaire. ‘Sample mean’ gives the mean of the
dependent variable using only those observations used in the relevant estimation.




                                            39
           Table A.5: Determinants of weekly time investments (in minutes) - Robustness I

                                                                             Weekly investments                                             Factor
                                           Reading         Helping          Talking         Playing         Other            Total        Activities
                                                   ∗∗              ∗∗∗                                            ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Perceived returns (time)                   77.561         258.705             24.665         92.911      203.988          657.830          0.789∗∗∗
                                           (36.866)         (67.770)       (100.160)        (60.803)       (52.920)        (215.585)        (0.216)
Male parent                                -14.277∗          -22.146      -111.471∗∗∗        15.969         -19.452       -151.377∗∗       -0.124∗∗
                                            (8.561)         (16.234)        (28.788)        (19.716)       (12.870)         (59.940)        (0.058)
Age of parent                                 0.109           -0.876          -2.440       -3.114∗∗∗         0.433            -5.888         -0.005
                                            (0.601)          (0.864)         (1.762)         (1.141)        (0.802)          (3.642)        (0.004)
Number of children                            5.050           14.783         -17.268          1.962          -3.561            0.965          0.014
                                            (5.296)         (10.663)        (17.282)        (12.071)        (8.348)         (37.477)        (0.036)
Other parent in household                   11.775            14.394           5.495        49.398∗∗        22.823          103.885          0.114
                                           (12.033)         (23.403)        (37.333)        (19.646)       (15.029)         (76.105)        (0.073)
Parent works full-time                        1.805          -13.480       -58.842∗∗         -14.096         9.003           -75.610         -0.051
                                            (8.621)         (16.429)        (27.443)        (18.734)       (13.734)         (59.458)        (0.058)
At least one parent has degree               -0.140          -22.835         -23.828          -8.934          1.845          -53.892         -0.049
                                            (7.985)         (14.098)        (25.707)        (17.582)       (11.762)         (54.245)        (0.052)
Own child goes to private school            22.941            30.703         -70.352         34.908          1.256            19.456          0.070
                                           (20.651)         (36.851)        (52.116)        (49.187)       (23.228)        (118.860)        (0.125)
High Income                                   1.042           16.963        55.074∗∗        35.165∗        23.738∗         131.982∗∗        0.116∗∗
                                            (8.420)         (16.100)        (27.674)        (20.400)       (12.670)         (60.161)        (0.058)
Own child’s academic ability               0.630∗∗∗        1.027∗∗∗         2.397∗∗∗         1.009∗∗       1.780∗∗∗         6.843∗∗∗       0.007∗∗∗
                                            (0.211)          (0.389)         (0.722)         (0.505)        (0.305)          (1.521)        (0.001)
Own child’s school year                       6.269           14.417          16.625          13.601      16.666∗∗          67.579∗         0.070∗
                                            (7.039)         (10.181)        (15.246)        (13.631)        (6.836)         (37.197)        (0.038)
Own child is male                            -3.201           -9.570         -28.100          23.099          5.774          -11.998         -0.005
                                            (7.540)         (13.219)        (24.400)        (16.138)       (11.024)         (50.354)        (0.048)
Age of own child                          -20.662∗∗∗         -15.940         -19.545       -30.909∗∗     -20.372∗∗∗      -107.428∗∗∗      -0.118∗∗∗
                                            (7.207)         (10.273)        (15.320)        (13.872)        (6.976)         (37.885)        (0.039)
Foreign language at home                   22.938∗         54.698∗∗∗        -59.199∗          28.693      57.942∗∗∗         105.071         0.166∗∗
                                           (13.018)         (21.083)        (32.707)        (24.096)       (16.694)         (75.872)        (0.076)
Region FE                                     Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
Sample Mean                                 117.37          276.78           616.28         297.11          184.32         1491.86           -0.01
R-squared                                    0.135          0.046             0.051          0.088           0.075          0.077            0.093
Observations                                 1514            1514             1514           1514            1514           1514             1514
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions include a constant. Observations are weighted according
to the age and gender of the parent’s own child and the education level of the responding parent. The analysis is limited to those individuals for
whom the implied perceived returns to time investments are non-negative. For Columns (1)-(5), the dependent variable is the number of minutes
spent (in minutes) with their own child per week on the five different activities shown in the column headings, while Column (6) treats the sum
across all activities as the dependent variable. ‘Reading’ refers to time spent per week (in minutes) during term-time reading to/with the child,
while ‘Talking’ refers to time spent talking with or listening to the child. ‘Helping’ denotes time spent helping or teaching the child, and ‘Playing’
refers to time spent playing with him/her (including sports). ‘Other’ refers to all other activities related to the child’s education. In the final
column, the dependent variable ‘Activities’ is the extracted first principal component from the responses to the five activities. ‘Perceived returns
(time)’ refers to the perceived returns to time investments calculated in Section 4.3. ‘High income’ is a dummy variable equal to 1 if gross annual
household income is above the median for our sample, and zero otherwise. ‘Own child’s academic ability’ refers to the academic ability of the
child perceived by the parent on a scale of 0-100, where a higher response reflects higher perceived ability. ‘Foreign language at home’ denotes
whether the parent speaks any language other than English at home. ‘Sample mean’ gives the mean of the dependent variable using only those
observations used in the relevant estimation.




                                                              40
           Table A.6: Determinants of monthly material investments (in £s) - Robustness I

                                                                 Monthly investments                                    Factor
                                          Books       Educ. games        Societies      Tuition        Total        Expenditure
                                                ∗∗               ∗∗∗               ∗             ∗           ∗∗∗
Perceived returns (material)             63.925         39.548            35.446       42.357        181.277           1.934∗∗∗
                                         (25.223)        (11.366)         (21.446)     (22.711)        (53.901)         (0.554)
Male parent                                -1.476          -0.649           -3.918        0.220          -5.823          -0.045
                                          (1.412)         (1.290)          (5.856)      (2.968)         (7.842)         (0.051)
Age of parent                              0.091           -0.026         0.919∗∗∗        0.126         1.110∗∗           0.005
                                          (0.103)         (0.087)          (0.254)      (0.184)         (0.431)         (0.003)
Number of children                         1.020           0.397             2.570        0.435           4.422           0.033
                                          (0.989)         (1.467)          (3.156)      (2.222)         (5.340)         (0.042)
Other parent in household                  0.991           -1.277            0.599        2.612           2.926           0.014
                                          (1.649)         (2.280)          (5.024)      (2.302)         (8.389)         (0.067)
Parent works full-time                     1.246         3.456∗∗∗            1.479      4.389∗∗         10.570         0.098∗∗
                                          (1.226)         (1.294)          (5.587)      (2.159)         (7.099)         (0.045)
At least one parent has degree             1.969           1.427         17.490∗∗∗     7.231∗∗∗       28.117∗∗∗        0.151∗∗∗
                                          (1.340)         (1.334)          (4.644)      (2.502)         (6.687)         (0.048)
Own child goes to private school            1.351           6.607        54.367∗∗      24.098∗∗       86.424∗∗∗        0.432∗∗
                                          (3.665)         (4.597)         (21.915)      (9.614)        (28.328)         (0.168)
High Income                              4.325∗∗∗        3.994∗∗∗        19.639∗∗∗      3.548∗        31.505∗∗∗        0.213∗∗∗
                                          (1.404)         (1.495)          (4.727)      (2.152)         (6.855)         (0.052)
Own child’s academic ability             0.118∗∗∗          0.036         0.406∗∗∗        -0.070        0.490∗∗∗        0.003∗∗∗
                                          (0.037)         (0.030)          (0.106)      (0.056)         (0.156)         (0.001)
Own child’s school year                    -0.215          1.935             3.327       -0.386           4.661           0.033
                                          (1.257)         (1.294)          (2.242)      (1.261)         (4.249)         (0.040)
Own child is male                          1.382        3.671∗∗∗            -3.346       -0.021           1.685           0.063
                                          (1.203)         (1.328)          (4.511)      (2.122)         (6.234)         (0.044)
Age of own child                            0.562        -2.622∗∗          -4.233∗        0.823          -5.470          -0.038
                                          (1.323)         (1.258)          (2.294)      (1.287)         (4.264)         (0.040)
Foreign language at home                    2.933         4.839∗             2.406        5.142         15.320          0.152∗
                                          (2.598)         (2.902)          (6.618)      (4.711)        (11.016)         (0.089)
Region FE                                   Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
Sample Mean                                14.64           11.90           48.64         12.32         87.50            0.01
R-squared                                  0.109           0.076           0.087         0.062         0.126            0.127
Observations                               1509            1509            1509          1509          1509             1509
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions include a constant. Observations are
weighted according to the age and gender of the parent’s own child and the education level of the responding parent. The analysis
is limited to those individuals for whom the implied perceived returns to material investments are non-negative. For Columns
(1)-(4), the dependent variable is the amount spent per month (in £s) on the respective category given by the column headings.
‘Books’ refers to expenditures on books other than school books, while ‘Educ. games’ denotes spending on educational games and
toys. ‘Societies’ denotes monthly expenditure on sports clubs, music lessons and other societies/clubs, while ‘Tuition’ refers to
private tuition. Column (5) treats the sum of these four expenditure categories (denoted as ‘Total’) as the dependent variable. In
the final column, the dependent variable ‘Expenditure’ is the extracted first principal component from the responses to the four
expenditure categories. ‘Perceived returns (material)’ refers to the perceived returns to time investments calculated in Section
4.3. ‘High income’ is a dummy variable equal to 1 if gross annual household income is above the median for our sample, and
zero otherwise. ‘Own child’s academic ability’ refers to the academic ability of the child perceived by the parent on a scale of 0-
100, where a higher response reflects higher perceived ability. ‘Foreign language at home’ denotes whether the parent speaks any
language other than English at home. ‘Sample mean’ gives the mean of the dependent variable using only those observations used
in the relevant estimation.




                                                            41
Table A.7: Determinants of school quality investments - Robustness I

                                                  School         Fees
         Perceived returns (quality)                0.059     107.064∗
                                                  (0.076)      (56.508)
         Male parent                               -0.001         3.157
                                                  (0.043)      (22.168)
         Age of parent                            0.005∗        3.504∗∗
                                                  (0.003)       (1.364)
         Number of children                         0.008        -3.423
                                                  (0.025)      (11.462)
         Other parent in household                 -0.008        -3.613
                                                  (0.055)      (17.444)
         Parent works full-time                    -0.062       -10.087
                                                  (0.042)      (21.452)
         At least one parent has degree             0.022        -1.814
                                                  (0.037)      (19.576)
         High Income                             0.111∗∗∗     70.435∗∗∗
                                                  (0.039)      (18.740)
         Own child’s academic ability            0.003∗∗          0.605
                                                  (0.001)       (0.369)
         Own child’s school year                    0.015        -2.501
                                                  (0.022)       (9.583)
         Own child is male                          0.017        9.473
                                                  (0.036)      (16.606)
         Age of own child                          -0.026        4.506
                                                  (0.023)      (10.471)
         Foreign language at home                   0.045        18.014
                                                  (0.046)      (26.130)
         Region FE                                  Yes           Yes
         Sample Mean                                3.22         59.89
         R-squared                                 0.039         0.050
         Observations                              1333          1406
          Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
         *** p<0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the parent
         level. All regressions include a constant. Observations are
         weighted according to the age and gender of the parent’s own
         child and the education level of the responding parent. The
         analysis is limited to those individuals for whom the implied
         perceived returns to school quality are non-negative. The
         dependent variable ‘School’ is a discrete variable based on the
         Ofsted rating of the child’s school. ‘School’ takes value 1 if
         the school is rated as ‘Inadequate’, 2 if ‘Satisfactory/Requires
         improvement’, 3 if ‘Good’ and 4 if ‘Outstanding’. ‘Fees’
         refers to the amount spent per month (in £s) on school fees.
         ‘Perceived returns (school)’ refers to the perceived returns to
         school quality calculated in Section 4.3. ‘High income’ is a
         dummy variable equal to 1 if gross annual household income
         is above the median for our sample, and zero otherwise. ‘Own
         child’s academic ability’ refers to the academic ability of the
         child perceived by the parent on a scale of 0-100, where a higher
         response reflects higher perceived ability. ‘Foreign language at
         home’ denotes whether the parent speaks any language other
         than English at home. ‘Sample mean’ gives the mean of the
         dependent variable using only those observations used in the
         relevant estimation.




                                        42
          Table A.8: Determinants of weekly time investments (in minutes) - Robustness II

                                                                            Weekly investments                                             Factor
                                           Reading         Helping         Talking         Playing         Other            Total        Activities
                                                                  ∗∗∗                                             ∗∗                ∗
Perceived returns (time)                     12.325      214.071             63.625          13.043      106.599          409.663           0.460∗∗
                                            (45.372)      (67.309)        (105.990)        (63.098)       (54.344)        (228.634)         (0.231)
Perceived returns (material)                 83.003         11.885          -71.903       153.763∗∗        77.919          254.667            0.346
                                            (53.943)      (63.901)        (123.728)        (74.035)       (53.109)        (252.307)         (0.251)
Perceived returns (quality)                    6.188       -17.374           -8.733         -35.560          6.447          -49.033          -0.042
                                            (14.414)      (23.243)         (45.658)        (24.328)       (20.592)         (86.979)         (0.086)
Male parent                                -18.882∗∗       -22.994       -108.840∗∗∗        12.920         -15.704      -153.499∗∗∗        -0.130∗∗
                                             (9.084)      (15.852)         (28.164)        (18.819)       (12.923)         (58.580)         (0.057)
Age of parent                                 -0.241        -1.179           -2.537       -3.457∗∗∗          0.083         -7.330∗∗         -0.007∗
                                             (0.598)       (0.848)          (1.717)         (1.106)        (0.816)          (3.599)         (0.004)
Number of children                            2.927         10.618          -17.407          2.913          -1.440           -2.389           0.009
                                             (5.302)      (10.206)         (16.554)        (11.597)        (8.294)         (36.512)         (0.036)
Other parent in household                    13.532         16.738           -5.830        49.467∗∗       30.362∗∗         104.269           0.122∗
                                            (12.193)      (22.980)         (36.654)        (19.551)       (15.352)         (76.068)         (0.074)
Parent works full-time                        7.496        -10.728        -58.543∗∗         -15.206         10.556          -66.426          -0.037
                                             (8.657)      (16.048)         (26.918)        (18.300)       (13.714)         (58.571)         (0.058)
At least one parent has degree                 1.812       -18.425          -22.949          -2.641          3.408          -38.795          -0.032
                                             (8.111)      (13.796)         (24.977)        (17.076)       (12.040)         (53.344)         (0.052)
Own child goes to private school             24.965         19.719         -89.787∗         35.287         30.583            20.767           0.082
                                            (19.310)      (33.652)         (47.559)        (44.704)       (30.478)        (113.027)         (0.120)
High Income                                   2.120         12.672          46.460∗         29.873         12.911         104.036∗            0.090
                                             (8.560)      (15.556)         (26.788)        (19.518)       (12.836)         (58.789)         (0.057)
Own child’s academic ability                0.701∗∗∗      1.166∗∗∗         2.394∗∗∗         0.991∗∗       1.891∗∗∗         7.142∗∗∗        0.007∗∗∗
                                             (0.209)       (0.383)          (0.709)         (0.493)        (0.308)          (1.503)         (0.001)
Own child’s school year                       5.322         10.899            9.319         10.155        16.106∗∗           51.801           0.056
                                             (6.499)       (9.465)         (14.362)        (12.769)        (6.589)         (35.369)         (0.036)
Own child is male                             -3.507        -9.217          -28.440          15.237         -2.774          -28.701          -0.023
                                             (7.595)      (12.954)         (23.571)        (15.765)       (11.565)         (49.819)         (0.048)
Age of own child                          -19.455∗∗∗       -13.939          -13.111       -28.645∗∗      -21.405∗∗∗      -96.555∗∗∗       -0.109∗∗∗
                                             (6.625)       (9.530)         (14.434)        (13.016)        (6.657)         (35.928)         (0.036)
Foreign language at home                   28.138∗∗      56.496∗∗∗         -60.047∗         22.533       63.579∗∗∗         110.699          0.177∗∗
                                            (12.641)      (20.579)         (31.342)        (22.510)       (16.955)         (74.535)         (0.076)
Region FE                                     Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Sample Mean                                 117.37          276.78          616.28          297.11         184.32          1491.86          -0.01
R-squared                                    0.129          0.042            0.052           0.091          0.070           0.078           0.093
Observations                                 1599            1599            1599            1599           1599            1599            1599
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions include a constant. Observations are weighted according
to the age and gender of the parent’s own child and the education level of the responding parent. For Columns (1)-(5), the dependent variable
is the number of minutes spent (in minutes) with their own child per week on the five different activities shown in the column headings, while
Column (6) treats the sum across all activities as the dependent variable. ‘Reading’ refers to time spent per week (in minutes) during term-
time reading to/with the child, while ‘Talking’ refers to time spent talking with or listening to the child. ‘Helping’ denotes time spent helping
or teaching the child, and ‘Playing’ refers to time spent playing with him/her (including sports). ‘Other’ refers to all other activities related to
the child’s education. In the final column, the dependent variable ‘Activities’ is the extracted first principal component from the responses to the
five activities. ‘Perceived returns (time)’ refers to the perceived returns to time investments calculated in Section 4.3. ‘High income’ is a dummy
variable equal to 1 if gross annual household income is above the median for our sample, and zero otherwise. ‘Own child’s academic ability’ refers
to the academic ability of the child perceived by the parent on a scale of 0-100, where a higher response reflects higher perceived ability. ‘Foreign
language at home’ denotes whether the parent speaks any language other than English at home. ‘Sample mean’ gives the mean of the dependent
variable using only those observations used in the relevant estimation.




                                                             43
          Table A.9: Determinants of monthly material investments (in £s) - Robustness II

                                                                 Monthly investments                                    Factor
                                          Books       Educ. games        Societies      Tuition        Total        Expenditure
Perceived returns (time)                   -3.758          -7.374            6.750      -18.556       -22.937            -0.241
                                          (8.619)         (7.288)         (16.278)     (14.576)      (32.949)           (0.282)
Perceived returns (material)             54.069∗∗       31.829∗∗∗          24.012        40.681     150.590∗∗∗         1.619∗∗∗
                                         (24.873)        (11.613)         (22.122)     (26.779)      (57.404)           (0.566)
Perceived returns (quality)                6.073          4.639∗          12.310∗        -2.183       20.839             0.194
                                          (4.161)         (2.784)          (7.376)      (3.863)      (13.768)           (0.121)
Male parent                                -0.201          0.350            -2.231       1.332         -0.750            0.001
                                          (1.353)         (1.430)          (5.353)      (2.852)       (7.343)           (0.049)
Age of parent                               0.035          -0.118         0.879∗∗∗        0.081       0.878∗∗            0.002
                                          (0.089)         (0.101)          (0.234)      (0.171)       (0.396)           (0.003)
Number of children                          1.558           0.966           2.640         0.710         5.874            0.052
                                          (1.137)         (1.455)          (2.967)      (2.141)       (5.275)           (0.044)
Other parent in household                   0.166          -0.926           -0.826       2.948          1.363             0.003
                                          (1.725)         (2.195)          (5.022)      (2.358)       (8.374)           (0.066)
Parent works full-time                      1.428        3.757∗∗∗            0.289      4.991∗∗        10.465          0.104∗∗
                                          (1.253)         (1.290)          (5.317)      (2.104)       (6.890)           (0.045)
At least one parent has degree             1.624           0.923         16.990∗∗∗     7.400∗∗∗     26.937∗∗∗          0.137∗∗∗
                                          (1.525)         (1.454)          (4.414)      (2.470)       (6.746)           (0.052)
Own child goes to private school            0.500           7.607        46.687∗∗      22.840∗∗     77.635∗∗∗          0.400∗∗
                                          (3.489)         (4.989)         (20.183)      (8.956)      (26.479)           (0.164)
High Income                              4.339∗∗∗         3.293∗∗        19.361∗∗∗        3.078     30.072∗∗∗          0.199∗∗∗
                                          (1.488)         (1.589)          (4.470)      (2.201)       (6.842)           (0.054)
Own child’s academic ability             0.111∗∗∗         0.066∗∗         0.368∗∗∗       -0.097      0.449∗∗∗          0.003∗∗∗
                                          (0.037)         (0.032)          (0.102)      (0.061)       (0.157)           (0.001)
Own child’s school year                     0.340         2.668∗∗          3.882∗         1.933        8.823∗            0.067
                                          (1.298)         (1.309)          (2.222)      (1.877)       (4.789)           (0.043)
Own child is male                           1.686         3.424∗∗           -3.342       1.343          3.111            0.071
                                          (1.178)         (1.342)          (4.301)      (2.137)       (6.086)           (0.044)
Age of own child                           -0.076       -3.355∗∗∗         -4.742∗∗       -1.592      -9.765∗∗          -0.074∗
                                          (1.381)         (1.274)          (2.247)      (1.903)       (4.843)           (0.043)
Foreign language at home                    3.215         5.546∗             3.678        6.714      19.153∗           0.179∗∗
                                          (2.618)         (2.978)          (6.200)      (4.613)      (10.920)           (0.090)
Region FE                                   Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
Sample Mean                                14.64           11.90           48.64         12.32         87.50            0.01
R-squared                                  0.086           0.070           0.086         0.064         0.118            0.111
Observations                               1627            1627            1627          1627          1627             1627
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions include a constant. Observations are
weighted according to the age and gender of the parent’s own child and the education level of the responding parent. For Columns
(1)-(4), the dependent variable is the amount spent per month (in £s) on the respective category given by the column headings.
‘Books’ refers to expenditures on books other than school books, while ‘Educ. games’ denotes spending on educational games and
toys. ‘Societies’ denotes monthly expenditure on sports clubs, music lessons and other societies/clubs, while ‘Tuition’ refers to
private tuition. Column (5) treats the sum of these four expenditure categories (denoted as ‘Total’) as the dependent variable. In
the final column, the dependent variable ‘Expenditure’ is the extracted first principal component from the responses to the four
expenditure categories. ‘Perceived returns (material)’ refers to the perceived returns to time investments calculated in Section
4.3. ‘High income’ is a dummy variable equal to 1 if gross annual household income is above the median for our sample, and
zero otherwise. ‘Own child’s academic ability’ refers to the academic ability of the child perceived by the parent on a scale of 0-
100, where a higher response reflects higher perceived ability. ‘Foreign language at home’ denotes whether the parent speaks any
language other than English at home. ‘Sample mean’ gives the mean of the dependent variable using only those observations used
in the relevant estimation.




                                                            44
Table A.10: Determinants of school quality investments - Robustness II

                                                    School           Fees
          Perceived returns (time)                   -0.125      -169.436∗∗
                                                    (0.130)        (80.654)
          Perceived returns (material)                0.074        173.440
                                                    (0.169)       (126.260)
          Perceived returns (quality)                 0.077        85.648∗
                                                    (0.066)        (49.383)
          Male parent                                -0.002         14.817
                                                    (0.039)        (20.068)
          Age of parent                            0.005∗∗          2.614∗∗
                                                    (0.002)         (1.146)
          Number of children                          0.009          -4.325
                                                    (0.023)        (10.145)
          Other parent in household                  -0.004           1.169
                                                    (0.049)        (15.117)
          Parent works full-time                     -0.058         -14.021
                                                    (0.039)        (20.039)
          At least one parent has degree              0.030           3.172
                                                    (0.035)        (16.980)
          High Income                              0.117∗∗∗       72.834∗∗∗
                                                    (0.036)        (16.678)
          Own child’s academic ability             0.003∗∗∗           0.481
                                                    (0.001)         (0.336)
          Own child’s school year                     0.014          -0.173
                                                    (0.018)         (7.615)
          Own child is male                           0.012           4.387
                                                    (0.033)        (15.441)
          Age of own child                           -0.021           3.110
                                                    (0.019)         (8.574)
          Foreign language at home                    0.063         27.085
                                                    (0.044)        (25.558)
          Region FE                                   Yes            Yes
          Sample Mean                                 3.22          59.89
          R-squared                                  0.047          0.055
          Observations                               1549           1638
           Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
          *** p<0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the parent level.
          All regressions include a constant. Observations are weighted
          according to the age and gender of the parent’s own child and
          the education level of the responding parent. The dependent
          variable ‘School’ is a discrete variable based on the Ofsted rating
          of the child’s school. ‘School’ takes value 1 if the school is rated
          as ‘Inadequate’, 2 if ‘Satisfactory/Requires improvement’, 3 if
          ‘Good’ and 4 if ‘Outstanding’. ‘Fees’ refers to the amount spent
          per month (in £s) on school fees. ‘Perceived returns (school)’
          refers to the perceived returns to school quality calculated in
          Section 4.3. ‘High income’ is a dummy variable equal to 1 if gross
          annual household income is above the median for our sample,
          and zero otherwise. ‘Own child’s academic ability’ refers to the
          academic ability of the child perceived by the parent on a scale of
          0-100, where a higher response reflects higher perceived ability.
          ‘Foreign language at home’ denotes whether the parent speaks
          any language other than English at home. ‘Sample mean’ gives
          the mean of the dependent variable using only those observations
          used in the relevant estimation.




                                          45
Appendix B: Questionnaires

B.1 Hypothetical Investment Scenarios

Next we are interested in your opinion about how important it is for parents to devote time and financial

resources to help their children acquire new skills. For this purpose, we will ask you to imagine two

average British families, the Jones and the Smiths, who make decisions about how much time and

money to devote to their children. More specifically, we will show you different scenarios and ask you

what you think the likely yearly earnings of the child will be at age 30. We know these questions are

difficult. Please try to consider each scenario carefully and tell us what you believe the likely outcome

to be.



Mr and Mrs Jones have one child, John.14 John is in Year 3 of primary school15 , and he attends a

popular school, which has been rated as ’Outstanding’. In the KS1 SATs John achieved the expected

level.16 During school years 3-6, Mr and Mrs Jones can decide how much time to devote to helping

John acquire new skills (e.g. by reading to/with John, playing educational games, talking to John,

helping John with his school work etc.) and how much money to spend on educational resources which

help John acquire new skills (e.g. books, educational games, private tuition etc.). Assuming there is

no inflation, what do you expect John’s gross yearly earnings to be when he is 30 years old...17



A) if they help John for 0 hours every week to acquire new skills, and they spend £0 every week on

educational resources which help John to acquire new skills.

B) if they help John for 0 hours every week to acquire new skills, and they spend £30 every week on

educational resources which help John to acquire new skills.

C) if they help John for 3 hours every week to acquire new skills, and they spend £0 every week on

educational resources which help John to acquire new skills.

D) if they help John for 3 hours every week to acquire new skills, and they spend £30 every week on

educational resources which help John to acquire new skills.
  14 Half of the parents in our sample were randomised into seeing a son (John) with the other half seeing a daughter

(Jane).
  15 Parents were randomly selected into seeing either a child in Year 3 (primary school) or Year 7 (secondary school) in

order to analyse the effect of the timing of investments.
  16 Half of the parents saw a child who achieved the expected level (high initial skill level) and half saw a child who did

not (low initial skill level)
  17 Parents saw either low/high time and material investments of 0 hours/3 hours and £0/£30 respectively (Group 0)

or low/high time and material investments of 1 hour/4 hours and £10/£40 respectively (Group 1).




                                                            46
Now imagine a different family, the Smiths. In many respects the Smiths are very similar to the

Jones.18 For example, Mr and Mrs Smith also have one child, Simon, who is in Year 3 of primary

school. They live in the same neighbourhood as Mr and Mrs Jones and they have similar levels of

income and education. Also, the two children John and Simon have similar levels of intellectual ability

and they both achieved the expected level in the KS1 SATs. However, there is one difference. Unlike

John’s school, which is popular and has been rated as ’Outstanding’, Simon’s school is not very popular

and has only been rated as ’Requires Improvement’. Assuming there is no inflation, what do you expect

Simon’s gross yearly earnings to be when he is 30 years old...



A) if they help Simon for 0 hours every week to acquire new skills, and they spend £0 every week on

educational resources which help Simon to acquire new skills.

B) if they help Simon for 0 hours every week to acquire new skills, and they spend £30 every week on

educational resources which help Simon to acquire new skills.

C) if they help Simon for 3 hours every week to acquire new skills, and they spend £0 every week on

educational resources which help Simon to acquire new skills.

D) if they help Simon for 3 hours every week to acquire new skills, and they spend £30 every week on

educational resources which help Simon to acquire new skills.




B.2 Parental Investment Questions

In the following, please think about you and your child.

How much time do you usually spend on each of the following activities during term-time? Please

provide time spent in minutes on a typical weekdays and the time spend in minutes on a typical

weekend day. If you don’t engage in a given activity, please insert 0.

    1) Reading to/with child

    2) Talking with/listening to child

    3) Helping/teaching child

    4) Playing with child (including sports)

    5) Other activities related to child’s education
  18 The age, gender and initial skill level of the hypothetical child and the levels of low/high investments seen by parents
are kept the same for the two families.



                                                             47
During term-time, how much money do you on average spend (in £s) on the following categories per

month for your child? If you don’t spend any money in a given category, please insert 0.

   1) Books (other than school books)

   2) Educational games and toys

   3) Sports clubs/music lessons/other societies

   4) Private tuition

   5) School fees




B.3 Supplementary Mindset Questionnaire

To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements? [1 "Strongly disagree" 2

"Disagree" 3 "Neither agree nor disagree" 4 "Agree" 5 "Strongly agree"]

   1) My child develops at his/her own pace and there is not much I can do about that.

   2) If my child is not performing well in school, there is a lot I can do to help my child perform

   better.

   3) My child is a certain kind of person, and there is not much that can be done to really change

   that.

   4) Some children get more discouraged by setbacks than others - there is not much I as a parent

   can do to change that.




                                                   48
Appendix C: Sample

   Figure C.1: Distribution of household income - Comparison to Family Resources Survey
    .12
    .1
    .08
    .06
    .04
    .02
    0




          <£10000                     £50000−£55000                           >£100000

                                      Our survey            FRS




                                           49
