                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EFFECTS OF MATERNAL WORK INCENTIVES ON ADOLESCENT SOCIAL BEHAVIORS

                                        Dhaval M. Dave
                                          Hope Corman
                                           Ariel Kalil
                                     Ofira Schwartz-Soicher
                                        Nancy Reichman

                                       Working Paper 25527
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25527


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2019




Research reported in this publication was supported by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health & Human Development of the National Institutes of Health under
Award Number R01HD086223 and by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation through its support
of the Child Health Institute of New Jersey at Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers
University (grants 67038 and 74260). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health or the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation. The authors are grateful to Elizabeth Lower-Basch for valuable input;
Karen Conway, Jeff DeSimone, Daniel Grossman, Brady Horn, Brad Humphries, Joseph Sabia,
Orgul Ozturk, and Nicholas Anthony Wright for helpful comments, to the staff at the University
of Michigan’s NADHAP for their data and technical help, and Michael Papotto for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Dhaval M. Dave, Hope Corman, Ariel Kalil, Ofira Schwartz-Soicher, and Nancy
Reichman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Effects of Maternal Work Incentives on Adolescent Social Behaviors
Dhaval M. Dave, Hope Corman, Ariel Kalil, Ofira Schwartz-Soicher, and Nancy Reichman
NBER Working Paper No. 25527
February 2019
JEL No. H53,I12,I31,I38

                                         ABSTRACT

This study exploits variations in the timing of welfare reform implementation in the U.S. in the
1990s to identify plausibly causal effects of welfare reform on a range of social behaviors of the
next generation as they transition to adulthood. We focus on behaviors that are important for
socioeconomic and health trajectories, estimate effects by gender, and explore potentially
mediating factors. Welfare reform had no favorable effects on any of the youth behaviors
examined and led to decreased volunteering among girls, increases in skipping school, damaging
property, and fighting among boys, and increases in smoking and drug use among both boys and
girls, with larger effects for boys (e.g., ~6% for boys compared to 4% for girls for any substance
use). Maternal employment, supervision, and child’s employment explain little of the effects.
Overall, the intergenerational effects of welfare reform on adolescent behaviors were
unfavorable, particularly for boys, and do not support longstanding arguments that limiting cash
assistance leads to responsible behavior in the next generation. As such, the favorable effects of
welfare reform for women may have come at a cost to the next generation, particularly to boys
who have been falling behind girls in high school completion for decades.

Dhaval M. Dave                                  Ofira Schwartz-Soicher
Bentley University                              Princeton University
Department of Economics                         Donald Stokes Library
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                      Princeton, US 08544
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                          oschwart@princeton.edu
and IZA
and also NBER                                   Nancy Reichman
ddave@bentley.edu                               Rutgers University
                                                Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
Hope Corman                                     Department of Pediatrics
Department of Economics                         Child Health Institute of New Jersey
Rider University                                89 French St., Room 3272
2083 Lawrenceville Road                         New Brunswick, NJ 08903
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648                         reichmne@rutgers.edu
and NBER
corman@rider.edu

Ariel Kalil
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
a-kalil@uchicago.edu
       The U.S. Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA)

of 1996, often referred to as “welfare reform,” was a major policy shift in the U.S. that sought to

dramatically reduce dependence of single parents on government benefits by promoting work,

encouraging marriage, and reducing non-marital childbearing. The legislation represented a

convergence of dissatisfaction with the welfare system on both sides of the political spectrum,

with welfare participation becoming viewed by many as a cause of dependence rather than a

consequence of disadvantage. The key strategy for reducing dependence was to promote

employment by imposing work requirements as a condition for receiving benefits in concert with

a lifetime limit on receipt of cash assistance. The basic argument was that labor force

participation would break a culture of dependence by increasing self-sufficiency and

reconnecting members of an increasingly marginalized underclass to the mainstream ideals of a

strong work ethic and civic responsibility (Katz, 2001). At the same time, there were concerns

that some individuals would be ill equipped to maintain stable employment (e.g., due to low job

skills or disability) and that the pro-work regime would marginalize, rather than mainstream,

those individuals by contributing to existing hardships (Lichter & Jayakody, 2002). The

legislation was targeted to females, who represent the vast majority of welfare recipients in the

United States (ACF, 2016).

       The reforms have been successful in that welfare caseloads have declined dramatically—

e.g., average monthly family welfare caseloads fell from a peak of 5.05 million in 1994 to 1.10

million in 2017, representing a 78% decrease (ACF, 2018). Employment of low-skilled women

increased in the aftermath of the reforms and at least some of the increase can be attributed to

welfare reform (Fang & Keane, 2004; Ziliak, 2016) and welfare reform also led to declines in

women’s substance abuse (Corman et al., 2013; Kaestner & Tarlov, 2006) and crime (Corman et



                                                                                                    2
al., 2014) as well as increases in women’s civic participation in the form of voting (Corman,

Dave & Reichman, 2017). The effects for drug use appeared to operate in part through drug

sanctions and strength of state work incentives (Corman et al., 2013), while the effects for voting

appeared to operate in part through increases in employment, education, and income (Corman,

Dave & Reichman, 2017).

        An implicit assumption behind the reforms was that a work-focused regime would not

only encourage mainstream behaviors of mothers, which it appeared to do on average for the

behaviors that have been examined, but that it would also encourage mainstream behaviors of the

next generation and disrupt an intergenerational transmission of welfare dependence through

more stable home environments and exposure to work as the key means of financial support.

However, research to date on the effects of welfare reform on children has primarily focused on

young children who are not old enough to make autonomous decisions; as such, few studies have

broadly tested the intergenerational “culture of poverty” argument. The most developed line of

research on adolescents includes quasi-experimental studies finding that PRWORA led to

decreased high school dropout and likely decreased teen fertility (Dave et al., 2012; Kaestner,

Korenman & O’Neill, 2003; Koball, 2007; Lopoo & Deleire, 2006; Miller & Zhang, 2012;

Offner, 2005), at least in part through its “minor mother” requirements that mothers under 18

years old participate in education or training activities and live with a parent or legal guardian.

Thus, for these outcomes, welfare reform had socially favorable effects on the next generation.

Few other adolescent behavioral outcomes have been explored. 1

        The small extant literature on the effects of welfare reform on adolescent behaviors is



1
 We use the term “adolescents, “teens,” and “youth” interchangeably when making general points about children
who are old enough to make autonomous decisions but later indicate specific age ranges in the context of our
analyses.

                                                                                                                3
characterized by another noteworthy gap: Few studies have considered differential effects by

gender (exceptions are noted in the Background section). Although welfare reform was primarily

targeted to females, the developmental psychology and broader literature suggests that second-

generation effects could be substantial for boys. For example, a recent study found that gender

gaps in disciplinary problems, achievement test scores, and high school completion (all favoring

girls) are larger in disadvantaged families than in more advantaged families (Autor et al.,

forthcoming), suggesting that changes in families' economic circumstances may affect the

behavioral outcomes of boys more than those of girls.

       In this study, we investigate the effects of welfare reform, which was implemented in the

U.S. in the 1990s but is very much in effect today—on a range of social behaviors of high

school-aged youth. We conduct all analyses by gender and consider both socially-desirable

behaviors (volunteering and participating in clubs/teams/activities) and socially-undesirable

activities (skipping school, getting into serious fights, damaging property, stealing, hurting

others, and specific types of substance use). These outcomes can occur within a relatively

short time frame and represent early observable consequences of the reforms for the next

generation as they transition to adulthood. We explore the contribution of potentially

mediating factors, including maternal employment, supervision, and the child’s employment

when not in school.

       We focus on adolescents, as opposed to younger children, based on the literature on

identity formation (e.g., Adams & Montemayor, 1983; Marcia, 1980; Wigfield & Wagner, 2005)

— the process of integrating experiences and characteristics into a stable identity and making

decisions that align with that identity, which begins in childhood but takes hold during

adolescence. In addition, theoretical and empirical research has shown that adverse experiences

(e.g., economic pressure) lead to negative affect and conflict in the household and suboptimal
                                                                                                   4
parenting, which can compromise adolescents’ development of competencies that protect them

from those risks and increase their risky behavior (IOM 2011). Finally, youth in this age range

are at a critical stage of their lifecourse trajectories. Focusing specifically on high school students

captures teens in a particularly important period of autonomy development when their decisions

can have long term consequences for their own future economic success and health as well as for

society more broadly (Steinberg, 2014).

Background

Welfare reform in the United States

       The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of

1996, often referred to as welfare reform, ended entitlement to welfare benefits under Aid to

Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and replaced AFDC with Temporary Assistance for

Needy Families (TANF) block grants to states. Key features of the legislation were time limits

on cash assistance and work requirements as a condition for receiving benefits. States were

granted considerable latitude in establishing eligibility and program rules subject to the national

guidelines under PRWORA that mandated work requirements and a 5-year lifetime limit on the

receipt of cash assistance.

       Although welfare reform is often dated to the PRWORA legislation, reforms started

taking place in the early 1990s when the Clinton Administration expanded the use and scope of

“welfare waivers” to allow states to carry out experimental changes to their AFDC programs.

Although not federally mandated, waivers were implemented in the majority of states by the time

the federal PRWORA was enacted in 1996. Many policies and features of PRWORA, such as

work requirements and time-limited welfare receipt, were integral parts of these earlier

programs.



                                                                                                      5
        Major statewide waivers—as typically operationalized in research studies and originally

defined in a 1997 report by the Council of Economic Advisors (CEA) (CEA 1997) as those that

substantially altered the nature of AFDC with respect to work requirements and incentives, time

limits, and family caps—were introduced in 29 states over a period of 53 months, and TANF was

implemented in all states over a period of 17 months (Appendix Table 1). Considering both

waivers and TANF, states implemented any welfare reform over a period of 64 months, from

October 1992 through January 1998.

Empirical studies of effects of welfare reform on behaviors in adolescence and beyond

        All previous studies of the effects of welfare reform on social behaviors of the next

generation of which we are aware have focused on antisocial or delinquent behaviors; that is,

none studied prosocial behaviors. Syntheses of pre-PRWORA welfare reform experiments,

which included features such as work requirements and time limits that later were included in the

PRWORA legislation, did not find consistent evidence of effects of work incentives on

adolescent delinquent behaviors such as having trouble with the police or being suspended or

expelled from school (Gennetian et al., 2002, 2004; Grogger & Karoly, 2005). However, the

welfare experiments were conducted in specific contexts, tended to have small samples of

adolescents, and often did not measure adolescent behavioral outcomes.

        Aside from the studies focusing on fertility and high school completion discussed earlier,

there have been few quasi-experimental studies of effects of welfare reform on adolescent

behaviors. 2 Two recent studies exploited differences in the implementation of welfare reform in




2
 There have also been few quasi-experimental studies of effects of maternal employment on adolescent behaviors.
An exception is Aughinbaugh and Gittleman (2004), which estimated the effects of maternal work in the past 3
years on teen alcohol, cigarette, and marijuana use with data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979
and family fixed effects models and found no significant effects, even for a subsample of unmarried mother
households. However, the effects in this study were imprecisely estimated.

                                                                                                                    6
the U.S. across states and over time to identify causal effects of welfare reform on youth arrests

for drug-related (Corman et al., 2017a) and non-drug-related (Corman et al., 2017b) crime using

arrest data from the Federal Bureau of Investigation merged with implementation dates of

welfare reform in each state. Corman et al. (2017a) found suggestive evidence that welfare

reform led to increases in drug-related arrests for teens ages 15 to 17; the effects appeared to be

stronger for boys than for girls, but the estimates were not always statistically significant.

Corman et al. (2017b) focused on crimes categorized as serious (violent offenses such as assault,

rape, and murder, as well as serious property offenses such as burglary, possession of stolen

property and vandalism) and minor (such as disorderly conduct, driving under the influence, and

curfew and loitering law violations) and found that welfare reform led to reduced arrests for

minor crimes among youth ages 15–17 with similar estimates for boys and girls, but that it did

not affect youth arrests for serious crimes.

       The estimates from the Corman et al. studies of welfare reform on teen arrests could

reflect changes in behavior but could also potentially reflect welfare-reform-induced changes in

reporting of teen crime (perhaps as a result of changes in maternal employment or supervision)

that changed the probability of arrest. The latter would still be a welfare reform effect but would

not reflect adolescents’ behavioral responses. In addition, arrest data do not include crimes that

do not result in arrests and only capture behaviors that are sufficiently severe and apparent that

they result in chargeable criminal arrests. For these reasons, it is important to focus on behavior

rather than arrests. In addition, arrest data contain limited information on the characteristics of

individuals committing the crimes; although they include sex and age of arrestees, they do not

include characteristics such as maternal employment and parental marital status.

       Recently, Hartley, Lamarche and Ziliak (2017) estimated the effects of welfare reform on



                                                                                                      7
the intergenerational transmission of welfare participation using data from the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics in difference-in-differences models and found that welfare reform attenuated

the “intergenerational transmission” of welfare participation by more than 50 percent. A large

intergenerational decline in welfare participation is to be expected given the dramatic

retrenchment of the cash assistance safety net. As such, much of the effect likely reflects reduced

access to welfare in the second generation. However, welfare reform may have increased family

resources, led mothers to model socially desirable behavior, led mothers to become more

engaged parents, and/or dampened youths’ expectations about welfare as a long-term option,

which may have favorably affected adolescents’ behavior and potentially their longer-term

outcomes including self-sufficiency (i.e., non-reliance on welfare). That said, some families may

not have achieved greater financial security under the new regime, may have confronted new

work/family challenges (such as time available for child supervision), and/or may have

experienced increased stress and conflict within the household, which could adversely affect

adolescents’ behavior and potentially their longer-term outcomes. In the latter case, lack of

welfare participation of the next generation would not be a marker of economic success. Thus,

without understanding the circumstances behind the overall reduction in welfare participation in

the next generation, welfare reform cannot necessarily be considered a success in this regard. It

is important to consider more proximal and clearly favorable or unfavorable outcomes in order to

identify who was helped and who was harmed by the reforms.

       Overall, there is little past literature directly relevant to our focus on the effects of welfare

reform on teenage social behaviors. The two most directly relevant studies focused on arrests,

which are an imperfect proxy for delinquent behavior, and those studies were limited in terms of

exploring potential heterogeneous treatment effects and underlying mechanisms and had limited



                                                                                                      8
power to detect effects for certain types of crime. In this study, we focus on teenage social

behaviors more generally, considering prosocial as well as delinquent behaviors. Delinquent

behaviors of adolescents can be precursors to criminal careers (Loeber, Farrington & Petechuk,

2013), and studies have found links between community engagement in adolescence (defined

various ways including participation in school clubs or organizations, participation in community

service organizations, and volunteering for social causes, depending on the specific study) and

civic participation, educational attainment, and lower rates of arrest in emerging adulthood (see

Chan, Ou & Reynolds, 2014 for a review).

Expected effects

       Employment of low-skilled women increased as a result of welfare reform, with an

upper-bound estimate of 27 percent (Fang & Keane, 2004; Ziliak, 2016). This employment effect

may have increased household incomes, which could improve teens’ behaviors. E.g., Akee et al.,

(2010) found that a positive income shock led to increases in parental supervision (which Aizer

(2004) found was associated with decreases in 10–14-year-old children’s alcohol/drug use,

skipping school, stealing, and hurting others in a disadvantaged sample) and lower levels of drug

dealing and minor crimes among teenage children. However, maternal employment could lead to

a net increase in constraints (e.g., if increases in income do not offset transportation and

childcare expenses, or by decreasing time available for supervision or parental involvement),

which could lead to undesirable effects on teens’ behaviors.

       Real incomes of unmarried mothers increased by approximately 25% between 1993 and

2002, while real income from public assistance in 2002 was about 20% of its 1993 level (Fang &

Keane, 2004). However, unmarried mothers—particularly those who were employed—

experienced high rates of financial hardship, poor health, and unreliable child care in the post-



                                                                                                    9
PRWORA era (Teitler et al., 2004). These potentially offsetting effects suggest that the effects of

welfare reform on families may vary by household composition.

       The effects of welfare reform on marriage, cohabitation, and non-marital fertility have

been mixed or weak (Ziliak, 2016), suggesting that if household composition is an important

pathway between welfare reform and teen behaviors, it would operate through other aspects of

living arrangements. Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes (2006), focusing on where children live rather

than whether a woman lives with her child (because the Current Population Survey, like most

datasets, does not document where a child lives if not with a parent), found that pre-PRWORA

waivers were associated with children being less likely to live with unmarried parents, more

likely to live with married parents, and more likely to live with neither parent (living instead with

a grandparent or other relative). These findings, which pertain to the waivers but not national

welfare reform under PRWORA, suggest that child supervision may not have decreased as a

result of welfare reform.

       The reforms could also affect teen behaviors through channels other than maternal

employment, income, and supervision. Welfare reform was a strong intervention that was

designed to not only move women from welfare to work, but also to change the normative

climate from a culture of dependence to one of personal responsibility and precluded welfare

reliance as a long-term option for the next generation by time-limiting cash assistance. As such,

it may have led teens to focus more on school and community activities as investments in human

and social capital. The reforms led to reductions in high school dropout (Dave et al., 2012;

Kaestner, Korenman & O’Neill, 2003; Miller & Zhang, 2012), and thus would have reduced time

and opportunities for engaging in delinquent behaviors and possibly decreased the costs of




                                                                                                  10
engaging in school-related activities. 3 Additionally, recent studies found that welfare reform led

to decreases in women’s crime (Corman, Dave & Reichman, 2014) and substance use (Corman

et al., 2013) and increased their civic participation in the form of voting (Corman, Dave &

Reichman, 2017), which may have led them to set a positive example for their children and be

more engaged parents, which would be expected to improve their children’s behaviors. However,

welfare reform also could adversely affect parenting quality or quantity, perhaps through

increased stress and conflict within household, and ultimately lead to unfavorable teenage

behaviors. Notably, Paxson and Waldfogel (2003) found suggestive evidence that early welfare

reforms led to increased cases of child maltreatment.

         As indicated earlier, previous studies of effects of welfare reform or maternal

employment on teen social behaviors have rarely considered differences by gender, 4 but other

studies have shown that: (1) Females are less likely than males to commit crime, and factors that

affect criminal behavior generally have less of an effect for females than for males (e.g., Levitt &

Lochner, 2001), suggesting that the effects would be stronger for boys than girls. (2) Disruptive

events have more adverse effects on behaviors of boy teens than girl teens (e.g., Bertrand & Pan,

2013; Kling et al., 2005), suggesting that effects would be stronger for boys, if welfare reform is

experienced as a disruptive event. (3) Girls are more likely than boys to take care of younger

siblings (East, Weisner & Slonim, 2009) and there is some evidence that this type of caretaking



3
  As indicated earlier, there is evidence suggesting that PRWORA led to decreases in teen fertility (Kaestner,
Korenman & O’Neill, 2003; Koball, 2007; Lopoo & Deleire, 2006; Offner 2005), at least in part through its “minor
 mother” requirements. It is not clear a priori whether or how a reduction in fertility would translate to social
behaviors.
4
  As far as we know, the only exceptions were Aughinbaugh and Gittleman (2004), which found no overall or
gender-specific effects on teen substance use, sexual activity, and conviction for criminal behavior, but had limited
power to detect effects for unmarried-mother families; Gennetian et al. (2002), which revealed no overall gender-
specific effects of early welfare experiments on suspension or expulsion from school; Corman et al. (2017a), which
found some evidence of stronger effects for boys than girls on drug arrests; and Corman et al. (2017b), which found
similar effects for boys and girls on arrests for minor crimes.

                                                                                                                   11
increased in the aftermath of welfare reform (Hsueh & Gennetian, 2011), suggesting that girls

would have fewer opportunities than boys to engage in school and community behaviors, both

anti- and prosocial, as a result of welfare reform. (4) Girls are much more likely than boys to rely

on welfare when they are adults—e.g., fewer than 15% of adult TANF recipients in 2015 were

male; 5 this reality suggests that effects of welfare reform on behaviors would increase favorable

behaviors and reduce unfavorable behaviors of girls, if youth are forward looking in this regard.

(5) Girls would be more subject than boys to potential maternal role modeling effects (Bussey &

Bandura, 1984; Perry & Bussey, 1979), suggesting that welfare reform would lead to increases in

favorable behaviors and reductions in unfavorable behaviors of girls—if welfare reform led to

changes in maternal role modeling.

        Overall, the patchwork of findings relevant to various potential mechanisms suggests that

the effects of welfare reform on teenage behaviors would be the product of potentially competing

forces, may differ depending on the specific behavioral outcome, and may differ by gender. The

various plausible scenarios make it difficult to anticipate a generalized pattern by gender but

point to the potential importance of exploring gender-specific effects.

Data

        For our main analyses, we use restricted data from the 10th and 12th grade surveys of

Monitoring the Future (MTF), an annual nationally-representative survey of high school

students, for the years 1991 through 2006. 6 We use 1991 as the starting point because that was

the year the MTF began surveying 10th graders and that year also preceded welfare reform in all

states. We use 2006 as the endpoint in order to allow all states to have fully implemented the


5
  In the U.S. in 2015, there were 112,300 adult male TANF recipients (Table 17) compared to 631,957 adult female
TANF residents (Table 18). From Characteristics and Financial Circumstances of TANF Recipients, Fiscal Year
2015 (ACF, 2016).
6
  More information about the MTF study design can be found at http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/purpose.html.

                                                                                                              12
reforms and to avoid conflating our results with the effects of the Great Recession that started in

the last quarter of 2007. The MTF is administered at over 400 public and private schools,

providing representative samples of students in the 8th, 10th, and 12th grades. Between 13,000 and

19,000 students are surveyed each year in each of the three grades. We limit our primary sample

to high school students (grades 10 and 12) that are minors (<18 years old), but also consider

models that also include the 8th graders, who are in an age range for which many of the

behavioral outcomes examined are less salient and gender differences in development are more

pronounced compared to high schoolers.

         MTF began in 1975 and was designed for the purpose of studying substance use and

related attitudes and behaviors among youth, teens, and adults. It is one of two large Federal

surveys used to track adolescent drug use in the United States (Substance Abuse and Mental

Health Services Administration, 2012). 7 Questionnaires are administered at school rather than at

home so that parents are never physically near the teen while he/she is completing the survey.

Teens are assured that their responses are confidential and private, and the data collection

protocol was designed to minimize underreporting of sensitive information. 8

         The MTF is particularly well-suited for our study, since it allows us to have an

observation period that envelops welfare reform, has large sample sizes both overall and within

states, and includes high-quality information on many relevant pro-and antisocial behaviors and

other relevant factors. Multiple “forms” of the survey are administered such that some questions

are asked only of random subsamples of respondents. For the 10th graders, there were two




7
  The other is the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), for which geographic indicators going back
to the early 90s are not publicly available. In any case, the MTF is more suitable for our study because the NSDUH
is limited in measures of delinquent behaviors, does include any prosocial behaviors, includes a smaller teen sample,
and was administered in the household when parents might be present.
8
  Source: http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/purpose.html Accessed 11/29/18.

                                                                                                                  13
different forms from 1991 through 1996 and then four different forms from 1997 onward. For the

12th graders, there were six different forms. For this reason, sample sizes vary across behavioral

outcomes.

       In additional analyses, we use restricted data from the 1979 cohort of the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) linked with information on their children from

the Child Self-Administered (CS) and Young Adult (YA) Self-Report surveys. The original

sample consisted of over 12,000 youth who were ages 14 to 22 years in 1979. The self-

administered CS and YA surveys follow the biological children of the women in the original

NLSY79 sample. The CS began in 1988 and has been administered biannually (in even-

numbered years) to children 10 years and over and includes questions relating to sensitive

antisocial behaviors such as hurting others and vandalizing property, as well as prosocial

behaviors such as volunteering. Starting in 1994, the NLSY implemented the YA survey, which

was administered to children who were 15 years old or more, and only administered the CS

(which had much more detailed data on youth behaviors than the YA surveys) to children ages

10–14. In order to consider a sample as comparable as possible to that in our MTF analyses, we

created a cohort of teens ages15 to 17 for the years 1990 through 2006.

       The MTF is a school-based sample, and thus representative of youth enrolled in and

attending school on the survey day. The NLSY, on the other hand, is a representative sample of

all youth born to the original NLSY cohort of mothers. The NLSY is also longitudinal,

permitting an alternate identification strategy (sibling fixed effects) and an exploration of

potential compositional selection, neither of which are possible with pooled cross-sectional data.

However, because of the transition to the YA surveys for youth age 15 and older in 1994, which

focused more on adult issues than teenage behaviors, the available outcomes in this dataset were



                                                                                                 14
limited. Moreover, much smaller sample sizes in the NLSY than in the MTF provided limited

statistical power.

Measures

Outcomes

       In our main analyses, which used the MTF data, we consider three different prosocial

behaviors and a large set of delinquent behaviors. For convenience, we break down the

delinquent behaviors into antisocial behaviors and substance use, recognizing that the use of

tobacco and alcohol in minors is illegal (as is the use of marijuana and other illicit drugs) and

therefore antisocial. Each of the behavioral outcome measures from the MTF is defined below.

Prosocial (favorable) behaviors

       Volunteering. Students were asked how often they participated in community affairs or

volunteer work. Categories ranged from “never” to “almost daily.” We categorized students as

having volunteered if they participated at least once a month.

       Participation in school clubs and participation in school athletics. Students were asked

about the extent to which they participated in various types of school activities during the school

year. Response categories ranged from participated “not at all” to participated to a “great extent.”

The categories were school athletics, school newspaper or yearbook, music or other performing

arts, and other school clubs or activities. Using this information, we created two different

behavioral outcome measures. The first, participation in school clubs, was coded as a “yes” if

the student reported that he/she participated in school newspaper or yearbook, music or other

performing arts, or other school clubs or activities (other than athletics) to a “considerable” or

“great extent.” The second, participation in school athletics, was coded as a yes if the respondent

reported that he/she participated in school athletics to a considerable or great extent.



                                                                                                     15
Antisocial behaviors

        Skipping school. Students were asked how many whole days of school they missed in the

past four weeks due to “skipping” or “cutting.” We coded them as skipping school if their

answer was once or more.

        Damaging property. Students were asked how often they had damaged school property

on purpose in the last 12 months. We coded them as having damaged property if they answered

once or more often.

        Involved in fights. Students were asked how often, in the past year, they had gotten into a

serious fight in school or at work. Categories ranged from none to 5+ times. We coded this

outcome as a “yes” if the student responded that he or she had been in a serious fight at least

once.

        Stealing. In two separate questions, students were asked how often in the past year they

had taken something not belonging to them valued at under $50 or worth over $50, respectively.

We coded them as having engaged in stealing if they answered “at least once” to either question.

        Hurting someone. Students were asked how often they had hurt someone badly

(physically) in the past 12 months. We coded them as having hurt someone if they responded

that they had done this once or more often.

Substance Use

        We consider four categories of substance use: marijuana, alcohol, other illicit drugs, and

cigarettes. For marijuana, alcohol, and other illicit drug use, students were asked how many

times they had engaged in the activity during the past 30 days. For cigarette smoking, they were

asked about the frequency in the past 30 days. For illicit drugs other than marijuana/hashish,

students were asked about the following specific types of drugs, which included substances



                                                                                                   16
without a doctor’s prescription: LSD, psychedelics other than LSD, crack cocaine, cocaine in any

other form, amphetamines, barbiturates, 9 tranquilizers, heroin, narcotics other than heroin, and

inhalants. For all four categories of substance use, students were coded as having engaged in the

activity if they reported that they had done so (for other illicit drugs, any of the types listed) at

least once in the previous month. In addition, we combine all substances into a variable called

any substance use, which is coded positive if the respondent reported using any of the substances

in the past 30 days—alcohol, marijuana, other illicit drugs, or cigarettes. Thus, the substance use

variables are marijuana use, alcohol use, smoking, other illicit drug use, and any substance use.

Outcomes in NLSY analyses

           As indicated earlier, a key disadvantage of the NLSY for this study is a paucity of

outcomes that are consistently measured for youth ages 15–17. The two relevant outcomes that

we were able to consider using the NLSY, which also happened to be similar to outcomes we are

investigating in the MTF, were whether the youth had hurt someone and whether the youth had

used cigarettes, alcohol, or marijuana. 10

           Hurting someone. In the CS survey in 1990 and 1992, teens were asked, “In the last year,

about how many times have you hurt someone badly enough to need bandages or a doctor?” We

coded any frequency greater than “never” as a yes. In 1994, 1996, and 1998, the YA survey

asked: “In the last year, have you ever hurt someone badly enough to need bandages or a

doctor?” This question was not asked in 2000. In 2002, 2004, and 2006, the YA survey asked

how often (in the past year) the teen had hurt someone badly enough to need bandages or a

doctor. We coded any frequency greater than “never” as a yes.

           Any substance use. The NLSY consistently asked teens whether they had smoked


9
    In 2004, this category was changed to barbiturates/sedatives.
10
     Information on the use of other illicit drugs is very limited in the NLSY and thus cannot be used for this analysis.

                                                                                                                       17
cigarettes, whether they had consumed alcohol, and whether they had used marijuana in the past

three months. We combined these into a measure of whether the teen had used any of these

substances in the past three months.

Welfare reform

           Following the convention in the welfare reform literature (Blank, 2002), we exploit

differences in the timing of both AFDC waivers and TANF implementation across states. For

waivers, we consider whether, in a given year and month, a given state had a statewide AFDC

waiver in place that substantially altered the nature of AFDC with regard to time limits, work

requirements, earnings disregards, sanctions, and/or family caps, based on the CEA classification

(1997). For TANF, we consider whether, in a given year and month, the state had implemented

TANF post-PRWORA. In most specifications, we include a single indicator for any welfare

reform (AFDC waiver or TANF). In supplementary models, we use separate indicators for

AFDC and TANF.

           We matched the timing of each phase of welfare reform to the teens’ records in the MTF

and NLSY based on maternal state of residence 11 and year and month of interview. A teen is

considered exposed to welfare reform if the mother resided in a state in which welfare reform

was implemented and had been in effect for at least 12 months—i.e., welfare reform was

implemented in that state at least 12 months prior to the year and month of interview. The one-

year lag addresses the retrospective nature of the youth outcomes, many of them capturing

participation over the past month, past 3 months, or past year, and also allows for a lag between

maternal exposure to welfare reform, maternal responses to welfare reform, and children’s

behavioral responses. We explore lagged effects more formally in supplementary analyses



11
     State indicators are available in restricted MTF and restricted NLSY data.

                                                                                                  18
described later.

Covariates and sample selection variables

       Individual-level covariates in all analyses include the child’s age, grade in school, and

race/ethnicity (white, black, or other, with the last category including Hispanics). Mothers’

marital status and education are used to define target and comparison groups for our analyses and

education is controlled for as relevant (e.g., when comparing groups with mothers with less than

or equal to a high school education, we control for maternal high school completion). State/year

covariates include unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income

Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number of Medicaid beneficiaries,

numbers of National School Breakfast and Lunch Program beneficiaries, and population.

Mediators

       In our analyses using the MTF data, we consider the following variables as potential

mediators of effects of welfare reform on adolescent behaviors: whether the teen engaged in paid

work when out of school, whether the teen was home alone for 4+ hours after school, and

whether the mother was employed. We also considered continuous variables for the numbers of

hours the teen worked for pay and was home alone after school.

Methods

Baseline difference-in-difference-in-differences

       We employ a quasi-experimental difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD) research

design, which exploits variation in the timing of welfare reform implementation across states in

conjunction with comparisons across treatment and comparison groups and is standard in the

economics literature on evaluating the effects of welfare reform. The following reduced-form

baseline DDD specification directly relates changes in children’s behaviors to their exposure to



                                                                                                   19
welfare reform, for the target group relative to a comparison group:

           (1)      Dimst = α + (Welfarest-12 * Targetmst) Π1 + Welfarest-12 Π2 + Ximst β + Vmst λ +

                             Zst β + States Ω + Timet Ψ + εimst

           A given behavior (D), for the ith child born to mother m residing in state s and observed at

time t, is a function of welfare policy (Welfare), measured here by an indicator for whether a

given state had in place a major AFDC waiver (prior to enacting TANF) or had implemented

TANF for at least 12 months. As indicated earlier, we build in the 12-month lag (Welfarest-12)

because some of the behavioral measures reference past year participation (see Table 1) and to

allow time for the implementation of welfare reform to affect mothers (e.g., their employment)

and youth behaviors. 12 In alternate specifications, we use separate indicators for the two phases

of welfare reform that capture whether the state had an AFDC waiver in place for at least 12

months and whether the state had implemented TANF for at least 12 months. We control for a

vector of child characteristics (X) and a vector of maternal characteristics (V).

           Models are estimated separately by the child’s gender because, as discussed earlier, there

are many reasons to expect that boys and girls would respond differently to the policy shift. We

estimate all models using Ordinary Least Squares (linear probability models) and report standard

errors that are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the error term (ε) across and within individuals

in a given state, and hence clustered at the state level. 13

           To account for other potentially confounding policy shifts, we include a rich set of time-

varying state factors (Z), detailed earlier and in table notes. Models further include State and

Time (month/year of interview) fixed effects, which control for time-invariant state

heterogeneity, national trends, and seasonal variations in youth outcomes.


12
     We explore the timing of the effects more formally in an event study framework.
13
     Our estimates are not sensitive to estimation via logit or probit regression.

                                                                                                       20
       The population of interest is children born to all women at risk of relying on public

assistance, not just children born to current or former welfare recipients. Traditionally, the

welfare caseload has consisted primarily of low-educated unmarried mothers (Bitler & Hoynes,

2010). This at-risk population is the target group of women for whom welfare policy would be

expected to have the largest effects on employment, income, and other household conditions and

potentially the largest behavioral effects, if any exist, on their children. While we control for a

large set of time-varying state-level factors, the possibility of omitted variables remains. The

DDD framework addresses this issue by considering a comparison group – individuals similar in

many ways to the target group but unlikely to participate in public assistance programs and

therefore not expected to be affected by welfare reform policies. In the above specification,

Target represents a dichotomous indicator equal to one if the child is in the target group (has a

low-educated unmarried mother and is thus at risk of being on welfare) and zero if in the child is

in the comparison group (has a mother who is not at risk of being on welfare; defined below).

The parameter vector of interest is Π1, the coefficients of the interaction terms between the

policy measures (Welfare) and the Target group indicator, which represent the reduced-form

effects of exposure to welfare reform on the children’s behaviors operating through any and all

reinforcing and/or offsetting channels.

       In these models, the error terms (ε) for a given individual i are likely to be correlated

across the various outcomes since behaviors tend to be clustered together within individuals.

Accounting for this cross-equation correlation across outcomes can increase statistical power and

improve the efficiency of estimates. In alternative specifications, we transform the outcome

variables into a consistent scale, standard normal deviates [(Y – mean)/standard deviation] and

estimate the effects of welfare reform on youth behaviors using a seemingly unrelated regression



                                                                                                      21
(SUR) framework, allowing us to test joint hypotheses across equations. These estimates are

evaluated as changes in standard normal deviations of the dependent variable, and we test

whether the average estimate across models is statistically different from zero. This approach has

the added advantages of bypassing issues related to multiple comparisons and testing and

yielding a consistently-defined average magnitude across outcomes, making it straightforward to

compare effects across gender and model specification.

Assessing validity of DDD

         The key assumption necessary for the DDD estimate to represent an unbiased causal

effect is that in the absence of welfare reform, unobserved time-varying state factors would

affect the target and comparison groups similarly. We follow the literature by utilizing a target

group of unmarried mothers with at most a high school education and a comparison group of

similarly low-educated married mothers. As marriage generally precludes eligibility for cash

assistance, low-educated mothers who are married are at much lower risk of welfare receipt than

those who are unmarried and thus much less likely to be affected by welfare reform. 14 Appendix

Table 2 descriptively shows that the outcome means at baseline (in survey years 1991 and 1992,

before any welfare reform was implemented) were generally quite similar in the target and

comparison groups. 15 In supplementary models described later, we consider an alternative

comparison group.

         The validity of this approach depends on: (1) welfare reform being unrelated to

unobserved state-level factors that are associated with the outcomes, and (2) similar trends in l



14
   Data from the 2014 NSDUH indicate that about 14% of unmarried mothers with at most a high school education
received welfare, compared with only about 2% of similarly-educated married mothers. The NSDUH does not
differentiate welfare/cash assistance from child care and job placement assistance; as such, a portion of the 2% of
low-educated married mothers receiving assistance likely captures child care or job placement assistance.
15
   The MTF Surveys are fielded in school during the spring of each year. Thus, the 1992 MTF predates the first
implementation of welfare reform by any state (see Appendix Table 1).

                                                                                                                  22
outcomes for the target and comparison groups before the implementation of welfare reform

(“parallel trends” assumption). We assess the importance of unobserved time-varying state-

specific factors and pre-welfare reform trends by adding 1-, 2-, and 3-year lags of the state’s

unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, and welfare caseloads to the

baseline model. 16 This specification addresses the possibility that the timing of welfare reform

implementation was dependent on, and thus endogenous to, the state’s economic conditions and

welfare history. We further include state-specific linear trends, which allow all states (including

early- and late-reform states) to have differential systematic trends over the entire sample period.

We also expand the baseline DDD specification into an event study framework, which

decomposes the policy effects into leads and lags and allows us to more formally identify

significant differential trends between the target and comparison groups prior to policy

implementation.

Alternate identification and fixed effects

         We assess the robustness of the estimated effects of welfare reform to alternate

comparison groups and by exploiting the MTF and NLSY data to control for fixed effects at

narrower levels than the state of residence. First, with the MTF, we use an alternative

comparison group that also has been established in the welfare reform literature—higher-

educated unmarried mothers (specifically, unmarried mothers with more than a high school

education). Participation in public assistance is associated with low maternal education (Bitler &

Hoynes, 2010); as such, it is a valid exercise to compare outcomes for otherwise similar mothers


16
   The lagged economic indicators are in addition to the contemporaneous measure of the state’s economy included
in the vector Z. However, we do not control for contemporaneous welfare caseloads as these would be endogenous
controls that are a function of welfare reform. The lagged measures of welfare caseloads can help account for the
possibility that the state-specific timing of welfare reform implementation was a function of the state’s previous
levels and trends in caseloads. However, given the high degree of correlation in a state’s welfare population over
time, the estimates from these models are only suggestive of the sensitivity of our estimates to additional selection
on observed state-specific factors.

                                                                                                                   23
who have higher levels of education and should be less affected by welfare reform. Second, with

the NLSY, we exploit variation in policy exposure across siblings by including household

(mother) fixed effects. This approach provides an alternate comparison group and identification

strategy while controlling for all non-time varying heterogeneity across mothers. In these

specifications, the thought experiment involves comparing changes in outcomes across two (or

more) siblings, one who is exposed to welfare reform and the other who is not exposed to

welfare reform but is otherwise identical. 17 These models essentially add a fourth “D,” by

comparing siblings who were and were not exposed to welfare reform when they were of a

similar age. Third, with the MTF being a school-based survey, in alternate specifications we

control for time-invariant school-specific unobserved characteristics by adding school fixed

effects. 18 Since the policy variation is at the state level, we do not expect school-specific

unobserved characteristics to introduce any bias. However, accounting for heterogeneity across

schools can reduce sampling variance and affect standard errors. Robustness of the estimates to

adding school fixed effects also provides an indirect check on any systematic compositional

selection issues with the school-based sampling in the MTF.

Additional analyses

         The DDD effect, based on Equation 1, captures the average treatment effect over the

post-policy period. However, there may be stronger effects among teens exposed to the policy

shift for longer periods of time. To explore the extent to which the effects of welfare reform on


17
   For example, we are comparing changes in outcomes across two siblings, one of whom was exposed to welfare
reform at a given age and the other of whom had not yet been exposed at that same age. Since this comparison is
within a given state and both siblings reside in the same state, the variation in exposure comes from timing of
exposure across different cohorts. The year fixed effects and the third “D” (comparison of children born to low-
educated unmarried vs. married mothers) account for general trends and period effects; that is, they address the
concern that the difference in outcomes across siblings is not due to the passage of time.
18
   The school fixed effects are in lieu of state fixed effects, as the nesting of school districts within states
automatically controls for unobserved factors at higher levels of geography. Controlling for county fixed effects in
lieu of school fixed effects had no material effects on our estimates.

                                                                                                                   24
youth behaviors are persistent or cumulative, we estimate models of the effects of welfare reform

by duration of exposure. This alternative specification also serves as a dose-response check.

Additionally, we present estimates from a more flexible event study specification, which

decomposes the timing of the policy effects into leads and lags and allows us to gauge (and

partly adjust for) differential pre-policy trends between the treatment and comparison groups and

assess lagged policy responses in the behavioral outcomes.

       Earlier, we described a number of causal channels that may underlie reduced-form DDD

effects of welfare reform on youth behavioral outcomes, many of which we are not able to

explore with our data. However, we are able to take a broad look at the extent to which changes

in youth behaviors attributed to welfare reform appear to be mediated by maternal employment,

child supervision, and the child’s after-school work for pay. To accomplish this, we re-estimate

Equation 1 adding measures of these potential mediators and evaluate the extent to which the

estimated effects of welfare reform can be explained by these factors. We do not control for

these factors in our main models, as they represent more proximal potential effects of welfare

reform that may lie along the pathway from welfare reform to youth behaviors.

       Given that the target and comparison groups are defined according to characteristics

(maternal marital status and education) that are observed in the cross section over a number of

survey years, potential bias due to compositional selection is a concern as these characteristics

may have been affected by welfare form. In particular, there may be selective composition with

respect to classifying an individual as low- or high-educated, as previous research found that

adult women’s educational attainment was affected by welfare reform (Dave, Corman &

Reichman 2012). We are less concerned about selection bias with respect to marital status, as

prior research has generally found weak to no effects of welfare reform on marriage. In auxiliary



                                                                                                    25
analyses using the MTF, we confirm that the both of these characteristics, which are used to

define the target and comparison groups, have not changed significantly or systematically over

the sample period. We also use the NLSY to more directly address the sensitivity of the

estimates to potential compositional selection by exploiting the longitudinal nature of the data.

Specifically, we compare estimates from models that define the target and comparison groups

based on maternal characteristics at the time of the survey when the youth outcomes were

measured (as in the MTF analyses) to those from models that redefine the target and comparison

groups using baseline maternal characteristics, with baseline being the first year that the child

entered the NLSY (i.e., a mother is assigned to the target or comparison group during the first

survey year when we observe the child and that assignment is fixed over the sample period,

regardless of any changes in the mother’s marital status or educational attainment). The

comparison of these estimates provides a sense of the extent to which our estimates from the

MTF are biased by systematic changes in sample composition.

Results

       Table 1 presents means of the behavioral outcomes and sample characteristics for our

target and comparison groups by gender. Between 1/5 and 1/2 of teens engaged in prosocial

activities; boys in the target group participated at approximately the same rate as boys in the

comparison group, but the same was not true for girls. Girls were more likely than boys to

volunteer and participate in school clubs, and less likely to participate in school athletics. Boys

were more likely than girls to damage property, fight, steal, or hurt someone. Teens in the target

group were more likely than those in the comparison group to engage in all of the antisocial

behaviors (Table 1). Substance use was fairly prevalent among youth in both the target and

comparison groups, with participation ranging from 10–12% (illicit drugs) to ~45% (alcohol)



                                                                                                      26
among boys and ~10% (illicit drugs) to ~40% (alcohol) among girls. Overall, differences in

substance use between the target and comparison groups and by gender were minimal.

         We present baseline DDD estimates from Equation 1 in Tables 2–4 for prosocial

behaviors, antisocial behaviors, and substance use, respectively, by gender. Table 2 presents the

estimated effects of welfare reform on participation in volunteering, school clubs, and school

athletics. Overall, there is little evidence that welfare reform led to any meaningful change in

these activities for either gender, except for volunteering among girls, for which we find a

significant reduction of about 1.5 percentage points (5.9% relative to the baseline mean). 19

Estimates also suggest a 1–2 percentage point reduction in participation in school clubs and

athletics for boys, but the effects are not statistically significant at conventional levels.

         Table 3 presents the estimates for skipping school, damaging property, fighting, stealing,

and hurting someone. Here we find more consistent evidence that welfare reform was associated

with an increase in these behaviors, with larger effects for boys than girls. Boys exposed to

welfare reform were more likely to skip school (2.1 percentage points), damage property (4.1

percentage points), and be involved in a fight (6 percentage points). These effect sizes translate

into 7–21% increases relative to the baseline means for the target group. We also find non-

negligible effect magnitudes for stealing and hurting someone (8–11%) in the same direction,

although the estimates are imprecise. For girls, we find a marginally significant increase only for

skipping school (1.7 percentage points or 7%) and changes in other antisocial behaviors are close

to zero in magnitude and have a negative coefficient in two of the four outcomes.




19
   In additional analyses not shown, we found no effects of welfare reform on time spent doing homework or
working at a job for pay after school, suggesting that the reduction in volunteering attributed to welfare reform was
not offset by an increase in these other productive uses of time. However, the MTF did not ask about other non-
school-based athletics or clubs or caring for younger siblings; as such, we cannot rule out that welfare reform led to
substitution from volunteering to other types of prosocial behavior.

                                                                                                                    27
       The estimated effects of welfare reform on youth substance use are presented in Table 4.

The DDD estimates in Table 4 suggest that welfare reform led to an increase in substance use for

both boys and girls. The patterns mirror those for antisocial behaviors, with generally larger

effects for boys than for girls (e.g., 3.3 vs. 2.3 percentage points, which translates to 5.8 vs.

4.3%, for any substance use). The increase in any substance use for boys is driven by smoking,

marijuana, and other illicit drugs; girls were also more likely to smoke and use marijuana as a

result of welfare reform, but not to use other illicit drugs. We do not find any significant effects

of welfare reform on alcohol use for either gender.

       For the results presented so far, we used a single indicator of any welfare reform, both for

ease of comparison and to maximize variation and precision. Appendix Table 3 reports estimates

that decompose the composite effect of welfare reform into separate effects of the AFDC

Waivers and TANF. The patterns are consistent with those that used the single indicator of any

welfare reform; there is some loss of precision in this specification, but the coefficient

magnitudes and overlapping confidence intervals generally suggest similar effects across the two

phases of welfare reform. This finding is not altogether surprising given that many of the early

state reforms of AFDC were later incorporated into the federal reforms under TANF.

       The results discussed thus far are robust to several model extensions, both in terms of

patterns (across outcomes and gender) and effect sizes. Specifications reported in Appendix

Table 4 control for lagged state-level economic conditions and welfare caseloads to address the

potential endogeneity of the timing of welfare reform, which may reflect the state’s recent

economy and welfare caseloads. In Appendix Table 5, we control for state-specific trends and

assess the sensitivity of the estimates to systematically (linearly) time-varying state unobserved

characteristics and differential trends across states. Appendix Table 6 presents estimates that



                                                                                                    28
adjust for time-invariant school-specific heterogeneity by including school fixed effects. Finally,

we present DDD estimates based on an alternate comparison group (unmarried mothers with

more than a high school education) in Appendix Table 7. As shown in Appendix Table 2,

baseline pre-policy means for youth in the target group are closer to those of youth in this

alternate comparison group for some outcomes. Both comparison groups have been employed in

the welfare reform literature (for example, Corman et al., 2013; Corman, Dave & Reichman

2017). We find that our results are insensitive to the use of the alternative comparison group.

       Estimates from Table 2–4 provide some evidence that welfare reform is associated with

increases in antisocial behaviors and substance use of youth, with somewhat stronger effects for

boys than girls. Table 5 presents the SUR results that account for cross-equation correlation

across outcomes. For convenience, we focus on the DDD estimates derived from our baseline

model that includes state covariates and state and time fixed effects, though we note here that the

results are robust to the various alternative model specifications. Columns 1–4 present joint

estimates across sets of outcomes for boys and Columns 5–8 present corresponding estimates for

girls. In Columns 1 and 5, we consider joint effects across the three prosocial behaviors –

volunteering, participation in school clubs, and participation in school athletics. From the first set

of figures in these columns, we can see that welfare reform has no statistically significant effect

across these outcomes. The figures in the following rows present the average estimated effects of

welfare reform across the set of transformed outcomes and associated test statistics. For example,

the average effect for boys can be interpreted as follows: Welfare reform is associated with a

0.03 standard deviation decrease in prosocial behaviors for boys and this estimate is on the

margin of statistical significance (p = 0.102). For girls, there is a corresponding 0.02 standard

deviation decrease in prosocial behaviors and the estimate is not statistically significant.



                                                                                                    29
       In Columns 2 and 6, we report cross-equation estimates for the antisocial behaviors.

While the effects of welfare reform were not statistically significant for some of these outcomes,

we can categorically reject the null hypothesis of no effect across all five outcomes at the one-

percent level for boys and at the five percent level for girls. When looking at the average effect,

here too we are able to categorically reject the null that the average effect is zero for boys; the

combined DDD effect suggests that welfare reform is associated with a 0.082 standard deviation

increase in antisocial behaviors. For girls, the effect is smaller (0.011 standard deviation) and not

significant. For marijuana, alcohol, smoking, and other illicit drugs (Columns 3 and 7), there is

strong evidence that the average DDD effect is not zero for either gender; the combined estimate

points to a welfare reform-induced increase in substance use for both boys and girls, with a

stronger response for boys (0.06 standard deviation vs. 0.04 standard deviation for girls).

       In Columns 4 and 8, we fully maximize statistical power and account for correlated errors

across all outcomes (prosocial, antisocial, and substance use) by grouping all outcomes together

in the SUR framework. In order to implement this, it was necessary to redefine all of the

outcomes in a consistent direction; thus we defined all outcomes in a socially favorable direction

(e.g., from hurting someone to not hurting someone, from smoking to not smoking, etc.). We

find consistent evidence that the joint effect of welfare reform across outcomes is statistically

significant for both boys and girls, that welfare reform led to significantly worse behaviors, and

that the overall effect is substantially more negative for boys (0.06 standard deviation decrease)

than for girls (0.02 standard deviation decrease).

       Our DDD specifications using an indicator for welfare reform implementation capture the

net average effect of the policy change over the entire post-policy window – a period of roughly

8 years. In Panel A of Tables 6 and 7 for boys and girls, respectively, we investigate the extent to



                                                                                                      30
which welfare reform had persistent or cumulative effects based on the duration of exposure to

the new policy regime. For these models, we re-specified our policy measure as the number of

years that the child had been exposed to welfare reform based on their age at interview, state of

residence, and age when welfare reform was implemented in their state. The coefficient of

interest is the interaction between the target group and number of years exposed, which measures

the linear effect of an increase in exposure duration by one year for children in the target group

relative to those in the comparison group. Here too, it is convenient to utilize the SUR

framework in order to bring key patterns into focus and bypass issues related to comparisons

across multiple outcomes. The results in Tables 6 and 7 are consistent with our main findings

thus far. Greater exposure to welfare reform had detrimental effects on behaviors of boys; most

generally, being exposed to welfare reform for an additional year led to an average unfavorable

change in behaviors of about 0.006 standard deviations for boys (Model 4, Panel A, Table 6).

When multiplying the exposure effects by 8 (average number of years of exposure among

children in the target group), the effect sizes are similar to the average DDD estimates reported

in Table 5. Greater exposure to welfare reform also had detrimental effects on behaviors of girls,

and those were of substantially smaller magnitude than for boys as in our main models. These

patterns suggest cumulative effects with respect to exposure to welfare reform for both

genders. 20


20
   Since duration of exposure is a function of age at initial exposure and current age, these effects may also capture
age of initial exposure. E.g., consider two youths who are both 15 years old. One had been exposed to welfare
reform for 7 years, and the other had been exposed for 3 years. If we find differences in behaviors across these two
youths based on their duration of exposure conditional on age at interview, these differences may also reflect that the
first youth was initially exposed when he was 8 years old and the second was exposed when he was 12. We do not
have sufficient statistical power to disentangle age-at-exposure from duration effects. However, by imposing some
parametric restrictions on one of the two effects, some evidence can be gleaned. We find crude evidence that youth
who had been exposed to welfare reform between the ages of 11 and 13 tended to be most adversely affected.
Controlling for the age at initial exposure, we continue to find significant duration effects, suggesting that the
estimated in Tables 6 and 7 do not completely reflect variation in age at initial exposure. We do not present these
results as they are highly imprecise and lack statistical power.

                                                                                                                    31
        In Panel B of Tables 6 and 7, we further parse out the timing of the effects of welfare

reform by estimating an event study. Specifically, we define windows of time with respect to

welfare reform implementation (year and month of implementation in each state) capturing pre-

policy leads (5+ years prior to implementation, 4 years prior to implementation, 3 years prior to

implementation, and 2 years prior to implementation) and post-policy lags (within 1 year of

implementation, 2 years post-implementation, and 3 years post-implementation, and 4+ years

post-implementation), with 1 year prior to implementation as the reference category. For brevity,

only the DDD interactions between these timing indicators and the target group are reported.

        For boys, virtually all of lead effects are statistically insignificant (Panel B, Table 6),

suggesting no differential trends between the target and comparison groups prior to policy

implementation, and 14 of the 16 lead indicators are statistically insignificant. The two

significant lead estimates are for open-ended lead category (5+ years pre-welfare reform), which

essentially captures a sub-sample of states that implemented welfare reform in 1996 or later

(generally, states that had not implemented pre-TANF waivers). 21 Consistently significant

estimates that indicate welfare reform associated increases in unfavorable behaviors are confined

to periods after welfare reform was already in effect, and the strongest effects appear after 2- or

3-year lag post implementation. Given that some of the hypothesized effect mechanisms on

youth are indirect, driven first through changes in maternal outcomes (i.e., maternal work,

household structure, supervision), a lag in the policy response is plausible.

        For girls, the lead effects are generally statistically significant and there is less consistent

evidence of lagged effects (Panel B, Table 7). We find a significant adverse effect only with



21
  While such timing analyses have been standard in the applied DD literature, these should be viewed as suggestive
given recent evidence indicating that lags and leads in event study-type models with heterogeneous treatment effects
may spuriously reflect treatment effects from other periods (Goodman-Bacon, 2018; Abraham & Sun, 2018).

                                                                                                                 32
respect to substance use, and, similar to the pattern for boys, there is some evidence of a lagged

policy response, with stronger effects materializing about 2–3 years post welfare reform. Overall,

the event study results indicate: (1) little systematic evidence of differential pre-trends for boys

or girls; (2) more consistent evidence of increases in antisocial behaviors post-welfare reform for

boys than for girls; (3) evidence of a welfare reform-associated increase in substance use for both

genders, with larger responses for boys; and (4) when effects materialize, there is some evidence

of a lagged policy-response, with strongest effects taking place 2–3 years post-reform.

       The DDD estimates presented to this point are consistent with a causal interpretation,

particularly for boys, given the numerous validity checks conducted and the robustness across

specifications. As discussed earlier, these effects are plausibly driven by a number of different

mechanisms, many of which are not observed or are imperfectly measured in the MTF, which

was a school-based sample focusing on the students and included few questions about their

parents. Nevertheless, we can explore the extent to which the effects we identified can be

explained by some of the hypothesized pathways. These analyses are presented in Table 8. We

rely on the SUR framework, grouping outcomes to conserve statistical power. For each group of

outcomes, we present the average DDD effect (within the group), both excluding the potential

mediators we can observe in the MTF and then including those potential mediators. For the

mediators, we consider measures related to maternal employment, unsupervised time that the

youth is at home after school, and youth employment. The top row of estimates in Table 8

reports the average DDD effect (from Table 5) without controlling for any of the mediators. The

next row adds broad measures related to whether the teen engages in any paid work after school,

whether the teen is home alone for 4+ hours each day after school, and whether the teen’s mother

is employed. The final row of estimates incorporates more refined measures of working after



                                                                                                       33
school and being home alone after school—the number of hours for each.

        Comparing the average effects when excluding and including the mediators, we find that

about 14% of the overall effect for boys across the four substance use outcomes can be explained

by the mediating factors considered, but that the mediators explain little of the observed effects

for the other sets of outcomes. For girls, the overall effects of welfare reform on behaviors were

smaller than those of boys, but the observed mediators are more predictive. Comparing the

average effects when excluding and including the mediators, we find that the mediators can

explain about 20–60% of the observed DDD effects for girls—59% for prosocial behaviors, 50%

for antisocial behaviors, and 21% for substance use. We note that Angrist and Pischke (2008)

caution against including mediators directly in models this way, as these factors are endogenous;

as such, the estimates in Table 8 are exploratory. That said, these results are consistent with the

patterns we would expect to emerge if welfare reform causally impacted youth behaviors through

some of these observed mediating factors.

        Next, we consider the effects of welfare reform on the children of married college-

educated mothers as a placebo check, as we would not expect any statistically or substantively

significant effects of welfare reform for this group. In fact, significant effects for children for this

group would point to spurious time-varying state trends. Table 9 presents these estimates, which

are DD estimates since no comparison group is utilized. It is validating that across all sets of

outcomes, the joint and the average effects of welfare reform are statistically insignificant for

this group and the size of the average DD effect is small and close to zero.

        Table 10 presents estimates from the NLSY for adolescents ages 15–17 (an age range

close to that of the 10th and 12th graders in our MTF sample), for hurting someone and any

substance use. In Panel A, we present estimates for each outcome from the standard DDD model



                                                                                                     34
with state and time fixed effects as well as from a model that incorporates household fixed

effects. The latter exploits variation across siblings within households and relies on variation

across discordantly exposed siblings within the household. As such, identifying variation is

limited in these models, and this is reflected in the inflation of the standard errors. Both the

standard DDD and the sibling fixed effects estimates suggest that welfare reform led to an

increase in any substance use and the likelihood of hurting someone among boys. Effect

magnitudes across both models and identification strategies are consistent. Furthermore, effects

for girls, while positive, are statistically insignificant and smaller than those of boys, mirroring

the pattern of results from the MTF. Finally, the bottom panel in Table 10 presents a check for

compositional selection bias by redefining the target and comparison groups in the NLSY based

on maternal characteristics at the time of the child’s first interview. 22 We see little difference in

the estimates when comparing Panel B to Panel A, suggesting that compositional selection is not

confounding our main results. Given the data limitations of the NLSY, we consider these

estimates as a secondary robustness check. That said, it is validating that the patterns of results

are similar to those from the MTF when using an alternate (non-school based) dataset,

incorporating household fixed effects, and addressing compositional selection.

         Finally, estimates from models that included the 8th graders in addition to the 10th and




22
   In auxiliary analyses not shown, we used the MTF to test whether inclusion in the target or comparison groups
was significantly associated with welfare reform, after controlling for state and period fixed effects. First, we
defined an indicator for whether an observation was either in the target or comparison group vs. outside our analysis
sample and regressed this on an indicator for welfare reform implementation (contemporaneous, 1-month lag, 3-
month lag, and 1-year lag in alternate specifications) along with year and month of interview and state fixed effects.
In these models, the coefficient on the welfare reform indicator ranged from 0.0030 to 0.0050 (p-values ranged from
0.73 to 0.87). Second, we limited the specification to the analysis sample, and regressed an indicator for being in the
target group on the welfare reform indicator and included the requisite fixed effects. In these models, the coefficient
on the welfare reform indicator ranged from -0.0011 to -0.0024 (p-values ranged from 0.77 to 0.94). Hence, there is
no indication that welfare reform was systematically associated with any shift in the characteristics (marital status
and educational attainment) used to define the target and comparison groups.


                                                                                                                    35
12th graders are attached in Appendix Tables 8–10. For the prosocial behaviors, the estimates are

very similar (in terms of both magnitudes and significance) to those in our main models,

although there is now also a marginally significant negative effect of welfare reform on school

athletics for girls. For the antisocial behaviors, the estimates are generally smaller in magnitude

than those in our main models, but only those for damaging property and fighting remain

statistically significant for boys, and skipping school is no longer significant for girls. For the

substance use behaviors, the estimated effects are smaller than those in the main models, and for

both boys and girls, only marijuana is significantly associated with welfare reform.

Conclusion

       As pointed out by Moffitt (2015), there have been surprisingly few studies of the effects

on children of the substantial (and un-reversed) reduction of the cash assistance safety net for

poor families that took place in the 1990s. This is particularly true for adolescents, who represent

the next generation in a presumed transmission of welfare dependence. This study addressed this

gap while testing the larger and fundamental “culture of poverty” argument that welfare leads to

an intergenerational cycle of irresponsible behavior. Specifically, we investigated the effects of

welfare reform on adolescent social behaviors, which are not only important for children’s

socioeconomic trajectories and societal well-being, but also can occur within a relatively short

time frame and represent early observable consequences of the reforms for the next generation as

they transition to adulthood.

       When grouping behaviors into three categories (prosocial behaviors, antisocial behaviors,

and substance use), we found no significant effects of welfare reform on youth prosocial

behaviors, for either gender. For boys, welfare reform led to a significant increase in antisocial

behaviors (skipping school, damaging property, fighting, stealing, hurting others), with an



                                                                                                      36
average DDD effect of .08 standard deviations. For girls, there were no systematic effects of

welfare reform on these behaviors other than a small welfare reform-associated increase in

skipping school. For both boys and girls, welfare reform increased substance use (marijuana,

cigarettes, other illicit drugs), although the average DDD effect was larger for boys than girls

(about .06 standard deviations versus about .04 standard deviations). As median age of initiation

is between 16 and 17 years for-ever users of cigarettes and marijuana and 18 years for ever-users

of other illicit drugs (calculations from 2014 National Survey of Drug Use and Health), our

effects on substance use are likely capturing this initiation margin.

           Overall, we found no evidence of favorable effects of welfare reform on youth behaviors,

but considerable evidence of unfavorable effects that were generally much larger for boys than

girls. Of the various hypothesized (and potentially competing) mechanisms laid out earlier, that

most consistent with this finding of stronger effects for boys than girls is that of disruptive events

taking more of a toll on boys, perhaps through differential responses to welfare reform-

associated maternal stress/anxiety, conflict between parents and children, or parental

disengagement. 23 This potential scenario is consistent with previous findings of gender

differences in the non-cognitive returns to parental inputs such as time, attention, and emotional

connectedness during middle childhood and early adolescence (Bertand & Pan, 2013).

Specifically, Bertrand and Pan found that boys’ likelihood of “acting out” was greatly reduced

when they received higher quality and quantity of parental inputs, while the relationship between

parental inputs and acting out was much weaker for girls. Recent findings from experimental

interventions that reduced youth crime and increased school engagement of disadvantaged boys

in Chicago by shaping their decision making (specifically, getting them to take time and consider



23
     We found no evidence from our mediation analysis that the effects operated through adult supervision.

                                                                                                             37
whether their impulses were appropriate) underscore that vulnerable boys can be responsive to

structure and guidance (Heller et al., 2017). The stronger effects of welfare reform for boys than

girls also could reflect differential levels of maturity or impulsivity of boys and girls at the same

ages or, possibly, differential effects of welfare-reform-induced changes in contexts—e.g.,

household composition, place of residence, and/or peer groups.

       It is also possible that other hypothesized mechanisms buffered the effects for girls (e.g.,

having assumed more responsibility for housework and childcare at home, having internalized

the new reality that welfare is no longer a long-term option, or having responded to positive role

modeling on the part of their mothers). Unfortunately, we were able to explore only a limited set

of mechanisms with our data and we were only able to investigate those in a crude way.

       There are few relevant previous studies with which to reconcile our findings. No previous

studies of which we are aware have explored any of the outcomes investigated in this study. The

most relevant studies are Corman et al. (2017a) and Corman et al. (2017b). Our results for

marijuana and other illicit drug use are consistent with those of Corman et al. (2017a), which

found suggestive evidence that welfare reform led to increases in drug-related arrests for teens

ages 15 to 17 and that the effects appeared to be stronger for boys than for girls. Although arrests

are not the same as illegal behavior, arrests are often used as proxies for criminal behavior in

research studies. Corman et al. (2017b) estimated effects of welfare reform on youth arrests for

non-drug related crimes, some of which are related to damaging property and hurting others.

However, these types of crimes were not disaggregated from other types of crime, making it

impossible to reconcile our result with that study.

       Overall, the findings from this study suggest that while welfare reform may have had

favorable effects on social behaviors of mothers (at least in terms of reduced crime and increased



                                                                                                   38
civic participation in the form of voting, the only social outcomes previously studied in this

context), the intergenerational effects on social behavior were not favorable, particularly for

boys, and may have hindered the affected youths’ socioeconomic trajectories. The results from

this study do not support culture of poverty arguments that requiring poor mothers to work

would make the next generation more responsible and suggest that the social gains of welfare

reform for women have come at a cost to the next generation, particularly to boys who have been

falling behind girls in terms of high school completion for decades (Murnane 2013). More

generally, the results from this study underscore the importance of fully exploring the effects of

policy changes, particularly those that implemented on a large scale and currently in effect, on

the next generation and considering potential differential effects by gender.




                                                                                                   39
References

Abraham, S., & Sun, L., 2018. Estimating Dynamic Treatment Effects in Event Studies with
        Heterogeneous Treatment Effects. Working Paper. Available at:
        https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3158747.
Administration for Child and Families, 2016. Characteristics and Financial Circumstances of
        TANF Recipients, Fiscal Year 2015. Accessed on 11/16/18 from:
        https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/ofa/characteristics_and_financial_circumstanc
        es_of_tanf_recipients.pdf.
Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
        2018. Compiled by authors from annual caseload reports. Retrieved on August 26, 2018
        from: https://www.acf.hhs.gov/ofa/programs/tanf/data-reports
Adams, G, & Montemayor, R., 1983. Identity Formation During Early Adolescence. Journal of
        Early Adolescence 3(3), 193–202.
Aizer, A., 2004. Home Alone: Supervision after School and Child Behavior. Journal of Public
        Economics, 88(9), 1835–48.
Akee, R., Copeland, W.E., Keeler, G., Angold, A., & Costello, E.J., 2010. Parents' Incomes and
        Children's Outcomes: A Quasi-Experiment Using Transfer Payments from Casino
        Profits. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (1), 86–115.
Angrist J.D., & Pischke J-S. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion.
        Princeton University Press: New Jersey; 2008.
Aughinbaugh, A., & Gittleman, M., 2004. Maternal Employment and Adolescent Risky
        Behavior. Journal of Health Economics 23 (4), 815–838.
Autor, D., Figlio, D., Krzysztof, K, Roth, J., & Wasserman, M., forthcoming. Family
        Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes. American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Bertrand, M., & Pan, J., 2013. The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the Gender Gap in
        Disruptive Behavior. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1), 32–64.
Bitler, M.P., Gelbach, J.B, & Hoynes, H.W., 2006. Welfare Reform and Children’s Living
        Arrangements. Journal of Human Resources 41, 1–27.
Bitler, M.P., & Hoynes, H.W., 2010. The State of the Social Safety Net in the Post-Welfare
        Reform Era." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 71-127.
Blank, R.M., 2002. Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States (No. w8983). National
        Bureau of Economic Research.
Bussey, K., & Bandura, A., 1984. Influence of Gender Constancy and Social Power on Sex-
        linked Modeling. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 47(6), 1292–1302.
Chan, W.Y., Ou, S.-R., & Reynolds, A. 2014. Adolescent Civic Engagement and Adult
        Outcomes: An Examination among Urban Racial Minorities. Journal of Youth and
        Adolescence 43(11), 1829–1843.
Corman, H., Dave, D., Kalil, A., & Reichman, N.E., 2017a. Effects of Maternal Work Incentives
        on Teen Drug Arrests. Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research. 26.
        Emerald Group Publishing. In press.
Corman, H., Dave, D., Kalil, A., & Reichman, N.E., 2017b. Effects of Maternal Work Incentives
        on Youth Crime. Labour Economics 49, 128–144.
Corman, H., Dave, D.M., & Reichman, N.E., 2017. Effects of Welfare Reform on Women's
        Voting Participation. Economic Inquiry 55 (3), 1430–1451.


                                                                                               40
Corman, H., Dave, D.M., & Reichman, N.E., 2014. Effects of Welfare Reform on Women's
        Crime. International Review of Law and Economics 40, 1–14.
Corman, H., Dave, D.M., Reichman, N.E., & Das, D., 2013. Effects of Welfare Reform on Illicit
        Drug Use of Adult Women. Economic Inquiry 51, 653–674.
Council of Economic Advisors, 1997. Technical Report: Explaining the Decline in Welfare
        Receipt. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Dave, D. M., Reichman, N. E., & Corman, H., 2012. Effects of Welfare Reform on Education
        Acquisition on Young Adult Women. Journal of Labor Research, 33(2), 251–82.
East, P.L., Weisner, T.S., & Slonim, A., 2009. Youths' Caretaking of their Adolescent Sisters'
        Children: Results from Two Longitudinal Studies. J Fam Issues 30 (12), 1671–1697.
Fang, H., & Keane, M., 2004. Assessing the Impact of Welfare Reform on Single Mothers.
        Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. The Brookings Institution: Washington DC.
        Accessed on April 23, 2017 at: https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/assessing-the-
        impact-of-welfare-reform-on-single-mothers/
Gennetian, L.A., Duncan, G.J., Knox, V.W., Vargas, W.G., Clark-Kauffman, E., & London,
        A.S., 2002. How Welfare and Work Policies for Parents Affect Adolescents: A Synthesis
        of Research. Accessed on April 23, 2017 at: http://www.mdrc.org/publication/how-
        welfare-and-work-policies-parents-affect-adolescents
Gennetian, L.A., Duncan, G.J., Knox, V.W., Vargas, W.G., Clark‐Kauffman, E., & London,
        A.S., 2004. How Welfare Policies Affect Adolescents' School Outcomes: A Synthesis of
        Evidence from Experimental Studies. Journal of Research on Adolescence 14 (4), 399–
        423.
Goodman-Bacon, A., 2018. Difference-in-differences with Variation in Treatment Timing.
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series (No. w25018). National
        Bureau of Economic Research.
Grogger, J., & Karoly, L., 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change. Harvard
        University Press, Cambridge and London.
Hartley, R.P., Lamarche, C., & Ziliak, J.P., 2017. “Welfare Reform and the Intergenerational
        Transmission of Dependence,” IZA Discussion Papers 10942.
        http://ftp.iza.org/dp10942.pdf
Heller, S., Shah, A., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., & Pollack, H., 2017. Thinking,
        Fast and Slow? Some Field Experiments to Reduce Crime and Dropout in Chicago.
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132 (1), 1–54.
Hsueh, J., & Gennetian, L.A., 2011. Welfare Policies and Adolescents: Exploring the Roles of
        Sibling Care, Maternal Work Schedules, and Economic Resources. Am J Community
        Psychol. 48 (3-4), 322–340.
Institute of Medicine (US) and National Research Council (US) Committee on the Science of
        Adolescence, 2011. The Science of Adolescent Risk-Taking: Workshop Report.
        Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US). Chapter 4, The Psychology of
        Adolescence.
Katz, Michael B. The Price of Citizenship: Redefining the American Welfare State. New York,
        NY: Metropolitan Books, Henry Holt & Co., 2001.
Kaestner, R., Korenman, S., & O'Neill, J., 2003. Has Welfare Reform Changed Teenage
        Behaviors? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 22 (2), 225–248.
Kaestner, R., & Tarlov, E., 2006. Changes in the Welfare Caseload and the Health of Low-
        Educated Mothers. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25(3), 623–643.

                                                                                            41
Kling, J.R., Ludwig, J., & Katz, L.F., 2005. Neighborhood Effects on Crime for Female and
        Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment. The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 87–130.
Koball, H., 2007. Living Arrangements and School Dropout Among Minor Mothers Following
        Welfare Reform. Social Science Quarterly 88 (5), 1374–1391.
Levitt, S.D., & Lochner, L., 2001. The Determinants of Juvenile Crime. Pp. 327–374 in Gruber,
        J. (Ed.), Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis. University of Chicago
        Press.
Lichter, D.T., & Jayakody, R. “Welfare Reform: How Do We Measure Success?” Annual
        Review of Sociology, 2002, 28, 117-41.
Loeber, R., Farrington, D. P., & Petechuk, D., 2013. Bulletin 1: From Juvenile Delinquency to
        Young Adult Offending (Study Group on the Transitions between Juvenile Delinquency
        and Adult Crime). Accessed on April 23, 2017 at:
        https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/242931.pdf
Lopoo, L.M., & DeLeire, T., 2006. Did Welfare Reform Influence the Fertility of Young Teens?
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 25 (2), 275–298.
Marcia, J. E., 1980. Identity in Adolescence. Pp. 109–37 in Handbook of Adolescent
        Psychology. Comp. Joseph Adelson. New York: Wiley, 1980.
Miller, A., & Zhang, L., 2012. Intergenerational Effects of Welfare Reform on Educational
        Attainment. Journal of Law and Economics, 55(2), 437–76.
Moffitt, R., 2015. The Deserving Poor, the Family, and the U.S. Welfare System. Demography,
        52 (3), 729-749.
Murnane, R., 2013. U.S. High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations. Journal of
        Economic Literature, 51(2), 370–422.
Offner, P., 2005. Welfare Reform and Teenage Girls. Social Science Quarterly 86 (2), 306–322.
Perry, D., & Bussey, K., 1979. The Social Learning Theory of Sex Differences: Imitation is
        Alive and Well. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37(10), 1699–1712.
Paxson, C., & Waldfogel, J., 2003. Welfare Reforms, Family Resources, and Child
        Maltreatment. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 22 (1), 85–113.
Steinberg, L. (2014). Age of opportunity: Lessons from the New Science of Adolescence. New
        York: Eamon Dolan/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2012. Comparing and evaluating
        youth substance use estimates from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health and
        other surveys. HHS Publication No. SMA 12-4727, Methodology Series M-9.
Teitler, J., Reichman, N.E., & Nepomnyaschy, L., 2004. Sources of Support, Child Care, and
        Hardship Among Unwed Mothers, 1999–2001. Social Service Review 78(1), 125–148.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1999. State Implementation of Major Changes
        to Welfare Policies, 1992–1998. Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
        Evaluation, Washington, DC. Accessed 5/22/15 from: http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/waiver-
        policies99/Table_A.htm
Wigfield, A., & Wagner, A.L., 2005. Competence, Motivation, and Identity Development
        During Adolescence. Pp. 222–239 in A. Elliott and C. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of
        Competence and Motivation. New York: Guilford Press
Ziliak, J.P., 2016. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. Pp. 303–393 in Robert A. Moffitt,
        (ed.), Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1.
        University of Chicago Press.


                                                                                            42
                                                Table 1
                                 Outcomes and Sample Characteristics
                            Across Target and Comparison Groups by Gender
                            Monitoring the Future (MTF) Surveys 1991–2006
                                 Children in Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y

Variable                                                 Boys                            Girls
Sample                                         Target         Comparison         Target        Comparison
                                            Mothers ≤ High School Graduate   Mothers ≤ High School Graduate
                                             Unmarried         Married         Unmarried         Married
Prosocial behaviors
Volunteering (≥ once a month)                   0.198           0.207             0.245           0.282
Participating in school clubs                   0.295           0.300             0.445           0.511
Participating in school athletics               0.412           0.438             0.261           0.334

Antisocial behaviors
Skipping school (past 4 weeks)                  0.286           0.222             0.260           0.216
Damaging property (past year)                   0.229           0.210             0.106           0.096
Fighting (past year)                            0.289           0.238             0.178           0.143
Stealing (past year)                            0.375           0.340             0.231           0.215
Hurting someone (past year)                     0.245           0.201             0.095           0.062

Substance use
Marijuana use (past month)                      0.251           0.179             0.190           0.143
Alcohol consumption (past month)                0.459           0.445             0.412           0.401
Cigarette smoking (past month)                  0.273           0.250             0.271           0.263
Other illicit drug use (past month)             0.119           0.103             0.114           0.104
Any substance use (past month)                  0.572           0.538             0.535           0.509

Sample characteristics
Age (years)                                     16.07           16.03             16.05           16.01
Grade 10                                        0.746           0.727             0.694           0.686
Grade 12                                        0.255           0.273             0.306           0.314
White                                           0.506           0.709             0.494           0.701
Black                                           0.253           0.064             0.280           0.075
Other race/ethnicity (includes Hispanics)       0.241           0.227             0.226           0.224
Mother: Married                                  0.0             1.0               0.0             1.0
Mother: Less than high school graduate          0.239           0.178             0.289           0.211
Mother: High school graduate                    0.700           0.766             0.641           0.718

Observations                                 11,136           44,129             16,415          53,160
   Notes: Weighted means, based on the MTF sampling weights, are reported as column percentages.
   Reported number of observations is the maximum sample size; sample sizes are smaller for some
   variables owing to missing data.




                                                                                                     43
                                                                          Table 2
                                                  Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Prosocial Behaviors
                                                                      MTF 1991–2006

                    Sample                                            Boys                                                    Girls
                                                            Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y                               Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
                                                                 Participating Participating                             Participating Participating
                    Outcome                         Volunteering    in School      in School                Volunteering    in School      in School
                                                                      Clubs        Athletics                                  Clubs        Athletics
                    Model                                1              2              3                         4              5              6
                    Target                                                                        Children of
                                                                                              Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                       With High School Education or Less
                    Comparison                                                                    Children of
                                                                                               Married Mothers
                                                                                            With High School or Less
                    Welfare Reform                       0.0088            -0.0007            -0.0083            0.0054           0.0266*              0.0061
                                                       (0.0112)           (0.0162)           (0.0142)           (0.0104)          (0.0140)           (0.0090)
                    Welfare Reform*Target               -0.0064            -0.0132            -0.0195          -0.0149**           -0.0005            -0.0116
                                                       (0.0087)           (0.0157)           (0.0150)           (0.0069)          (0.0150)           (0.0134)


                   Observations                      44,939             21,515              21,830             54,964            27,719              27,904
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level
measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries,
numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month.




                                                                                                                                                                                   44
                                                                             Table 3
                                                     Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Antisocial Behaviors
                                                                         MTF 1991–2006

Sample                                                       Boys                                                                              Girls
                                                   Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y                                                         Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Outcome                         Skipping       Damaging    Fighting     Stealing                 Hurting         Skipping        Damaging    Fighting     Stealing                Hurting
                                 School        Property                                          Someone          School         Property                                         Someone
Model                              1              2           3             4                       5               6               7           8             9                     10
Target                                                                                                Children of
                                                                                                  Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                           With High School Education or Less
Comparison                                                                                            Children of
                                                                                                   Married Mothers
                                                                                           With High School Education or Less
Welfare Reform                   -0.0010        -0.0201*          -0.0216      -0.0538***         -0.0079        -0.0165*          0.0019          -0.0112         -0.0082          -0.0094
                                (0.0135)        (0.0106)         (0.0147)        (0.0174)        (0.0167)        (0.0087)         (0.0085)        (0.0102)        (0.0122)         (0.0064)
Welfare Reform*Target           0.0207**       0.0414***        0.0601***         0.0304           0.0228         0.0169*          0.0075           0.0134         -0.0084          -0.0068
                                (0.0095)        (0.0108)         (0.0203)        (0.0207)        (0.0175)        (0.0093)         (0.0091)        (0.0150)        (0.0100)         (0.0086)


Observations                 52,359         20,800          17,477           20,906            17,411          66,398          26,481          22,348           26,570          22,295
  Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
    value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level
    measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries,
    numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month.




                                                                                                                                                                                       45
                                                                                       Table 4
                                                                 Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Substance Use
                                                                                  MTF 1991–2006

     Sample                                                         Boys                                                                               Girls
                                                          Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y                                                          Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
                                                                                Other                   Any                                                        Other                  Any
     Outcome                        Marijuana         Alcohol     Smoking       Illicit               Substance       Marijuana          Alcohol     Smoking       Illicit              Substance
                                                                                Drugs                    Use                                                       Drugs                   Use
     Model                                1              2           3             4                      5                 6               7           8             9                    10
     Target                                                                                                 Children of
                                                                                                        Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                                 With High School Education or Less
     Comparison                                                                                             Children of
                                                                                                         Married Mothers
                                                                                                 With High School Education or Less
     Welfare Reform                    0.0005          0.0093          -0.0070        -0.0120**         0.0056           0.0064          0.0107           -0.0085         0.0057          0.0097
                                      (0.0145)        (0.0115)        (0.0107)         (0.0058)        (0.0103)         (0.0095)        (0.0180)         (0.0155)        (0.0050)        (0.0194)
     Welfare Reform*Target           0.0321***         0.0168         0.0229**        0.0190**        0.0329***        0.0250***         0.0132         0.0288***         0.0020         0.0226**
                                      (0.0064)        (0.0116)        (0.0097)         (0.0082)        (0.0079)         (0.0063)        (0.0091)         (0.0093)        (0.0063)        (0.0102)


    Observations                   54,225           52,473          54,458            55,265           52,835          68,596           66,285           68,632         69,575           66,719
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 <
p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate,
personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast
Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month.




                                                                                                                                                                                                       46
                                                                            Table 5
                                      Cross–equation Estimates of the Average Effect of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                                                        MTF 1991–2006

Target Group                                                                                 Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                            With High School Education or Less
Comparison                                                                                     Children of Married Mothers
Group                                                                                       With High School Education or Less
Sample                                                         Boys                                                                                      Girls
                                                     Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y                                                                 Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Model                             1                     2                     3                      4                     5                     6                      7                      8

Outcomes                     Prosocial             Antisocial          Substance Use          All Behaviors            Prosocial             Antisocial          Substance Use          All Behaviors
                             Behaviors             Behaviors                                  Measured in              Behaviors             Behaviors                                  Measured in
                                                                                               Favorable                                                                                 Favorable
                                                                                                Direction                                                                                 Direction
                           Volunteering        Skipping school           Marijuana            Volunteering           Volunteering        Skipping school           Marijuana            Volunteering
                           School clubs       Damaging property           Alcohol             School clubs           School clubs       Damaging property           Alcohol             School clubs
                          School athletics         Fighting               Smoking            School athletics       School athletics         Fighting               Smoking            School athletics
                                                   Stealing           Other illicit drugs    Skipping school                                 Stealing           Other illicit drugs    Skipping school
                                               Hurting someone                              Damaging property                            Hurting someone                              Damaging property
                                                                                                 Fighting                                                                                  Fighting
                                                                                                 Stealing                                                                                  Stealing
                                                                                             Hurting someone                                                                           Hurting someone
                                                                                                Marijuana                                                                                 Marijuana
                                                                                                 Alcohol                                                                                   Alcohol
                                                                                                Smoking                                                                                   Smoking
                                                                                            Other illicit drugs                                                                       Other illicit drugs


Joint DDD Effect = 0          [0.420]                [0.000]               [0.000]                [0.000]               [0.194]               [0.0229]               [0.000]                [0.000]

Average DDD Effect:           -0.0281              0.0818***              0.0574***             -0.0602***              -0.0199                0.0112              0.0419***              -0.0236**
Welfare                       (0.0172)              (0.0254)               (0.0143)              (0.0129)               (0.0183)              (0.0179)              (0.0110)               (0.0102)
Reform*Target
                               [0.102]               [0.001]                [0.000]                 [0.000]                [0.277]               [0.531]                [0.000]                [0.021]
Notes: Models are jointly estimated using a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) framework. All outcomes are redefined as standard normal deviates (see text). Two sets of results are presented for
each model: (1) P-values from joint significance tests across all noted outcomes are reported in the first results row in square brackets; (2) Estimates of the average effect of welfare reform (average
DDD effect) across all noted outcomes, with state-clustered standard errors reported in parentheses and the p-value reported in square brackets. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-value ≤
0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10.All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level measures (unemployment rate,
poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School
Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month.




                                                                                                                                                                                                      47
                                                  Table 6
            Cross–equation Estimates of the Average Effect of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                  Duration of Exposure and Event Study
                                              MTF 1991–2006
                                      Boys, Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
  Target Group                                                         Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                      With High School Education or Less
  Comparison Group                                                       Children of Married Mothers
                                                                      With High School Education or Less
  Model                                         1                        2                       3                               4

  Outcomes                                Prosocial                Antisocial             Substance Use            All Behaviors Measured in
                                          Behaviors                Behaviors                                          Favorable Direction
                                         Volunteering            Skipping school            Marijuana                       Volunteer
                                         School clubs           Damaging property            Alcohol                      School clubs
                                        School athletics             Fighting                Smoking                     School athletics
                                                                     Stealing            Other illicit drugs             Skipping school
                                                                 Hurting someone                                       Damaging property
                                                                                                                            Fighting
                                                                                                                            Stealing
                                                                                                                          Hurt someone
                                                                                                                           Marijuana
                                                                                                                             Alcohol
                                                                                                                            Smoking
                                                                                                                        Other illicit drugs

            Panel A                                        Effects of Duration of Exposure to Welfare Reform (# of Years)
  # Years Exposed to WR                      0.0087                    0.0016               -0.0082                       0.0042
                                            (0.0067)                  (0.0059)              (0.0064)                    (0.0042)
  Average DDD Effect
  # Years Exposed to                        -0.0020                 0.0091***               0.0055***                       -0.0061***
  WR*Target
                                            (0.0016)                 (0.0025)                 (0.0019)                       (0.0014)

            Panel B                                            Event Study: Lead and Lag Effects of Welfare Reform
  Average DDD Effect
  Pre WR 5+ Years*Target                     0.0060                   0.0833                 0.0897**                        -0.0631**
                                            (0.0573)                 (0.0562)                (0.0398)                         (0.0294)
  Pre WR 4 Years*Target                      -0.0341                 0.00004                  0.0544                           -0.0267
                                            (0.0513)                 (0.0638)                (0.0370)                         (0.0294)
  Pre WR 3 Years*Target                      -0.0013                 -0.0110                  0.0457                           -0.0110
                                            (0.0588)                 (0.0561)                (0.0414)                         (0.0330)
  Pre WR 2 Years*Target                      0.0637                   0.0603                  0.0191                           -0.0156
                                            (0.0601)                 (0.0512)                (0.0356)                         (0.0289)
  Pre WR 1 Year*Target                          _                        _                       _                                _

  Post WR 1 Year*Target                      -0.0013                   0.1243*                  0.0331                            -0.0632
                                            (0.0475)                   (0.0669)                (0.0413)                          (0.0389)
  Post WR 2 Years*Target                     -0.0144                    0.1213                 0.0972**                          -0.0866*
                                            (0.0578)                   (0.0863)                (0.0464)                          (0.0445)
  Post WR 3 Years*Target                     -0.0729                   0.1512*                 0.0886**                         -0.1107**
                                            (0.0564)                   (0.0814)                (0.0386)                          (0.0447)
  Post WR 4+ Years*Target                    -0.0109                  0.1276***               0.0991***                        -0.0890***
                                            (0.0369)                   (0.0439)                (0.0264)                          (0.0202)
Notes: Models are jointly estimated using a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) framework. All outcomes are redefined as standard normal
deviates (see text). Each column in each panel presents estimates from a separate model. Estimates of the average effect of welfare reform across all
noted outcomes are reported, with state-clustered standard errors reported in parentheses. All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and
race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast
Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01
< p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10.

                                                                                                                                                   48
                                                  Table 7
            Cross-equation Estimates of the Average Effect of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                   Duration of Exposure and Event Study
                                              MTF 1991–2006
                                      Girls, Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y

  Target Group                                                          Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                       With High School Education or Less
  Comparison Group                                                        Children of Married Mothers
                                                                       With High School Education or Less
  Model                                          1                        2                        3                             4

  Outcomes                                 Prosocial            Antisocial Behaviors        Substance Use          All Behaviors Measured in
                                           Behaviors                                                                   Favorable Direction
                                           Volunteer              Skipping school            Marijuana                    Volunteering
                                          School clubs           Damaging property            Alcohol                     School clubs
                                         School athletics             Fighting                Smoking                    School athletics
                                                                      Stealing            Other illicit drugs            Skipping school
                                                                  Hurting someone                                       Damaging property
                                                                                                                             Fighting
                                                                                                                             Stealing
                                                                                                                         Hurting someone
                                                                                                                            Marijuana
                                                                                                                             Alcohol
                                                                                                                            Smoking
                                                                                                                        Other illicit drugs


             Panel A                                        Effects of Duration of Exposure to Welfare Reform (# of Years)
  # Years Exposed to WR                       0.0083                     -0.0114               -0.0058                  0.0088***
                                             (0.0058)                   (0.0038)              (0.0042)                   (0.0033)
  Average DDD Effect
  # Years Exposed to WR*Target               -0.0012                   0.0021                  0.0051**                      -0.0029**
                                             (0.0022)                 (0.0025)                 (0.0013)                       (0.0013)

            Panel B                                             Event Study: Lead and Lag Effects of Welfare Reform
  Average DDD Effect
  Pre WR 5+ Years*Target                      -0.0100                  -0.0551                  -0.0123                       0.0246
                                             (0.0444)                 (0.0392)                 (0.0335)                      (0.0293)
  Pre WR 4 Years*Target                        0.0109                  -0.0239                  -0.0101                       0.0161
                                             (0.0623)                 (0.0339)                 (0.0369)                      (0.0288)
  Pre WR 3 Years*Target                       -0.0001                  -0.0042                  -0.0180                       0.0077
                                             (0.0541)                 (0.0552)                 (0.0437)                      (0.0399)
  Pre WR 2 Years*Target                      -0.0902*                  0.0058                   0.0410                       -0.0386
                                             (0.0505)                 (0.0427)                 (0.0332)                      (0.0260)
  Pre WR 1 Year*Target                            _                       _                        _                             _

   Post WR 1 Year*Target                      -0.0258                   -0.0526*                  -0.0050                         0.0171
                                             (0.0382)                   (0.0309)                 (0.0289)                        (0.0195)
  Post WR 2 Years*Target                      -0.0331                    0.0068                   0.0369                         -0.0234
                                             (0.0461)                   (0.0477)                 (0.0387)                        (0.0324)
  Post WR 3+ Years*Target                     -0.0804                    -0.0227                  0.0448                         -0.0256
                                             (0.0504)                   (0.0518)                 (0.0371)                        (0.0292)
  Post WR 4+ Years*Target                     -0.0388                    -0.0132                 0.0431*                         -0.0186
                                             (0.0393)                   (0.0353)                 (0.0263)                        (0.0224)
Notes: Models are jointly estimated using a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) framework. All outcomes are redefined as standard normal
deviates (see text). Each column in each panel presents estimates from a separate model. Estimates of the average effect of welfare reform across all
noted outcomes are reported, with state-clustered standard errors reported in parentheses. All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and
race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast
Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01
< p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10.



                                                                                                                                                   49
                                                                           Table 8
                                     Cross-equation Estimates of the Average Effect of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                                             Controlling for Potential Mediators
                                                                       MTF 1991–2006
Target Group                                                       Children of Unmarried Mothers with High School Education or Less
Comparison Group                                                    Children of Married Mothers with High School Education or Less
Sample                                           Boys, Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y                                      Girls, Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Model                            1                      2                     3                       4                 5                      6                      7                       8
Outcomes                      Prosocial             Antisocial          Substance Use          All Behaviors         Prosocial             Antisocial           Substance Use          All Behaviors
                              Behaviors             Behaviors                                  Measured in           Behaviors             Behaviors                                   Measured in
                                                                                                Favorable                                                                               Favorable
                                                                                                 Direction                                                                               Direction
                            Volunteering        Skipping school           Marijuana            Volunteering         Volunteering        Skipping school           Marijuana            Volunteering
                            School clubs       Damaging property           Alcohol             School clubs         School clubs       Damaging property           Alcohol             School clubs
                           School athletics         Fighting               Smoking            School athletics     School athletics         Fighting               Smoking            School athletics
                                                    Stealing           Other illicit drugs   Skipping school                                Stealing           Other illicit drugs   Skipping school
                                                Hurting someone                                 Damaging                                Hurting someone                                 Damaging
                                                                                                  property                                                                                property
                                                                                                  Fighting                                                                                Fighting
                                                                                                  Stealing                                                                                Stealing
                                                                                             Hurting someone                                                                         Hurting someone
                                                                                                Marijuana                                                                               Marijuana
                                                                                                  Alcohol                                                                                 Alcohol
                                                                                                 Smoking                                                                                 Smoking
                                                                                             Other illicit drugs                                                                     Other illicit drugs

Average DDD Effect:             -0.0281             0.0818***             0.0574***             -0.0602***             -0.0199               0.0112               0.0419***              -0.0236**
Welfare Reform*Target          (0.0172)              (0.0254)              (0.0143)              (0.0129)             (0.0183)              (0.0179)               (0.0110)               (0.0102)
(From Table 5)                  [0.102]               [0.001]               [0.000]               [0.000]              [0.277]               [0.531]                [0.000]                [0.021]

Adding Mediators (A)
Average DDD Effect:           -0.0415**             0.0836***             0.0491***             -0.0616***             -0.0081               0.0055                0.0331**              -0.0154
Welfare Reform*Target          (0.0198)              (0.0300)              (0.0180)              (0.0147)             (0.0250)              (0.0211)               (0.0135)              (0.0125)
                                [0.036]               [0.005]               [0.006]               [0.000]              [0.746]               [0.795]                [0.014]               [0.220]

Adding Mediators (B)
Average DDD Effect:             -0.0423**             0.0843***              0.0498***             -0.0623***            -0.0098                0.0079              0.0365***                -0.0179
Welfare Reform*Target            (0.0200)              (0.0284)               (0.0177)               (0.0139)           (0.0250)              (0.0212)               (0.0129)               (0.0122)
                                  [0.034]               [0.003]                [0.005]                [0.000]            [0.695]               [0.709]                [0.005]                [0.142]
Notes: Models are jointly estimated using a seemingly unrelated regression framework. All outcomes are redefined as standard normal deviates (see text). Estimate of the average effect of welfare
reform (average DDD effect) across all noted outcomes is reported, with state-clustered standard errors reported in parentheses and the p-value reported in square brackets. All specifications control
for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate,
refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and
month. Mediators (A) include: any work after school, youth is home alone 4+ hours each day, and mother is employed. Mediators (B) further adds hours of work after school and hours youth is home
alone. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10.



                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                            Table 9
                                      Cross-equation Estimates of the Average Effect of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                          Placebo Group: Children of Married Mothers with a College Degree or More
                                                                        MTF 1991–2006

Sample                                         Boys, Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y                                                             Girls, Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Model                         1                      2                      3                       4                      5                     6                       7                      8

Outcomes                  Prosocial             Antisocial           Substance Use           All Behaviors            Prosocial             Antisocial           Substance Use           All Behaviors
                          Behaviors             Behaviors                                    Measured in              Behaviors             Behaviors                                    Measured in
                                                                                              Favorable                                                                                   Favorable
                                                                                               Direction                                                                                   Direction
                        Volunteering        Skipping school            Marijuana             Volunteering           Volunteering         Skipping school           Marijuana             Volunteering
                        School clubs       Damaging property            Alcohol              School clubs           School clubs        Damaging property           Alcohol              School clubs
                       School athletics         Fighting                Smoking             School athletics       School athletics          Fighting               Smoking             School athletics
                                                Stealing            Other illicit drugs     Skipping school                                  Stealing           Other illicit drugs     Skipping school
                                            Hurting someone                                Damaging property                             Hurting someone                               Damaging property
                                                                                                Fighting                                                                                    Fighting
                                                                                                Stealing                                                                                    Stealing
                                                                                            Hurting someone                                                                             Hurting someone
                                                                                               Marijuana                                                                                   Marijuana
                                                                                                Alcohol                                                                                     Alcohol
                                                                                               Smoking                                                                                     Smoking
                                                                                           Other illicit drugs                                                                         Other illicit drugs


Joint DD Effect = 0        [0.216]                [0.566]                [0.509]                 [0.161]               [0.530]                [0.762]                 [0.563]                [0.401]

Average DD Effect:          0.0284                 -0.0124                 -0.0259                0.0209                   0.0294               -0.0223                  -0.0008               0.0169
Welfare Reform             (0.0267)               (0.0229)                (0.0210)               (0.0168)                 (0.0266)             (0.0174)                 (0.0225)              (0.0182)
                            [0.287]                [0.588]                 [0.218]                [0.214]                  [0.269]              [0.199]                  [0.973]               [0.354]
         Notes: Models are jointly estimated using a seemingly unrelated regression framework. All outcomes are redefined as standard normal deviates (see text). Two sets of results are
         presented: 1) p-value from a joint significance test across all noted outcomes is reported in the first results row in square brackets; 2) estimate of the average effect of welfare
         reform (average DDD effect) across all noted outcomes is reported, with state-clustered standard errors reported in parentheses and the p-value reported in square brackets. All
         specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per
         capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast
         Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-
         value ≤ 0.10.




                                                                                                                                                                                              51
                                                                  Table 10
                               Effects of Welfare Reform on Hurting Someone and Substance Use (past 3 months)
                                                              NLSY 1990–2006

 Sample                                                Boys, Ages 15–17                                                          Girls, Ages 15–17
 Outcome                                  Hurting Someone              Substance Use                                Hurting Someone               Substance Use
 Model                                    1             2             3             4                               5             6              7             8
 Panel A                                                     Target and Comparison groups defined based on current year maternal characteristics
 Target                                                                              Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                    With High School Education or Less
 Comparison                                                                            Children of Married Mothers
                                                                                    With High School Education or Less
 Welfare Reform                        -0.0592            -0.0071          -0.1065*            -0.1301           0.0218             -0.0105           0.0563             0.0312
                                      (0.0402)           (0.0745)          (0.0542)           (0.0855)          (0.0264)           (0.0526)          (0.0609)           (0.1012)
 Welfare Reform*Target                0.0669*              0.0716         0.1328***             0.1455           0.0215              0.0156           0.0479             0.1032
                                      (0.0368)           (0.0910)          (0.0417)           (0.1148)          (0.0401)           (0.1200)          (0.0541)           (0.1044)

 Observations                           1,899             1,899              2,325             2,325              1,804             1,804              2,164              2,164

 Panel A                                    Target and Comparison groups defined based on baseline (first entry year of child in survey) maternal characteristics
 Target                                                                            Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                 With High School Education or Less
 Comparison                                                                         Children of Married Mothers
                                                                                 With High School Education or Less
 Welfare Reform                        -0.0395            -0.0085         -0.1243**            -0.1231           0.0158             -0.0393           0.0644             0.0188
                                      (0.0363)           (0.0743)          (0.0544)           (0.0772)          (0.0241)           (0.0532)          (0.0587)           (0.0892)
 Welfare Reform*Target                0.0692**             0.0874         0.1270***             0.1421           0.0397              0.0197           0.0568             0.1211
                                      (0.0286)           (0.0847)          (0.0428)           (0.1066)          (0.0360)           (0.1082)          (0.0483)           (0.0957)

 Observations                          1,964             1,964              2,406             2,406              1,903             1,903              2,286              2,286
                                       State           Household            State           Household            State           Household            State            Household
         Fixed Effects
                                    Year, Month       Year, Month        Year, Month       Year, Month        Year, Month       Year, Month        Year, Month        Year, Month
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level
measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries,
numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month.




                                                                                                                                                                                   52
                                     Appendix Table 1: Implementation Dates of Welfare Reform by State, U.S.
                 10/92 to 2/97   9/96 to 1/98      10/92 to 1/98                            10/92 to 2/97      9/96 to 1/98      10/92 to 1/98
                 AFDC Waiver        TANF        Any Welfare Reform                          AFDC Waiver          TANF         Any Welfare Reform
 Alabama                           Nov-96             Nov-96               Montana             Feb-96            Feb-97             Feb-96
 Alaska                             Jul-97             Jul-97              Nebraska            Oct-95            Dec-96             Oct-95
 Arizona            Nov-95          Oct-96            Nov-95               Nevada                                Dec-96             Dec-96
 Arkansas            Jul-94         Jul-97             Jul-94              New Hampshire                         Oct-96             Oct-96
 California         Dec-92          Jan-98            Dec-92               New Jersey          Oct-92            Jul-97             Oct-92
 Colorado                           Jul-97             Jul-97              New Mexico                            Jul-97             Jul-97
 Connecticut        Jan-96          Oct-96            Jan-96               New York                              Nov-97            Nov-97
 DC                                Mar-97             Mar-97               North Carolina       Jul-96           Jan-97             Jul-96
 Delaware           Oct-95         Mar-97             Oct-95               North Dakota                          Jul-97             Jul-97
 Florida                                              Oct-96               Ohio                 Jul-96           Oct-96             Jul-96
 Georgia            Jan-94          Jan-97            Jan-94               Oklahoma                              Oct-96             Oct-96
 Hawaii             Feb-97          Jul-97            Feb-97               Oregon              Feb-93            Oct-96             Feb-93
 Idaho                              Jul-97             Jul-97              Pennsylvania                          Mar-97            Mar-97
 Illinois           Nov-93          Jul-97            Nov-93               Rhode Island                          May-97            May-97
 Indiana            May-95          Oct-96            May-95               South Carolina                        Oct-96             Oct-96
 Iowa               Oct-93          Jan-97            Oct-93               South Dakota        Jun-94            Dec-96             Jun-94
 Kansas                             Oct-96            Oct-96               Tennessee           Sep-96            Oct-96             Sep-96
 Kentucky                           Oct-96            Oct-96               Texas               Jun-96            Nov-96             Jun-96
 Louisiana                          Jan-97            Jan-97               Utah                Jan-93            Oct-96             Jan-93
 Maine                             Nov-96             Nov-96               Vermont              Jul-94           Sep-96             Jul-94
 Maryland           Mar-96         Dec-96             Mar-96               Virginia             Jul-95           Feb-97             Jul-95
 Massachusetts      Nov-95          Sep-96            Nov-95               Washington          Jan-96            Jan-97             Jan-96
 Michigan           Oct-92          Sep-96            Oct-92               West Virginia                         Jan-97             Jan-97
 Minnesota                          Jul-97             Jul-97              Wisconsin           Jan-96            Sep-97             Jan-96
 Mississippi        Oct-95           Jul-97            Oct-95              Wyoming                               Jan-97             Jan-97
 Missouri           Jun-95          Dec-96             Jun-95
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1999).



                                                                                                                                                 53
                                                               Appendix Table 2
                                    Behavioral Outcomes across Target and Comparison Groups and by Gender
                                                Monitoring the Future (MTF) Surveys, 1991–1992
                                                           Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y

Variable                                                        Boys                                                       Girls
Sample                                     Target:        Comparison A:        Comparison B:            Target:       Comparison A:     Comparison B:
                                        Children with      Children with        Children with        Children with     Children with     Children with
                                         Unmarried        Married Mothers        Unmarried            Unmarried       Married Mothers     Unmarried
                                        Mothers with ≤          with            Mothers with         Mothers with ≤         with         Mothers with
                                         High School       ≤ High School       >= High School         High School      ≤ High School    >= High School
                                                                                 Education                                                Education

Volunteering (≥ once a month)               0.191               0.196                0.214                0.255            0.261            0.303
Participating in school clubs               0.316               0.310                0.374                0.441            0.498            0.547
Participating in school athletics           0.477               0.438                0.485                0.232            0.318            0.343
Skipping school (past 4 weeks)              0.279               0.224                0.273                0.242            0.210            0.268
Damaging property (past year)               0.193               0.224                0.234                0.102            0.093            0.101
Fighting (past year)                        0.278               0.268                0.289                0.174            0.160            0.167
Stealing (past year)                        0.357               0.380                0.409                0.195            0.196            0.241
Hurting someone (past year)                 0.210               0.199                0.252                0.087            0.051            0.063
Any substance use (past month)              0.567               0.556                0.582                0.510            0.512            0.524
Marijuana (past month)                      0.137               0.102                0.150                0.102            0.079            0.109
Alcohol (past month)                        0.485               0.478                0.512                0.411            0.418            0.443
Cigarette smoking (past month)              0.252               0.244                0.227                0.233            0.248            0.245
Other illicit drugs (past month)            0.088               0.081                0.094                0.089            0.096            0.099
   Note: Weighted means for 1991 and 1992, based on the MTF sampling weights, are shown as adjusted proportions.




                                                                                                                                                 54
                                                                                Appendix Table 3
                                                                 Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                                                  Separate Effects of AFDC Waiver & TANF
                                                                                MTF 1991–2006
Outcome             Volunteer      School        School      Skipping      Damage          Fight         Steal    Hurt      Substance            Marijuana      Alcohol     Smoking      Other Illicit
                                   Clubs        Athletics     School       Property                             Someone       Use                                                          Drugs
Target                                                                                    Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                         With High School Education or Less
Comparison                                                                                  Children of Married Mothers
                                                                                         With High School Education or Less
Sample                                                                                                  Boys
                                                                                             Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
AFDC Waiver           0.0073       -0.0050       -0.0211       -0.0055      -0.0202*     -0.0288**    -0.0561***      -0.0160        0.0005       -0.0032       0.0096       -0.0107       -0.0137**
                     (0.0122)      (0.0165)      (0.0145)     (0.0137)      (0.0118)      (0.0131)      (0.0182)     (0.0156)       (0.0114)      (0.0160)     (0.0126)     (0.0121)        (0.0064)
TANF                  0.0030       -0.0184        0.0500       0.0181        -0.0092       0.0116      -0.0578**       0.0028      0.0370**        0.0295       0.0137        0.0159         -0.0067
                     (0.0205)      (0.0245)      (0.0444)     (0.0244)      (0.0228)      (0.0321)      (0.0285)     (0.0317)       (0.0171)      (0.0201)     (0.0165)     (0.0176)        (0.0125)
AFDC Waiver           0.0065        0.0244        0.0177      0.0341**        0.0354      0.0880*        0.0473      0.0695**      0.0404***     0.0332**       0.0117      0.0280**        0.0246**
*Target              (0.0126)      (0.0219)      (0.0328)     (0.0147)      (0.0218)      (0.0437)      (0.0288)     (0.0335)       (0.0120)      (0.0126)     (0.0166)     (0.0134)        (0.0119)
TANF*Target          -0.0091       -0.0207       -0.0276      0.0179*      0.0427***     0.0529***       0.0268        0.0108      0.0312***     0.0318***      0.0179      0.0217**        0.0178*
                     (0.0093)      (0.0150)      (0.0173)     (0.0098)      (0.0113)      (0.0192)      (0.0215)     (0.0168)       (0.0083)      (0.0068)     (0.0117)     (0.0103)        (0.0091)

Observations          44,939       21,515        21,830        52,359        20,800        17,477       20,906        17,411         52,835        54,225       52,473       54,458         55,265

Sample                                                                                                  Girls
                                                                                              Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
AFDC Waiver          -0.0037      0.0417***       0.0103      -0.0239**      0.0019       -0.0130       -0.0176       -0.0065        0.0175        0.0086       0.0162       -0.0053        0.0095*
                     (0.0101)      (0.0142)      (0.0094)      (0.0102)     (0.0079)      (0.0110)      (0.0127)      (0.0064)     (0.0186)       (0.0098)     (0.0178)      (0.0158)       (0.0051)
TANF                0.0434***      -0.0192       -0.0070        0.0273       0.0132       -0.0005        0.0218       -0.0330       -0.0214       -0.0047      -0.0190       -0.0249        -0.0128
                     (0.0147)      (0.0274)      (0.0289)      (0.0195)     (0.0211)      (0.0246)      (0.0254)      (0.0206)     (0.0263)       (0.0156)     (0.0243)      (0.0187)       (0.0093)
AFDC Waiver           0.0041       -0.0424       -0.0230        0.0191       0.0014        0.0174        0.0208       -0.0096        0.0089      0.0233**       0.0091      0.0260**        -0.0018
*Target              (0.0099)      (0.0259)      (0.0228)      (0.0216)     (0.0117)      (0.0170)      (0.0192)      (0.0106)     (0.0150)       (0.0106)     (0.0146)      (0.0106)       (0.0071)
TANF*Target         -0.0189**       0.0078       -0.0093      0.0164**       0.0089        0.0123       -0.0150       -0.0060      0.0255**      0.0254***      0.0141      0.0294***        0.0029
                     (0.0075)      (0.0169)      (0.0138)      (0.0080)     (0.0099)      (0.0163)      (0.0096)      (0.0101)     (0.0101)       (0.0067)     (0.0090)      (0.0097)       (0.0068)

Observations         54,694       27,719        27,904        66,398        26,481        22,348         26,570      22,295          66,719        68,596        66,285       68,632         69,575
       Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
       value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications include the following covariates: child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education;
       annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number
       Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month.




                                                                                                                                                                                          55
                                                                                  Appendix Table 4
                                                                   Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                                              Controlling for Lagged Economic and Welfare Conditions
                                                                                  MTF 1991–2006
Outcome             Volunteer       School         School        Skipping      Damage         Fight          Steal    Hurt      Substance           Marijuana        Alcohol       Smoking         Other Illicit
                                    Clubs         Athletics       School       Property                             Someone       Use                                                                Drugs
Target                                                                                        Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                             With High School Education or Less
Comparison                                                                                      Children of Married Mothers
                                                                                             With High School Education or Less
Sample                                                                                                      Boys
                                                                                                 Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Welfare Reform        0.0045        -0.0005        -0.0083        -0.0016      -0.0245**      -0.0258*    -0.0482***     -0.0119       -0.0054         0.0315         -0.0012        -0.0114         -0.0120*
                     (0.0098)       (0.0169)       (0.0142)      (0.0132)       (0.0114)      (0.0141)     (0.0163)      (0.0177)      (0.0095)       (0.0201)        (0.0112)      (0.0111)         (0.0063)
Welfare Reform       -0.0062        -0.0137        -0.0195       0.0207**      0.0420***     0.0602***      0.0300        0.0229      0.0331***      0.0279***         0.0170       0.0232**         0.0193**
*Target              (0.0087)       (0.0155)       (0.0150)      (0.0094)       (0.0107)      (0.0203)     (0.0207)      (0.0175)      (0.0078)       (0.0071)        (0.0116)      (0.0097)         (0.0082)

Observations          44,939         21,515         21,830         52,359       20,800        17,477        20,906        17,411        52,835         54,225         52,473         54,458           55,265

Sample                                                                                                      Girls
                                                                                                  Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Welfare Reform        -0.0022        0.0270         0.0072       -0.0191**       0.0038       -0.0114      -0.0071       -0.0025        0.0097         0.0104          0.0058       -0.0074           0.0054
                      (0.0110)      (0.0179)       (0.0111)       (0.0094)      (0.0094)      (0.0115)     (0.0135)      (0.0073)      (0.0203)       (0.0094)        (0.0192)      (0.0153)         (0.0054)
Welfare Reform       -0.0148**      -0.0014        -0.0117        0.0167*        0.0072        0.0138      -0.0090       -0.0069       0.0224**      0.0244***         0.0131      0.0284***          0.0019
*Target               (0.0068)      (0.0151)       (0.0134)       (0.0094)      (0.0091)      (0.0150)     (0.0100)      (0.0085)      (0.0101)       (0.0065)        (0.0089)      (0.0093)         (0.0063)

Observations          54,694        27,719         27,904         66,398        26,481        22,348        26,570       22,295         66,719          68,596         66,285         68,632          69,575
           Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
           value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications include the following covariates: child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education;
           annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number
           Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month. Models also
           control for lagged economic /welfare conditions including one, two, and three-year lags of the unemployment rate, poverty rate, state personal income per capita, and welfare
           caseloads.




                                                                                                                                                                                               56
                                                                                   Appendix Table 5
                                                                    Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                                                         Controlling for State Linear Trends
                                                                                   MTF 1991–2006

Outcome             Volunteer       School         School        Skipping      Damage          Fight         Steal     Hurt           Substance     Marijuana       Alcohol     Smoking          Other Illicit
                                    Clubs         Athletics       School       Property                              Someone            Use                                                        Drugs
Target                                                                                       Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                            With High School Education or Less
Comparison                                                                                     Children of Married Mothers
                                                                                            With High School Education or Less
Sample                                                                                                     Boys
                                                                                                Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Welfare Reform        0.0036          0.0012        -0.0112        0.0001       -0.0215*      -0.0231      -0.0468***     -0.0100       -0.0020      -0.0010       -0.0034       -0.0101            -0.0090
                     (0.0115)        (0.0173)       (0.0155)      (0.0130)      (0.0116)      (0.0150)      (0.0173)      (0.0203)      (0.0099)     (0.0139)      (0.0116)     (0.0108)           (0.0061)
Welfare Reform       -0.0049         -0.0110        -0.0178       0.0195*      0.0416***     0.0594***       0.0277        0.0222      0.0335***    0.0310***       0.0190      0.0224**           0.0183**
*Target              (0.0089)        (0.0158)       (0.0150)      (0.0097)      (0.0105)      (0.0206)      (0.0208)      (0.0179)      (0.0081)     (0.0065)      (0.0117)     (0.0100)           (0.0083)

Observations          44,939          21,515         21,830        52,359        20,800       17,477         20,906       17,411        52,835        54,225        52,473       54,458             55,265

Sample                                                                                                     Girls
                                                                                                 Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Welfare Reform        0.0030         0.0366**        0.0193       -0.0154       -0.0028       -0.0123       -0.0151       -0.0085       0.0112        0.0114        0.0071       -0.0070            0.0077
                     (0.0114)        (0.0159)       (0.0118)      (0.0099)      (0.0109)      (0.0117)      (0.0138)      (0.0080)     (0.0178)      (0.0086)      (0.0161)      (0.0129)          (0.0056)
Welfare Reform       -0.0119*         -0.0007       -0.0117       0.0175*        0.0071        0.0142       -0.0106       -0.0065      0.0217**     0.0245***       0.0127      0.0286***           0.0019
*Target              (0.0065)        (0.0152)       (0.0138)      (0.0092)      (0.0093)      (0.0153)      (0.0100)      (0.0085)     (0.0102)      (0.0065)      (0.0089)      (0.0093)          (0.0064)

Observations           54,694           27,719         27,904       66,398        26,481         22,348        26,570      22,295        66,719       68,596         66,285       68,632            69,575
Lagged
Economic &              Yes              Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes               Yes
Welfare
Conditions
          Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
          value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10 All specifications include the following covariates: child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education;
          annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number
          Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month. Models also
          control for state-specific linear trends (state dummies interacted with a linear time trend) and lagged economic / welfare conditions including one, two, and three-year lags of the
          unemployment rate, poverty rate, state personal income per capita, and welfare caseloads.




                                                                                                                                                                                             57
                                                                                   Appendix Table 6
                                                                    Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                                                         Controlling for School Fixed Effects
                                                                                   MTF 1991–2006
Outcome             Volunteer       School         School        Skipping      Damage          Fight         Steal    Hurt            Substance     Marijuana       Alcohol     Smoking       Other Illicit
                                    Clubs         Athletics       School       Property                             Someone             Use                                                     Drugs
Target                                                                                       Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                            With High School Education or Less
Comparison                                                                                     Children of Married Mothers
                                                                                            With High School Education or Less
Sample                                                                                                     Boys
                                                                                                Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Welfare Reform        0.0016       -0.0648**       -0.0129         0.0151        0.0153       -0.0210        0.0002       0.0034        0.0328*        0.0315        0.0169       0.0262           -0.0048
                     (0.0249)       (0.0303)       (0.0382)       (0.0128)      (0.0259)     (0.0324)       (0.0378)     (0.0337)       (0.0195)      (0.0201)      (0.0208)     (0.0158)         (0.0149)
Welfare Reform       -0.0045        -0.0117        -0.0256        0.0202**     0.0428***     0.0503**        0.0258       0.0200       0.0259***     0.0279***       0.0124       0.0171          0.0222**
*Target              (0.0082)       (0.0173)       (0.0164)       (0.0096)      (0.0126)     (0.0245)       (0.0242)     (0.0225)       (0.0084)      (0.0071)      (0.0102)     (0.0110)         (0.0092)

Observations          44,939        21,515          21,830         52,359        20,800       17,477        20,906        17,411        52,835         54,225        52,473       54,458           55,265

Sample                                                                                                     Girls
                                                                                                 Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Welfare Reform         0.0119        0.0022        -0.0177        -0.0153        0.0082       -0.0196       -0.0141      -0.0026         0.0253      0.0279**        0.0200       0.0069           0.0097
                      (0.0199)      (0.0275)       (0.0214)       (0.0153)      (0.0189)      (0.0221)      (0.0220)     (0.0187)       (0.0164)      (0.0135)      (0.0177)     (0.0140)         (0.0081)
Welfare Reform       -0.0131**       0.0033        -0.0116        0.0180*        0.0076        0.0066       -0.0116      -0.0039        0.0185*      0.0251***       0.0116     0.0287***          0.0043
*Target               (0.0058)      (0.0146)       (0.0139)       (0.0097)      (0.0097)      (0.0173)      (0.0115)     (0.0094)       (0.0097)      (0.0062)      (0.0076)     (0.0103)         (0.0061)

Observations          54,694        27,719         27,904         66,398        26,481         22,348        26,570       22,295         66,719         68,596        66,285      68,632           69,575
Lagged
Economic &             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Welfare
Conditions
          Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
          value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications include the following covariates: child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education;
          and annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number
          Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for year, month, and school. Lagged
          economic / welfare conditions include one, two, and three-year lags of the unemployment rate, poverty rate, state personal income per capita, and welfare caseloads.




                                                                                                                                                                                              58
                                                                                Appendix Table 7
                                                                 Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Behaviors
                                                                          Alternate Comparison Group
                                                                                MTF 1991–2006

Outcome            Volunteer       School       School       Skipping      Damage         Fight         Steal    Hurt      Substance            Marijuan      Alcohol     Smoking       Other Illicit
                                   Clubs       Athletics      School       Property                            Someone       Use                   a                                      Drugs
Target                                                                                    Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                        With High School Education or Less
Comparison                                                                                Children of Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                       With More than High School Education
Sample                                                                                                 Boys
                                                                                            Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Welfare Reform       -0.0225        0.0314      -0.0282        0.0024       -0.0440       -0.0438     -0.1093***     -0.0174       -0.0118       0.0232*      -0.0206       -0.0076        0.0043
                     (0.0149)      (0.0231)     (0.0234)      (0.0196)      (0.0272)     (0.0270)      (0.0271)      (0.0216)      (0.0134)      (0.0129)     (0.0191)     (0.0113)       (0.0084)
Welfare Reform       -0.0102       -0.0325      -0.0238       0.0267**     0.0503***     0.0540**      0.0536**       0.0339      0.0501***     0.0330***    0.0493***     0.0242**       0.0185**
*Target              (0.0104)      (0.0225)     (0.0186)      (0.0112)      (0.0120)     (0.0220)      (0.0232)      (0.0223)      (0.0092)      (0.0087)     (0.0116)     (0.0097)       (0.0075)

Observations          19,379        9,087        9,241         22,441        8,650         7,150        8,701         7,116         22,656        23,315       22,517       23,507          23,955

Sample                                                                                                  Girls
                                                                                              Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Welfare Reform        0.0085        0.0054      -0.0191       -0.0299        0.0122      -0.0039        0.0129       -0.0045       -0.0170        0.0075      -0.0153     -0.0321**        -0.0077
                     (0.0198)      (0.0246)     (0.0207)      (0.0187)      (0.0137)     (0.0168)      (0.0242)      (0.0124)      (0.0133)      (0.0132)     (0.0149)     (0.0134)        (0.0094)
Welfare Reform       -0.0054       -0.0017      -0.0011       0.0223*        0.0011      -0.0067        0.0011       -0.0127      0.0313***      0.0193**    0.0272***    0.0339***         0.0072
*Target              (0.0120)      (0.0162)     (0.0179)      (0.0123)      (0.0112)     (0.0179)      (0.0200)      (0.0083)      (0.0091)      (0.0087)     (0.0101)     (0.0123)        (0.0059)

Observations          25,564       12,901        12,989        31,448       12,081        10,035        12,117       10,020         31,689        32,665       31,554       32,708          33,259

Lagged
Economic &             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Welfare
Conditions
        Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
        value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications include the following covariates: child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education;
        annual state-level measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number
        Medicaid beneficiaries, numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month. Models also
        control for lagged economic / welfare conditions including one, two, and three-year lags of the unemployment rate, poverty rate, state personal income per capita, and welfare
        caseloads.




                                                                                                                                                                                          59
                                                                     Appendix Table 8
                                                  Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Prosocial Behaviors
                                                                      MTF 1991–2006

                    Sample                                             Boys                                                   Girls
                                                           Grades 8, 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y                            Grades 8, 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
                                                                  Participating Participating                             Participating Participating
                    Outcome                         Volunteering    in School       in School               Volunteering    in School       in School
                                                                      Clubs         Athletics                                 Clubs         Athletics
                    Model                                1              2               3                        4              5               6
                    Target                                                                        Children of
                                                                                              Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                       With High School Education or Less
                    Comparison                                                                    Children of
                                                                                               Married Mothers
                                                                                            With High School or Less
                    Welfare Reform                       0.0019            -0.0077            -0.0160            0.0051            0.0082             0.0153*
                                                       (0.0065)           (0.0125)           (0.0122)           (0.0075)          (0.0129)           (0.0082)
                    Welfare Reform*Target               -0.0074            -0.0078            -0.0078          -0.0100**           0.0160            -0.0162*
                                                       (0.0045)           (0.0130)           (0.0144)           (0.0045)          (0.0118)           (0.0092)


                   Observations                      85,541             37,134              37,716            104,766            47,475              47,886
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level
measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries,
numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month.




                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                         Appendix Table 9
                                                     Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Antisocial Behaviors
                                                                         MTF 1991–2006

Sample                                                        Boys                                                                             Girls
                                                  Grades 8, 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y                                                      Grades 8, 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
Outcome                        Skipping        Damaging      Fighting    Stealing                Hurting         Skipping        Damaging     Fighting     Stealing               Hurting
                                School         Property                                          Someone          School         Property                                         Someone
Model                              1              2             3            4                      5                6              7            8            9                     10
Target                                                                                               Children of
                                                                                                 Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                          With High School Education or Less
Comparison                                                                                           Children of
                                                                                                  Married Mothers
                                                                                          With High School Education or Less
Welfare Reform                   -0.0009       -0.0153**          -0.0105       -0.0286***         -0.0037         -0.0072         0.0003           -0.0105         -0.0089       -0.0112**
                                (0.0081)        (0.0069)         (0.0129)         (0.0089)        (0.0117)        (0.0076)        (0.0073)         (0.0086)        (0.0094)        (0.0051)
Welfare Reform*Target             0.0043       0.0298***         0.0373**          0.0202           0.0200         -0.0000         0.0075            0.0064          0.0011         -0.0095
                                (0.0080)        (0.0103)         (0.0143)         (0.0151)        (0.0144)        (0.0059)        (0.0064)         (0.0103)        (0.0083)        (0.0080)


Observations                90,245          36,061           29,985           36,326            29,849         113,882         46,278           38,417          46,505          38,272
  Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
    value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level
    measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries,
    numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month.




                                                                                                                                                                                       61
                                                                          Appendix Table 10
                                                          Effects of Welfare Reform on Youth Substance Use
                                                                           MTF 1991–2006

Sample                                                       Boys                                                                               Girls
                                                   Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y                                                          Grades 10 & 12 and ≤ 17 y
                                                                         Other                    Any                                                       Other                   Any
Outcome                       Marijuana         Alcohol    Smoking        Illicit               Substance       Marijuana          Alcohol    Smoking        Illicit              Substance
                                                                         Drugs                     Use                                                      Drugs                    Use
Model                               1              2           3             4                      5                 6               7           8             9                    10
Target                                                                                               Children of
                                                                                                 Unmarried Mothers
                                                                                          With High School Education or Less
Comparison                                                                                           Children of
                                                                                                  Married Mothers
                                                                                          With High School Education or Less
Welfare Reform                  0.0041           0.0040          -0.0030        -0.0085**         0.0016           0.0094            0.0117         0.0032          0.0039          0.0128
                               (0.0079)         (0.0081)        (0.0073)         (0.0037)        (0.0079)         (0.0071)         (0.0110)        (0.0090)        (0.0036)        (0.0108)
Welfare Reform*Target         0.0206***          0.0022           0.0069          0.0100         0.0145*         0.0189***          -0.0030         0.0105          0.0032          0.0083
                               (0.0042)         (0.0099)        (0.0076)         (0.0062)        (0.0079)         (0.0052)         (0.0089)        (0.0078)        (0.0055)        (0.0093)


Observations                 94,190          90,102         94,511            96,207           90,664           118,045         113,043         118,016          119,963         113,822
   Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-
    value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10. All specifications control for the child’s age, grade, and race/ethnicity; the mother’s education; annual state-level
    measures (unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) rate, refundable EITC, minimum wage, number Medicaid beneficiaries,
    numbers of National School Lunch and School Breakfast Program participants, and population); and indicators for state, year and month.




                                                                                                                                                                                       62
