                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      BANK OF JAPAN EQUITY PURCHASES:
              THE (NON-)EFFECTS OF EXTREME QUANTITATIVE EASING

                                     Ben Charoenwong
                                      Randall Morck
                                  Yupana Wiwattanakantang

                                     Working Paper 25525
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25525


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2019




Previously circulated as “Asset Prices, Corporate Actions, and Bank of Japan Equity Purchases.”
We are grateful to Sumit Agarwal, Francesco Franzoni, Virginia Gianinazzi, Marcin Kacperczyk,
Gregor Matvos, Andrew Rose, Pietro Veronesi, Bernard Yeung, our discussants Andrea Barbon
and Joe Zhang, seminar participants at the 2020 American Economic Association Meeting, 2019
European Finance Association Meeting, JSPS Core-to-Core Program: Governance Reforms from
Comparative Perspectives Conference, Development Bank of Japan, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, National University of Singapore, University of New South Wales, the Singapore
Scholar Symposium, Bank of Thailand, the Puey Ungphakorn Institute for Economic Research,
Chulalongkorn University, and NIDA University for helpful suggestions. This work was
supported the NUS Start-up Grant [grant number R-315-000-119-133 to B.C.] and the Singapore
Ministry of Education Tier 1 Research Grant [grant number R-315-000-127-115 to B.C.]. This
paper has circulated as NBER Working Paper No. W25525. All remaining errors are ours. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ben Charoenwong, Randall Morck, and Yupana Wiwattanakantang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bank of Japan Equity Purchases: The (Non-)Effects of Extreme Quantitative Easing
Ben Charoenwong, Randall Morck, and Yupana Wiwattanakantang
NBER Working Paper No. 25525
February 2019
JEL No. E52,E58,G31,G32

                                           ABSTRACT

From January 2011 through March 2018, the Bank of Japan purchased equity index ETFs worth
about 3.5% of GDP. Identification of the effect of central bank ETF purchases on stock
valuations and corporate responses is via differently-weighted and changing stock indices. BOJ
purchases lift valuations, increase share issuances, and increase total assets. On average, the latter
increase is due to cash and short-term securities rather than capital investment. However, firms
with worse corporate governance do increase capital investment. These findings suggest central
bank equity purchases are a problematic tool for stimulating economic growth through high
broad-based private-sector corporate investment.

Ben Charoenwong                                   Yupana Wiwattanakantang
National University of Singapore                  National University of Singapore
15 Kent Ridge Dr #07-69                           Business School
Singapore 119245                                  BIZ 1 2-7, 15 Kent Ridge Drive
Singapore                                         Singapore 119245
bizbgc@nus.edu.sg                                 bizyw@nus.edu.sg

Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6
CANADA
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
1.        Introduction
The Bank of Japan (BOJ) is pioneering a unique form of quantitative easing: the central bank
buying and holding large equity blocks in domestic corporations. From the policy’s advent in
December 2010 through March 2018, the BOJ accumulated equity index-backed exchange-traded
fund (ETF) holdings worth almost ¥19.3 trillion, some 2.9% of the market capitalization of the
Tokyo Stock Exchange, 3.5% of GDP, and over 75% of the total ETF market. In response to the
COVID-19 coronavirus crisis, in March of 2020, the BOJ announced a doubling of its equity
purchases with an annual budget of ¥12 trillion.1
          Are massive equity purchases by central banks an effective alternative monetary policy
stimulus other central banks might use amid near zero or, as in Japan, negative interest rates when
debt market interventions grow ineffective? The possibility of share purchase as an additional
policy tool has been discussed in several economies, including the United States, Europe, Israel,
and China.2 However, so far, the BOJ is the only major central bank to have purchased domestic
equities on such a scale.3 Based on our empirical analyses, we conclude that these BOJ equity
purchases have scant expansionary impact on corporate actions but temper bankruptcy risk. We
argue that Japan’s institutions and recent economic history leave its experience relevant to policy-
makers elsewhere.
          The BOJ’s policy reports explain ETF purchases as interventions to boost equity values to
reduce firms’ costs of capital and stimulate their investment. Consistent with the former, the BOJ

1
    Bank of Japan ploughs deeper into stocks to ease coronavirus fears, Financial Times, by Leo Lewis and Kana
    Inagaki, March 16, 2020.
2
    Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen has advocated expanding the Fed’s mandate to buying corporate stocks – see
    “Janet Yellen Sees Benefits to Central Bank Stock Purchases” by David Harrison, Wall Street Journal, Sept. 29
    2016. Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s March 2020 comments on the central bank intervening in “a broader
    range of securities or assets” were widely interpreted as referring to stock purchases – see e.g. “Could the Fed resort
    to buying stocks?” by Stephen Alpher, SeekingAlpha.com, Mar. 6. Blackrock Chief Investment Officer Rick Rieder
    urged the European Central Bank to buy equities – see “ECB can boost growth across Europe by buying stocks”
    Financial Times, July 22 2019. See also “Businesses urge Bank of Israel to buy corporate bonds, stocks,” Jerusalem
    Post, Mar. 18th 2020; “China's next stimulus step could be direct share purchases by its central bank,” Business
    Insider Australia, by David Scutt, Jan. 8th 2019.
3
    Equity constitutes about 20% of the Swiss National Bank’s (SNB) balance sheet. However, these are foreign stocks
    such as Apple, Alphabet, Microsoft, and Amazon. The SNB’s foreign equities serve as a profit center and as an
    additional channel for influencing the exchange rate. As another example, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority holds
    up to 20% of its balance sheet in equities. It had used its Exchange Fund Ordinance to purchase US$15 billion worth
    of stocks during the Asian Financial Crisis, but reduced its portfolio of Hong Kong equities to 5% of its reserves as
    of 2003. In 2015, the People’s Bank of China countered a stock market drop by lending to China Securities Finance
    Corporation, which then purchased stocks. Various governments purchase shares via sovereign wealth funds, public
    sector pension plans, or to affect complete or partial nationalizations. However, central banks do not take part in
    these policies and these purchases are not formally considered monetary policy interventions.

                                                             1
appears to time ETF purchases to occur on days when the market drops in the first trading session.
       Success in the BOJ’s experiment would be evident (1) if its ETF purchases lifted share
prices relative to a market-weighted benchmark, (2) if higher share prices led firms to raise more
capital, and (3) if firms used this capital to undertake more investment. Empirical tests confirm
only the first two parts in this mechanism: Larger BOJ-backed ETF share purchases lift stock
prices and predict equity issuance. However, the third essential part of the mechanism appears
non-functional: Larger BOJ-backed ETF share purchases do not predict substantially increased
corporate investment, but rather predict increased holdings of cash and other current assets.
       Since the policy shock is likely correlated with other factors that simultaneously affect
firms’ investment opportunity sets, our empirical analysis faces an important endogeneity concern.
Our identification strategy exploits a unique institutional feature of the program: the BOJ buys
stocks in proportions set by firms’ weights in a combination of three indexes: one price-weighted,
another free-float value-weighed TOPIX, and the third containing firms selected for “investor
appeal”. This introduces an exogenous firm-specific heterogeneity in BOJ demand for different
stocks that permits identification of the causal effects of central bank equity purchases on stock
returns and corporate responses.
       Validating the first part of the mechanism, greater BOJ demand increases a stock’s price
significantly the same day. After a small partial reversal, the increase persists through the
subsequent week and month. The data associate total quarterly BOJ purchases worth 1% of a firm’s
total prior quarter assets with a 1% higher stock return that quarter.
       Validating the second link, more BOJ purchases of a firm’s shares also correspond to
statistically and economically significant increases in that firm’s seasoned equity issuances.
However, despite a decrease in market leverage ratio due to increased market value of these firms,
there is no evidence of any increase in their debt issuance frequency/activity.
       The third link— firms investing more after BOJ-backed ETF purchases increase their share
values and thereby reduce their costs of capital — is not economically significant. Instead, we
observe large increases in current assets, especially in cash and short-term investments. The BOJ
purchasing equity amounting to 1% of a firm’s lagged assets predicts a 2.28% increase in that
firm’s assets over the same quarter. However, our quarterly regressions associate only 8.5% of this
with increased capital investment. Instead, the increase in assets is overwhelmingly in short term
assets, with cash and short-term investments accounting for 53%. In annual regressions, the link

                                                  2
to cash accumulation remains statistically and economically significant, but that to tangible
investment becomes statistically insignificant with near zero point estimates. This accords with
this monetary-stimulus mechanism amounting to “pushing on a rope” to boost investment.
           However, BOJ equity purchases are associated with increased investment in the subsample
of firms without valuable growth opportunities (Q < 1) and with weak corporate governance (the
chair is the CEO or ex-CEO). These findings suggest that, while being generally ineffective in
spurring investment, the BOJ’s equity purchases have loosened expansion constraints on firms
whose investment is least apt to be economically efficient. This suggests BOJ equity purchases
may exacerbate Japan’s “zombie firms” problems (Caballero et al. 2008).
           Lastly, we also document some diminishing impact of the BOJ ETF purchase policy over
time. Although we find no differences in the immediate impact of BOJ ETF purchases on stock
prices over time, the corporate actions are concentrated in 2011 and 2012 and attenuate, becoming
insignificant by 2017.
           To what extent can Japanese findings inform policy elsewhere? Japan’s unique economic
and financial institutions developed uniquely in the post-war era (Morck and Nakamura 2007;
Mehrotra et al. 2011). However, these rest atop fundamental similarities to those of other high-
income economies (Beason and Patterson 2004). Moreover, Japan’s institutions have converged
substantially to high-income norms in recent decades (Hoshi et al. 2018). Post-financial crisis
concerns about secular stagnation argue that other high-income economies are increasingly
“Japanified” (Blanchard and Summers 2020). Acharya et al. (2019) document parallels between
Japan’s “lost decades” and Europe’s slow growth, including “ultra accommodative central bank
policies and zombie lending (i.e., cheap credit to impaired firms) by undercapitalized banks”.
Banerjee and Hofmann (2018) document a growing Japanese-style “zombification” in OECD
economies. Peterson Institute President Adam Posen concludes “I don’t think you can set aside
how ineffective Japanese monetary policy has been in terms of nominal aggregates. I think we
need to take [it] very seriously and be troubled by this.” 4 Therefore, Japan’s experimental
monetary policies potentially have important external validity going forward.
           Our findings suggest that central bank purchases of equities are a problematic tool for
stimulating economic growth through high broad-based private-sector corporate investment.


4
    “Japanification”, Secular Stagnation, and Fiscal and Monetary Policy Challenges, American Economic Association
     Annual Meeting session, 2020.

                                                         3
However, higher stock prices might stimulate economic growth by, for example, increasing
consumers’ wealth (Poterba 2000), as shown in Di Maggio et al. (2020) and Agarwal et al. (2020)
who link stock returns to consumption in Sweden and India respectively. Comparable Japanese
data are unavailable, precluding such tests focussed specifically on central bank-driven share value
increases. Central banks may thus wish to consider other nonstandard monetary policy
interventions for boosting corporate investment.

2.        Related Literature and Institutional Background
2.1       The Bank of Japan’s Increasingly Unconventional Monetary Policy
Laying out a major monetary stimulus transmission channel and key link between finance and
macroeconomics, the Q theory of investment, Tobin (1969) argues “an increase in the quantity of
money is expansionary, causing a rise in the valuation of existing capital and stimulating
investment” (p. 21). Tobin envisioned the central bank creating money to buy T-bills (government
debt maturing in less than one year) to lift T-bills’ prices and lower their yields. This was to pull
down the yields of securities in general and lower firms’ costs of capital, boosting their investment
and thus boosting economic growth.5
          The BOJ successfully kept short-term rates low with “conventional” monetary stimuli
along these lines.6 However, investment and growth remained sluggish. When nominal short-term
risk-free rates are already very low, pushing them down further becomes ineffective. Japan’s
short-term borrowing costs were very low, but long-term borrowing costs were higher. Bernanke
and Reinhart (2004) posit that central banks could further stimulate the economy with an
“unconventional” monetary stimulus. Termed “quantitative easing” (QE), this had the central bank
creating money to buy a broader range of debt securities, including medium- and long-term
government bonds and private sector debt securities, to push down rates more generally. In March
2006, the BOJ became the first major central bank to implement QE.
          Following the 2008 global financial crisis, most other major central banks followed the
BOJ’s lead and implemented QE and other non-conventional monetary policies (Kuttner 2018).
The BOJ’s intensifying QE interventions lowered interest rates across maturities, but investment

5
    Other monetary policy transmission channels are also modelled, but as Bernanke and Reinhard (2003, p. 85) write,
    “Monetary policy works for the most part by influencing the prices and yields of financial assets, which in turn
    affect economic decisions and thus the evolution of the economy.”
6
    Central bank T-bill purchases are associated with reduced short rates (Christensen et al. 2012; Hördahl and King
    2008; Taylor and Williams 2010).

                                                          4
and economic growth remained elusive (Honda et al. 2013).

2.2     The Bank of Japan Expands Quantitative Easing to Stock Purchases
With short-term risk-free interest rates below zero and the yield curve flat, the BOJ again broke
new ground. In October 2010, Governor Masaaki Shirakawa directed the BOJ to create money to
buy corporate shares as well as debt securities. The BOJ opted to buy shares of index ETFs, which
then used the money to buy shares in corporations. This let the BOJ delegate decisions about which
stocks to buy and how to vote those stocks in annual shareholder meetings to ETF management
companies. Table 1 summarizes the subsequent expansion of the BOJ’s stock market interventions.
                                       [Table 1 about here]
         The 2010 Comprehensive Monetary Easing (CME) program initially put a cap of ¥450
billion and a December 2011 termination date on the BOJ’s equity index ETF purchases. As Table
1 shows, both the cap and termination date were repeatedly extended. The next BOJ governor,
Haruhiko Kuroda, replaced the CME with the Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing
(QQE) policy, which empowered the BOJ to buy equity index ETFs with no cap or termination
date (Kuroda 2013). Rather, the QQE set an annual equity ETF purchase target of ¥1 trillion for
the BOJ, which repeatedly increased over subsequent years.
        Although the largest entry in the BOJ’s balance sheet remains Japanese government bonds
(JGBs), its equity holdings show the greatest increase – from ¥1 trillion (shares taken off the
balance sheets of troubled banks) before 2011 to over ¥19 trillion by March 2018. On March 16,
2020, the BOJ doubled its annual ETF purchases to a target of ¥12 trillion to counter the COVID-
19 crisis.

2.3     Identification via the Mechanics of BOJ Equity Index ETF Purchases
To our knowledge, the BOJ has never framed its equity purchase policy within a formal model.
However, empirical evidence supports individual stocks having downward sloping demand curves
(Dierker et al. 2016), so the BOJ’s policy could plausibly affect stock prices by increasing demand.
Our first empirical objective is therefore to estimate how much the BOJ’s equity purchases of a
stock increase its price. Because demand elasticity identification suffers from an endogeneity bias,
prior studies have used changes in index inclusion (Shleifer 1986) or index weighting schemes
(Kaul et al. 2000; Greenwood 2008) as sources of exogenous variation in the demand for each
stock. Because the BOJ buys stocks by buying equity index ETFs, a similar identification strategy


                                                 5
is possible here.
       However, because the BOJ times its ETF purchases to counter market dips, two
complications arise. First, this timing could decrease systematic risk of stocks in indexes these
ETFs track, lowering their risk premiums and further increasing their prices. This means price
changes due to BOJ ETF purchases may overstate pure demand elasticities. However, our interest
is in total price impacts of BOJ equity purchases and not in demand elasticities per se, so this
complication is innocuous. Second, and less innocuous, a stock’s price change on any day on which
the BOJ buys ETFs is the sum of a change due to BOJ purchases and a change due to whatever
caused the market dip. Because time-series variation in BOJ ETF demand is endogenous, our focus
is cross-sectional heterogeneity in BOJ demand on each intervention day.
       The BOJ cannot alter the cross-sectional distribution of its demand for stocks in response
to changes in its price or in any firm, industry or other latent variable because each index has
predetermined inclusion criteria and weighting schemes and because the BOJ buys ETFs tracking
the different indexes in predetermined proportions. From 2010 to November 2014, the BOJ bought
ETFs tracking the Tokyo Stock Price Index (TOPIX) and the Nikkei 225 index. After that, it also
bought ETFs tracking the JPX-Nikkei 400. The BOJ initially weighted its ETF purchases across
indexes by the market capitalizations of each index. In September 2016, the BOJ allocated ¥7
trillion for buying ETFs tracking the TOPIX alone, leaving ¥5.7 trillion for buying ETFs tracking
all three indexes weighted by their market capitalizations as before. The TOPIX is a broad market
index that weights firms by free floats (market capitalizations less large stable equity blocks). The
Nikkei 225 is a price-weighted index of 225 selected large firms. The JPX-Nikkei 400 contains
400 stocks selected for governance and performance. Section 3.3 derives BOJ demand for each
stock on each date as an interaction of index inclusion dummies, index weights, and the BOJ’s
formula for allotting purchases to ETFs tracking different indexes. The resulting distribution of
BOJ demand across stocks on any date is thus both predetermined and highly irregular.
       Our identification assumption is that this irregular pattern is – to a first approximation – a
randomization that renders the cross-sectional variation in BOJ demand of a stock exogenous to
latent firm or macroeconomic factors at a given point in time. This assumption would fail if a
shock caused price changes with a correlated cross-sectional variation. For example, a shock
hitting firms equally would be collinear with price changes from the BOJ buying an equal-
weighted total market index ETF and one hitting larger firms harder would be collinear with price

                                                 6
changes from the BOJ buying a value-weighted total market index ETF. The irregular cross-
sectional distribution of BOJ demand in our setting, determined by interactions of index inclusion
dummies, index weights, and the BOJ’s allocation formula, is unlikely to correlate consistently
with that of any plausible series of shocks causing market dips.

3.     Empirical Framework
3.1    Economic Motivation
Tobin (1969) argues that a monetary expansion “enables the monetary authority to force the market
return on physical capital to diverge from its technological marginal efficiency or, what is the same
thing, to force the market valuation of existing capital to diverge from its reproduction cost. By
creating these divergences, the monetary authority can affect the current rate of production and
accumulation of capital assets. This is the manner in which the monetary authority can affect
aggregate demand in the short run” (p. 26). Our theoretical framework elaborates on this to
formulate the three criteria the introduction offers for deeming the BOJ’s equity purchase policy
effective: that it raises share prices, lowers costs of capital, and increases capital investment.
       First, could BOJ share purchases raise share prices? If all investors have homogenous
information, stocks are merely risk-return pairs and each stock has multiple perfect substitutes
(combinations of other stocks and the risk-free asset) and therefore has infinitely elastic demand.
Under this hypothesis, the BOJ cannot permanently boost stocks’ prices with targeted stock
purchases. As BOJ purchases push up targeted stocks’ prices, investors would sell those stocks
and buy other securities with similar risk-return profiles until the prices of the BOJ targeted stocks
revert to their original values. The BOJ buying ETFs would then fail to increase the prices of stocks
in those ETFs relative to the prices of other stocks. However, we observe share price increases and
no evidence of short-term reversals. In addition, Barbon and Gianinazzi (2019) present empirical
evidence that individual Japanese stocks have downward sloping demand curves using two major
BOJ share purchase policy announcements. This motivates a more nuanced theoretical framework.
       If information is costly and distributed heterogeneously across investors (Grossman and
Stiglitz 1980; Hong and Stein 2007; Dierker et al. 2016) or if investors are heterogeneously
impatient (Handa and Schwartz 1996)) and liquidity providers compete imperfectly (Sandas 2001),
stocks have finite demand elasticities. In such a setting, the BOJ increases the prices of these stocks.
       By raising a firm’s share prices, the BOJ mechanically lowers the return that its dividends


                                                   7
and future capital gains constitute for investors, which lowers the firm’s cost of equity capital and
overall cost of capital. Tobin’s Q theory says an efficiently run firm should undertake all capital
investment projects whose q ratio exceeds one and no others. A potential project’s 𝑞 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 exceeds
one if and only if the marginal return it gains by putting an additional unit of capital into a new
project exceeds the marginal cost of that unit of capital. By lowering a firm’s cost of capital, the
BOJ’s equity purchase program seeks to increase the number of projects whose q ratios exceed
one and therefore boost the firm’s investment by the setup costs of all of these projects.
       The link from higher stock prices via lower costs of capital to higher capital investment
might be more effective for some firms than for others. For example, a cost of capital decline might
lead to very little more investment by a “value firm” – that is, one with substantial cash flow from
existing projects but limited scope for undertaking new projects. Also, an inefficiently governed
firm might undertake “empire-building” investment projects that make the CEO feel important
and more entrenched rather than investment projects whose q ratios exceed one (Jensen 1986;
Pinkowitz et al. 2006). Lowering the cost of capital of such a firm might stimulate inefficient
investment that ultimately fails to justify its costs.
        Finally, Gross Domestic Product (𝐺𝐷𝑃) is 𝑌𝑡 = Ct + 𝐼𝑡 + 𝐺𝑡 + 𝑋𝑡 ; that is, the sum of
aggregate consumption, aggregate investment, government spending, and net exports. Fluctuations
in aggregate investment are largely due to fluctuations in its most important component, capital
investment. This is, to a first approximation, the sum of the set-up costs of all investment projects
that firms undertake in each period. Aggregate investment is the most volatile and pro-cyclical
component of GDP, and economic downturns typically correspond to low aggregate investment.
Central bank monetary stimulus policies therefore seek to boost aggregate investment. We take
this to be the objective of the BOJ’s equity purchase program.

3.2     Data for Financial and Stock Return Variables
The sample is all firms traded on the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) from
January 2011 to March 2018, excluding banks and financial institutions (J-SIC code 6), whose
financial statements are non-comparable. Daily stock returns, market capitalizations, public floats,
and shares outstanding are from Thomson-Reuters DataStream. Financial data are from Thomson-
Reuters WorldScope. BOJ ETF purchase daily data are from the BOJ’s website. ETFs trading on
the TSE are from the Japan Exchange Group (JPX) website. Index components and weights of
TOPIX, Nikkei 225 and JPX-Nikkei 400 indexes are from the website of Tokyo Stock Exchange

                                                    8
and Nikkei Inc. Assets-under-management data for each ETF are from Bloomberg.

       The BOJ announces its day 𝑡 ETF purchases on day 𝑡 + 1. Market participants reportedly
become aware of BOJ ETF purchases as, or shortly after, they occur. Therefore, we look at day
𝑡 returns as well as returns in the two-day window [𝑡, 𝑡 + 1] and longer windows. Longer non-
overlapping windows allow tests for reversals, but the cost is fewer usable data points as BOJ
purchases tend to cluster, especially in more recent data.

       Tests of the impact of BOJ purchases on stock returns use stocks with positive volume and
non-missing prior-day market capitalization. The daily returns sample of over 4.2 million stock-
day observations allows for portfolio-level tests, which contrast the return of a portfolio of stocks
in the BOJ-targeted ETFs, which we call the “BOJ purchase basket”, with a portfolio of all other
stocks. The BOJ purchase basket is virtually identical to the TSE’s First Section (large liquid
stocks) and the portfolio of all other stocks is virtually identical to the TSE’s Second Section (small
illiquid stocks). Consequently, tests contrasting the two are confounded by systematic size and
liquidity differences. Our main daily return tests therefore exploit the substantial heterogeneity in
BOJ demand within the BOJ purchase basket at each point in time. These tests use over 1.7 million
stock-day observations.

       Tests for corporate policy effects of BOJ ETF purchases use firm-quarter and firm-year
observations for BOJ purchase basket firms. We drop observations with negative total assets, net
sales, current assets, tangible capital, inventories, or cash and short-term investments; returns-on-
assets outside -50% to 200%; market-to-book ratios outside 0 to 50; long-term book leverage ratios
outside 0 to 100%; or changes in balance sheet items below -100%. These filters result in final
quarterly and annual panels of 42,993 firm-quarter observations and 6,114 firm-year observations,
respectively. Tests using share-issuance information use a sample of 42,919 firm-quarter
observations. Also, we winsorize changes in balance-sheet variables at the 1% level when using
them as outcome variables to study corporate actions. Table 2 lists the variables used and their
summary statistics, and Appendix Table 1 lists exact Thomson Reuters variable codes.

                                        [Table 2 about here]

3.3    Measuring Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity in BOJ Demand for Stocks
Our tests exploit firm-level heterogeneity in BOJ demand for identification. To assess how the


                                                  9
BOJ’s purchases of ETF units cause these ETFs to purchase shares of their component stocks, we
require precise measures of each stock’s weight in each index and each index’s weight in the BOJ’s
purchase menu each day. We denote stock i’s day t weight in the Nikkei 225, TOPIX, and JPX-
                       𝑇𝑜𝑝𝑖𝑥
Nikkei 400 by 𝑤𝑖,𝑡
               𝑁225
                    , 𝑤𝑖,𝑡   , and 𝑤𝑖,𝑡
                                    𝑁400
                                         , respectively and each index’s day t weight in the BOJ’s
                           𝑇𝑜𝑝𝑖𝑥
purchase menu as 𝑤𝐵𝑂𝐽,𝑡
                  𝑁225
                        , 𝑤𝐵𝑂𝐽,𝑡 and 𝑤𝐵𝑂𝐽,𝑡
                                      𝑁400
                                            , respectively, all expressed as percentages. The
percentage weight of stock i in total BOJ purchases on day t is then
                                        𝑇𝑜𝑝𝑖𝑥    𝑇𝑜𝑝𝑖𝑥
[6]                 𝑁225
           𝑤𝑖,𝑡 ≡ (𝑤𝑖,𝑡     𝑁225
                         × 𝑤𝐵𝑂𝐽,𝑡 ) + (𝑤𝑖,𝑡   × 𝑤𝐵𝑂𝐽,𝑡       𝑁400
                                                       ) + (𝑤𝑖,𝑡     𝑁400
                                                                  × 𝑤𝐵𝑂𝐽,𝑡 ).

           The three indexes’ different weight-calculation systems create substantial time-varying
cross-sectional heterogeneity in ETFs’ increased demand for each individual stock arising from a
given amount of BOJ’s ETF purchases. The TOPIX tracks roughly 2,000 stocks in the First Section
of the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE). A TOPIX component firm’s weight in the index is
proportional to its free float, namely, its share price times the number of its shares outstanding
minus publicly disclosed long-term block-holdings. The price-weighted Nikkei 225 tracks 225
stocks, selected to collectively reflect the health of Japan’s economy, analogous to the Dow-Jones
Industrial Average in the United States. The JPX-Nikkei Index 400 tracks 400 stocks of large TSE-
listed firms selected based on performance and corporate governance criteria. This index, like the
TOPIX, weights firms by free float but caps any individual firm’s weight at 1.5%. Nikkei reviews
and updates its component firms annually, so firms enter and exit these indexes.7 BOJ-driven ETF
demand for firm 𝑖’s shares is the yen cost of total BOJ ETF purchases on day 𝑡, 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑡 , times that
stock’s weight in BOJ purchases, 𝑤𝑖,𝑡 from [1]. We scale BOJ yen demand for a firm’s stock by
its market capitalization, 𝑉𝑖,𝑡−22 , lagged one month (22 trading days) in defining the increase in
demand for stock i associated with BOJ ETF purchases on day 𝑡 as

[7]        𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡 ≡ 𝑤𝑖,𝑡 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑡 /𝑉𝑖,𝑡−22 .

A value of 1% for 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡 means BOJ-driven ETF purchases on day t of shares in firm 𝑖 equal 1%
of the firm i’s market capitalization one month prior.
           Tests using quarterly data sum BOJ-backed demand for each stock across all days t in a


7
    We exclude the four indexes specifically tailored for the BOJ: the Daiwa MSCI Japan Human & Physical Investment
    index, JPX/S&P CAPEX & Human Capital index, Nomura Enterprise Value Allocation index, and iSTOXX MUTB
    Japan Proactive Leaders 200 because their component stocks may be endogenously selected and rebalanced.

                                                         10
quarter q and scale this amount by total assets as of the end of the prior quarter:
                    1
[8]    𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 ≡            ∑𝑡∈𝑞 𝑤𝑖,𝑡 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡 .
                  𝐴𝑖,𝑞−1


Tests using annual financial data analogously sum BOJ-backed demand for each stock across all
days in the year and scale by total assets at the end of the prior year.

4.     Empirical Findings
4.1    Identifying an Exogenous Component of BOJ-driven ETF Demand
As a preliminary first pass through the data, Panel A of Table 3 contrasts the daily returns on
market capitalization-weighted portfolios of stocks in ETFs the BOJ purchases and of all other
stocks, denoted 𝑟𝑡𝐵𝑂𝐽 and 𝑟𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑛−𝐵𝑂𝐽 , respectively. The explanatory variable is the log of one plus
the total daily amount of BOJ ETF purchases, denoted 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑡 , in hundreds of millions of yen.
Regressions 3A.1 and 3A.2 explain the return premium of the portfolio of stocks in ETFs the BOJ
purchases over that of the portfolio of other stocks, 𝑟𝑡𝐵𝑂𝐽 − 𝑟𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑛−𝐵𝑂𝐽 . All regressions assess
significance using Newey-West standard errors with five lags.
                                            [Table 3 about here]
The two regressions associate a small but statistically significant positive return premium with
BOJ ETF purchases: a 0.02-basis-point increase in the return of the BOJ purchase-basket portfolio
relative to that of the portfolio of other stocks accompanies a 10% increase in BOJ purchases.
       Regressions 3A.3 and 3A.4 highlight a timing problem: Both portfolios, with stocks in and
not in the BOJ’s ETF portfolio, drop on days when the BOJ buys more shares. This reflects the
BOJ’s stated purpose in intervening in the stock market: to exert upward pressure on stock prices.
However, it also means our tests must consider both the timing and overall magnitude of the BOJ’s
interventions endogenous.
       This endogeneity in the timing and aggregate magnitude of BOJ purchases means we must
identify a source of exogenous heterogeneity in BOJ-linked purchases to test for effects of these
purchases on individual stock returns and, through these, on corporate strategies. We do so by
using the exogenous heterogeneity that arises from firms’ different weights in the indexes tracked
by ETFs the BOJ purchases. Panel B of Table 3 presents the results of daily firm-level panel
regressions of the form

[9]    𝑟𝑖,𝑡 = 1𝑖 + 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑡),𝑡 + 𝛽 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 ,

                                                    11
where 𝑟𝑖𝑡 is the return of firm i’s stock on day t, 𝑗(𝑖, 𝑡) is firm 𝑖’s primary industry at time t, and
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡 is demand for shares in 𝑖 associated with BOJ ETF purchases on day 𝑡, defined in [6].
            The explained variable is the stock’s raw total return because the regressions include stock
fixed-effects, denoted 1𝑖 , which subsume different static risk loadings for different stocks, and
industry-day fixed-effects, denoted 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑡),𝑡 , which subsume time-varying sector-specific risk
loadings and time-varying macroeconomic risk loadings. Standard errors cluster bidirectionally,
by both stock and day, adjusting significance levels for persistence in BOJ-backed share purchases
by ETFs through time and for common shocks to all firms on given days.8
            Panel B of Table 3 shows the impact of successively finer fixed-effects on the relation
between daily firm-level stock returns and BOJ-driven ETF demand for that stock. Day fixed-
effects control for the BOJ timing purchases to counter market dips and reveal a positive cross-
sectional coefficient, indicating higher stock returns for stocks with greater weights in the
combination of indexes that the BOJ’s target ETFs track (Regression 3B.3). The regression fit
improves significantly as day fixed-effects are included, and again as industry-day fixed-effects
are included, so we adopt industry-day fixed-effects as our baseline specification (Regression
3B.4). This compares BOJ ETF stocks’ daily returns to those of their industry peers each day.9
            We take the coefficient on BOJ-driven ETF demand in regressions of the form of 3B.4 as
capturing the effects on individual stock returns of a defensibly exogenous source of heterogeneity
in BOJ non-standard monetary policy interventions in the stock market. This regression shows
stocks with greater weights in the BOJ’s purchase menu gaining significantly more on days when
the BOJ buys more ETFs. As a robustness check, Appendix Figure A1 corroborates the main
results in Barbon and Gianinazzi (2019), showing the BOJ ETF purchase policy announcements
increase returns of stocks with high weights in the BOJ purchase basket relative to those with less
exposure.

4.2         Windows and Weights in Daily Returns Panel Regressions
Table 4 further explores the baseline specification in regression (3B.4). Panel A uses the sample
in (3B.4), all stocks in the BOJ purchase basket. Panel B includes all stocks, assigning zero weights
to stocks not in the BOJ purchase basket. The first columns in both panels show stocks with greater

8
    The partial autocorrelation peaks at a lag of 5 trading days and is insignificant at longer lags.
9
    Stock fixed-effects account for firm-specific average returns, including static loadings to stock return factors, but do
     not significantly improve the fit. Our results are quantitatively and qualitatively similar including stock fixed-effects.

                                                               12
weights in the BOJ’s purchase menu gaining significantly more on days when the BOJ buys more
ETFs.
                                                [Table 4 about here]
           Jain (1987) argues that event studies of stocks’ inclusions in an index should consider
longer event windows to exclude temporary price pressure effects, which arise as passive investors,
who pay an immediacy premium to avoid the risk of not tracking the index accurately, bid up index
constituent prices temporarily. Gains from temporary price pressures reverse once abnormal
passive investor buying subsides, leaving a smaller permanent gain attributable to increased
demand for the stocks. Prior works (e.g., Kaul et al. 2000) find partial reversals within a few trading
days. The BOJ relies on its ETF purchases boosting index constituent firms’ share prices long
enough to affect investment decisions, so only the permanent component of the price gain is
relevant in assessing the effectiveness of this unconventional monetary policy.10
           To explore the permanence of price gains, the remaining columns in Panels A and B
examine cumulative log returns over longer windows from the day the BOJ buys ETFs to the next
trading day [𝑡, 𝑡 + 1], the trading day a day after [𝑡, 𝑡 + 2], a week (five trading days) later [𝑡, 𝑡 +
4], two weeks later [𝑡, 𝑡 + 9], and roughly one trading month later [𝑡, 𝑡 + 21]. Both panels admit
partial short-term reversals but show most of the immediate gains persisting as the length of the
window increases.
           As the window increases, the odds of it including a second BOJ ETF purchase date rise.
This means that the long event window returns in Panels A and B could reflect subsequent BOJ
ETF purchases on days later in these windows, rather than a permanent price increase following
the initial BOJ intervention date. To exclude this possibility, Panel C repeats the exercise, dropping
all event windows containing one or more subsequent BOJ ETF purchase dates. This substantially
reduces the sample size, but the price increase remains permanent. Indeed, rather than reversing,
it rises slightly with window length. This is an artefact of the BOJ’s market timing: interventions
not followed by other interventions are interventions not followed by price declines. Regardless,
share price gains associated with the BOJ’s interventions do not appear to fully reverse, so its


10
     Price pressure that raises share prices on abrupt spikes in demand by index ETFs could affect our results in two
     ways. First, the immediate positive abnormal return might be overstated if followed by a reversal, a negative
     abnormal return. Second, if index ETF managers act to mitigate immediate price pressure by delaying the buying
     of underlying shares, the immediate reaction might be muted and the abnormal return might spread across a longer
     window. In either case, cumulative abnormal returns over longer time windows measure the overall price impact.

                                                          13
unconventional monetary policy could affect corporate decisions and the real economy.

4.3      Policy Transmission Tests
Traditional monetary policy expansion is thought to function by reducing costs of debt, thereby
inducing firms to borrow more to undertake expansions. This section explores whether firms
whose share prices are affected by BOJ ETF purchases raise new financing. Attributing a firm’s
actions to BOJ-driven ETF purchases requires variation in their intensity that is not only defensibly
exogenous but also separable from other developments. Controlling for economy-wide latent
factors requires time fixed-effects. The effectiveness of these interventions may differ across
industries, so industry-quarter fixed-effects are used.11
         Each firm’s decision to raise external financing is assessed by two indicator variables:
 𝑆𝑂𝐸
1𝑖,𝑞 is set to one if firm 𝑖 issued additional equity in quarter 𝑞 and set to zero otherwise; and 1𝐷𝐼
                                                                                                   𝑖,𝑞

is set to one if the firm increased its long-term debt during the quarter and set to zero otherwise.
Because the explained variables are binary, we supplement OLS linear probability estimation with
logit and probit estimation. All of these regressions take the form
          
[10]     𝐼𝑖,𝑞 = 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑞),𝑞 + 𝜉𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 + 𝚪 ′ Δ𝐗 𝑖,𝑞−1 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑞 ,

       
where 𝐼𝑖,𝑞 is either 1𝑖,𝑞
                      𝑆𝑂𝐸
                          or 1𝐷𝐼
                              𝑖,𝑞 . The explanatory variable of primary interest, 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 , is BOJ-
                                   12


driven ETF purchases of the firm’s stock in each quarter scaled by the firm’s prior-quarter total
assets, from [8]. The coefficient of interest, 𝜉 , gauges the association of a firm’s financing
decisions with increased demand for its shares in that quarter which are due to BOJ ETF purchases.
The vector Δ𝐗 𝑖,𝑞−1 contains control variables represented as flow variables, including: one-quarter
lagged changes in each of the market-to-book ratios, return-on-assets, book leverage, and log total


11
   The BOJ’s quantitative easing also includes purchases of commercial paper and investment-grade corporate bonds.
   It does not disclose which firms’ debt securities it buys, so we cannot control for these purchases explicitly. However,
   as of calendar year 2018, the BOJ had only bought ¥5.2 trillion in commercial paper and corporate bonds in total,
   versus ¥25 trillion yen equity ETFs. If greater BOJ equity purchases increased firms’ debt capacities, affected firms
   may issue debt that the BOJ also buys. This might bias the coefficient of BOJ ETF purchases upward in explaining
   debt issuances. However, Table 6 shows no relation to debt issuances.
12
   We consider responses in the same quarter as the BOJ purchase because, since 1988, the Japanese Securities
   Exchange Law permits issuances to occur well within one month, with the fastest time from announcement to
   payment date of only 21 days. The minimum time between filing an equity offering document to the actual raise is
   7 or 15 days, contingent on firms meeting certain disclosure guidelines imposed by the Ministry of Finance. The
   date a company receives cash proceeds from the issuance must be at least 14 days from the original equity offer
   filing day. Issuing corporate bonds takes less than 3 months and loans from existing banking relationships are faster.


                                                           14
assets. Industry-quarter fixed-effects, denoted 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑞),𝑞 with 𝑖 indexing firms, 𝑞 indexing quarters,
and 𝑗(𝑖, 𝑞) denoting firm 𝑖’s primary industry in quarter 𝑞, are included in OLS estimations. Since
all variables are flows, we do not include firm fixed-effects. All regressions cluster by firm.
                                                   [Table 5 Here]
            Panel A of Table 5 summarizes these regressions.13 All three estimation techniques link
BOJ ETF purchases of a firm’s stock to that firm issuing seasoned equity. Regression 5A.1
associates a one percentage point increase in BOJ-driven ETF purchases of the firm’s stock with
a 1.5-percentage-point increase in the probability of the firm issuing seasoned equity, relative to
an unconditional probability in the sample of around 7 percentage points. The probit and logit
estimations associate a 0.7% increase in the marginal probability of a seasoned equity issue with
the same BOJ intervention. This suggests that the first link in the transmission channel is
operational: BOJ-driven ETF purchases may indeed stimulate firms to increase their outstanding
shares. Panel A shows no analogous increases in long-term debt issues.
           Panel B supplements these tests with an instrumental-variables approach to isolate the
transmission channel in question: differences across firms in corporate financing actions associated
with BOJ ETF purchases boosting different firms’ valuations by different amounts. The first stage
associates a change in each firm’s market valuation, scaled by its lagged book value, ∆𝑀𝑖,𝑞 /𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1 ,
with BOJ-driven ETF purchases of its shares by estimating

[11]       ∆𝑀𝑖,𝑞 /𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1 = 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑞),𝑞 + 𝛽 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 + 𝚪′𝐗 𝑖,𝑞−1 + 𝜂𝑖,𝑞

with all explanatory variables as in [10]. The second stage repeats the exercises in Panel A, but
uses the predicted changes in firms’ market valuation that [11] associates with BOJ-driven ETF
purchases of their shares, denoted ∆𝑀𝑖,𝑞 /𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1 |𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 . The second stage estimation is thus

            
[12]       𝐼𝑖,𝑞 = 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑞),𝑞 + 𝜉 (∆𝑀𝑖,𝑞 /𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1 |𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 ) + 𝚪 ′ Δ𝐗 𝑖,𝑞−1 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑞

with all else as in [10]. This does not directly relate new financing to capital investment as in Kim
and Purnanandam (2014). Instead, we later test investment and other corporate responses directly.

           Panel B of Table 5 summarizes these regressions. The first stage regression 5B.1.1 links a
one-percentage-point increase – approximately 0.7 of a standard deviation – in BOJ-induced
purchasing of a firm’s shares during a given quarter to a 0.38 increase in a firm’s market-to-book

13
     Appendix Tables A2 and A3 reproduce Table 6, including all control variable coefficients.

                                                          15
ratio – approximately one-third of a standard deviation. The first-stage clustered F-statistic is 7.028,
slightly below the rule of thumb of 10, meaning that the bias in our second-stage estimates may be
up to 14.3%. However, since our focus is not in using the BOJ ETF purchase as an instrument but
merely to study the BOJ impact occurring through changes in valuation ratios, we proceed with
the standard two-stage set up rather than a weak instrument approach. The instrumental variables
estimates in Panel B affirm that the BOJ’s ETF purchases of a firm’s shares indeed increased its
odds of issuing seasoned equity by increasing its market valuation.

4.4    Policy Effectiveness Tests
The BOJ undertook large-scale ETF purchases as a new form of unconventional monetary policy
aiming to stimulate corporate investment. The policy can be deemed effective if it can be tied to
such actions. We test for this using firm-quarter regressions explaining various measures of
changes in corporate assets, generically denoted Δ𝑌𝑖,𝑞 , of the form

[13]   Δ𝑌𝑖,𝑞 = 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑞),𝑞 + 𝜉𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 + 𝚪 ′ Δ𝐗 𝑖,𝑞−1 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑞 ,

with 𝑖 and 𝑞 indexing firms and quarters. The coefficient of interest, 𝜉, gauges the relationship
between the corporate-action variable and 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 , which is the increased demand for the firm’s
shares in that quarter due to BOJ ETF purchases, from [8]. As in [10], Δ𝐗 𝑖,𝑞−1 contains control
variables: one-quarter lagged changes in market-to-book ratio, return-on-assets, book leverage,
and log total assets. All regressions cluster by firm and include industry-quarter fixed-effects,
denoted, 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑞),𝑞 , with 𝑗(𝑖, 𝑞) as 𝑖’s primary industry in quarter 𝑞. The coefficient 𝜉 measures the
differences across firms associated with the BOJ buying more of a firm’s shares.
       The Δ𝑌𝑖,𝑞 are quarterly changes in total assets, tangible capital assets, current assets, cash
and short-term securities, inventories, and accounts receivable, each as a fraction of prior quarter
total assets. Some variables capturing important corporate investment decisions are disclosed only
annually, so we also consider annual regressions analogous to [13], but include industry-year
fixed-effects. The additional annual Δ𝑌𝑖,y are changes in cash holdings, short-term investments,
and research and development (R&D), each scaled by prior year total assets. We also run
regressions explaining changes in market value, expressed as a quarterly or annual return.
                                            [Table 6 Here]




                                                   16
           Panels A and B of Table 6 summarise quarterly and annual regressions, respectively.14
Panel A associates higher BOJ ETF purchases of a firm’s shares with higher quarterly returns and
asset growth. The growth is spread across all components of total assets except goodwill (not
shown), though the largest growth is of current assets, especially cash and short-term securities.
Panel B, using annual data which separates cash and short-term investments, shows that firms
accumulate more cash as the BOJ buys more of their shares and no growth in tangible assets.
           The quarterly increase in tangible assets in Panel A is statistically significant but
economically insignificant. The 0.023-percentage-point increase in tangible assets associated with
the BOJ purchases worth 1% of lagged assets is only 8.5% of the corresponding increase in total
assets and only 1.8% of the 1.30% standard deviation of the growth rate of tangible assets over
total assets in Table 2. In annual data, the point estimate goes to zero with a large standard error.
One possibility is BOJ purchases cause firms to do things in the current quarter that they would
subsequently have done anyway. BOJ share purchases are associated with large increases in
current assets, with cash and short-term investments accounting for almost half of this.
           To focus more narrowly on the transmission channel from BOJ-driven ETF purchases of a
firm’s shares to increases in firm valuations and corporate investment decisions, Table 7 adopts an
instrumental-variables approach as in Panel B of Table 5. The first stage is [6] and the second stage

[14]       Δ𝑌𝑖,𝑞 = 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑞),𝑞 + 𝜉(∆𝑀𝑖,𝑞 /𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1 |𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 ) + 𝚪 ′ Δ𝐗 𝑖,𝑞−1 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑞 ,

relates changes in the components of a firm’s assets to changes in its market-to-book ratio
attributable to prior quarter BOJ-backed ETF purchases of its shares, ∆𝑀𝑖,𝑞 /𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1 |𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 from
[11]. Annual tests do likewise with annual data.
                                                   [Table 7 Here]
           Panel A of Table 7 summarizes these regressions. Regressions 7A.1.1 shows the first-stage
relation from the quarterly panel, where an increase in BOJ demand of 1% relative to assets
corresponds to an increase in the market-to-book ratio of 0.384, or around one-third of a standard
deviation. Regressions 7A.1 through 7A.6 associate BOJ-driven ETF purchases, acting via
increases in firms’ market-to-book ratio, with expansions in their balance sheets, but again mostly
through current assets. Here too, the increase in tangible assets associated with the BOJ buying
shares worth one percent of lagged assets is only 8.5% of the increase in total assets and less than

14
     Appendix Tables A4 and A5 present these regressions again, including control variable coefficients.

                                                           17
5% of the standard deviation of tangible assets growth relative to total assets. The annual results
in Panel B continue to depict net increases in total assets, with almost 40% of the increase coming
from cash and no change in tangible assets. Additional tests, summarized in Appendix Figure A3,
show the impact of BOJ share purchases on all corporate action variables diminishing over time.
This diminishing transmission occurs despite the escalating scale of BOJ equity purchases in
Figure 2 and their increased share price impact in the first three months 2018 in Figure 1.
         Overall, we find (1) ETF purchases over a quarter lifted share prices by around one
percentage point, (2) higher share prices led firms to issue more equity and less debt, but (3) firms
did not appear to use additional capital to undertake more capital investment. Instead, increases in
the firm’s total assets correspond largely to increases in cash and short-term investments.

4.5      BOJ Purchases and Bankruptcy Risk
A secondary effect of BOJ ETF purchases could be a decline in firms’ bankruptcy risk. This is
plausible for several reasons. First, Table 3 shows the BOJ timing its ETF purchases to counter
market dips, which reduces downside return volatility.15 Second, Tables 4 through 8 show that
BOJ ETF purchases increase equity valuations, which mechanically decreases market-value
leverage and thus bankruptcy risk. Third, Table 5 links BOJ ETF purchases to firms issuing equity
and Tables 7 and 8 suggest the proceeds largely finance increased cash and short-term securities
holdings, which tend to reduce bankruptcy risk. BOJ ETF purchases could thus reduce firm-level
bankruptcy risk.
         We use five alternative measures of 𝛹𝑖,𝑞 : interest coverage ratios, manufacturing and non-
manufacturing versions of Altman Z-scores, Bharath and Shumway (2008) default probabilities,
and Campbell et al. (2008) distress measures. 16 Denoting the change in firm 𝑗 ’s quarter 𝑞
bankruptcy risk as Δ𝛹𝑖,𝑞 , with all other variables defined as in [10], we regress
[15]     Δ𝛹𝑖,𝑞 = 1𝑗(𝑖,𝑞),𝑞 + 𝜉𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 + 𝚪 ′ Δ𝐗 𝑖,𝑞−1 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑞



15
   Monthly regressions of stock-level downside return volatility, defined as 𝑙𝑛[1 + 𝜎(𝑟𝑖,𝑡 |𝑟𝑖,𝑡 < 0)] for all days 𝑡 in a
   month on its own lag and monthly BOJ ETF purchases assign the latter a coefficient of -0.015 (p = 0.0001). See
   Appendix Table A13 for details.
16
   Altman’s manufacturing Z-score predicts bankruptcy over a two-year horizon using 5 financial ratios with weights
   derived from discriminant analysis. The non-manufacturing Z-score is derived analogously and uses 4 financial
   ratios. Bharath-Shumway default probabilities derived from a Merton (1974) model assume log-normal asset values
   and use historical stock price volatility, book-value liabilities, market capitalization, and a risk-free rate assumption
   to forecast one year ahead. Campbell et al. (2008) distress probabilities are from a panel logit model using
   accounting and stock market variables.

                                                            18
to obtain 𝜉, an estimate of the impact of BOJ ETF purchases on bankruptcy risk. Missing values
for some bankruptcy risk measures leave samples smaller than in Tables 6, 7 and 8.
       Table 8 summarizes these results. More BOJ ETF purchases of a firm’s stock correspond
to statistically significantly lower bankruptcy risk (higher Altman Z-scores and lower Bharath and
Shumway default probabilities). BOJ ETF purchases are marginally significant (p < 0.10 in one-
tailed tests) in increasing interest coverage and decreasing Campbell et al. distress probabilities,
and both signs align with the other results. Additional unreported tests link BOJ equity purchases
to statistically significantly reduced default risk measured as in Campbell et al. (2008) and Hilscher
and Wilson (2017). These results suggest BOJ equity purchases decrease bankruptcy risk.

       Cascading bankruptcies and large negative wealth shocks along credit and supply chains
are a systemic risk (Battiston et al. 2007). Borrowing from large customers and suppliers is an
important financing channel for smaller Japanese firms, and its blockage worsened Japan’s
financial crisis (Taketa & Udell, 2006). Table 8 suggests BOJ ETF purchases, however ineffective
as a stimulus, reduce bankruptcy risk. If the expanded short-term assets and accounts receivable
associated with BOJ ETF purchases in Tables 7 and 8 expand credit to smaller firms, or could do
so in a crisis, BOJ ETF purchases may reduce systemic risk redefined to reflect Japanese practices.

4.6    Robustness
Appendix Section A.3 provides details about robustness checks of Tables 6 through 11. These
either yield qualitatively similar results (identical signs and statistical significance and comparable
economic significance) to the tables or reinforce the conclusions in the tables. Specifically,
qualitatively similar results ensue using alternative winsorizations; firm fixed-effects; external
financing gauged by amounts rather than issuance indicators; lagged responses in firms’ accessing
of external capital; using only firms in the price-weighted Nikkei 225; slope shifters for firms in
construction and manufacturing; and excluding 2011 and 2012, when an earthquake, tidal wave,
and nuclear incident necessitate large fiscal stimulus spending in Fukushima and other regions.
       Results that differ are economically consistent with the tables. Including current and lagged
BOJ ETF purchases in regressions of external financing associates higher BOJ purchases with
more current quarter equity issuance and less next quarter debt issuance, consistent with “lumpy”
external financing leaving making debt unnecessary just after an equity issuance. Sub-period tests
show larger coefficients on BOJ ETF purchases in regressions explaining firm decisions in earlier


                                                  19
years, despite the BOJ’s doubling of its ETF purchase targets on July 29, 2016. Indeed, interest
coverage attains statistical significance in Table 8 analogs using data before July 29, 2016.

5.     Differential Transmission and Investment Efficiency
Ideally, a monetary stimulus would encourage increased investment by firms with value-increasing
investment opportunities and management incentivized to undertake such opportunities.
Accordingly, this section explores whether BOJ purchases encourage increased investment by
“growth stock” firms with valuable growth opportunities obstructed by financing constraints
(Hennessy et al. 2007), and by firms with good corporate governance, whose managers are likely
to undertake efficient investments and forgo inefficient investments (Billett et al. 2011).

5.1    Do Growth Firms Respond More?
Tobin (1969) argues that firms have valuable investment opportunities if their valuations in
financial markets exceed the replacement costs of their assets, roughly approximated by their
market-to-book ratios being above one. We identify growth firms as those with a prior fiscal
quarter or year-end market-to-book ratio above one and designate all other firms as value firms.
Table 9 allows BOJ equity purchases to have a different coefficient for growth firms. The table
shows BOJ share purchases boost share prices significantly less for growth firms than for value
firms at quarterly frequencies, though the two are statistically indistinguishable at annual
frequencies. BOJ share purchases are significantly less associated with cash and short-term
securities accumulation for growth than for value firms at quarterly frequencies; and significantly
less associated with assets, tangible investment, and goodwill growth at annual frequencies.
       Firms with higher valuation ratios are viewed as having valuable marginal investment
opportunities left unexploited because of financing constraints (Hayashi 1982 and Bernanke et al.
1999). From this perspective, BOJ equity purchase policies appear to disproportionately encourage
cash accumulation and expansion by firms without valuable growth opportunities. However, this
conclusion must be qualified by more nuanced interpretations of the link between high market-to-
book ratios and growth opportunities (Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist 2016). Growth opportunities
might be left unexploited, not because of financing constraints, but because the firm has market
power (Cooper and Ejarque 2003), lumpy capital (Thomas 2002), or as stock prices become
elevated by investor sentiment (Morck et al. 1990). Therefore, we revisit the Table 9 regressions
using alternative proxies for financial constraints: the Whited and Wu (2006) index (Table A12,

                                                 20
Panel A in the online appendix) and the Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index as modified by Lamont
et al. (2001) (Table A12, Panel B in the online appendix). None of the interactions of BOJ
purchases with these financial constraint indexes attract statistically significant coefficients
explaining capital investment. Further untabulated tests using firm size and age as proxies for
financial constraints generate insignificant results for capital investments as well. These results
support Table 10’s conclusion that BOJ purchases of relatively financially constrained firms’
shares do not disproportionately increase investment by those firms.

5.2        Do Well-Governed Firms Respond More?
Managers do not follow the script in Tobin’s Q theory of investment. Table 10 lets BOJ ETF
purchases play out differently in firms with different corporate governance. This is gauged by
dummies for the CEO or an ex-CEO chairing the board. These data are subcomponents of
Environment, Social, and Governance scores assigned by Thomson Reuters.
           Panels A and B of Table 10 link more BOJ share purchases to significantly less growth in
assets, capital investment and goodwill (potentially reflecting expansions via mergers and
acquisitions) in firms whose CEOs do not chair their boards (more shareholder-oriented
governance) and in firms whose ex-CEO chair their boards (less shareholder-oriented
governance). 17 These findings suggest BOJ equity purchases spur less well-governed firms to
expand via capital investment and acquiring other firms. Furthermore, the BOJ’s equity purchase
policies may aggravate the propensity of ill-governed firms to invest inefficiently (Jensen 1986;
Billett et al. 2011).

5.3        Robustness and Discussion
Tables 10 and 11 survive the robustness tests of Section 4.6, including alternative winsorization,
firm fixed-effects, only studying data before the doubling of BOJ ETF purchase targets on July 29,
2016, and dropping 2011 and 2012 due to the Fukushima nuclear meltdown and following policy
interventions. We also find BOJ purchases do not appear to statistically differentially affect
bankruptcy risk significantly for growth firms or firms with better corporate governance.


17
     The CEO or ex-CEO chairing the board is deemed a governance deficiency in these data, as in e.g. Mace
     (1979). Entrenchment can be mitigated by performance-based CEO pay (Fahlenbrach 2009), but stock and
     option grants are marginal in Japan (Pan and Zhou 2018). In addition, in analogous regressions, an independent
     board dummy is insignificant, consistent with conclusion that “in Japan… emphasis is more on externality than
     independence” (Ferrarini and Marilena 2015, p. 269).

                                                         21
           Overall, Tables 10 and 11 and these related results suggest BOJ purchases encourage more
investment by firms without highly valuable investment opportunities (market-to-book ratios
below one) and by firms less likely to undertake economically efficient investment (less
shareholder-oriented corporate governance). These findings are consistent with BOJ equity
purchases aggravating overinvestment associated with poor corporate governance – that is,
inefficient corporate empire-building (Hayashi 2006).

6.         Conclusions
The BOJ’s groundbreaking and innovative experiment in large scale and prolonged equity ETF
purchases have (1) boosted share valuations of the affected firms and encouraged those firms to
issue equity, (2) increased their balance sheets with cash and short-term investments, but (3) not
economically significantly increase their capital investment. From January 2011 to March 2018,
BOJ equity purchases totalled ¥19.3 trillion (around US$179 billion). Our quarterly point estimates
and summary statistics link these to an increase in aggregate investment of ¥1.16 trillion (around
US$4 billion), a mere 0.19% cumulative increase in total assets over all 29 quarters, and a thirteen-
fold greater ¥15.1 trillion (around US$26 billion) increase in aggregate corporate cash and short-
term investment holdings.18 Our annual results point to a negligible increase in aggregate capital
investment, but link the BOJ’s purchases of ¥19.3 trillion in shares to aggregate corporate cash
accumulations summing to almost ¥10 trillion over the same period. These calculations show BOJ
share purchases are ineffective in boosting capital investment, but boost corporate savings and
thereby reduce corporate bankruptcy risk.
           BOJ share purchases do boost capital investment for firms with few valuable investment
opportunities or with weak corporate governance. These findings raise the possibility that, to the
extent that BOJ equity purchases boost aggregate capital investment, they encourage capital
investment that is more likely to be economically inefficient. By lowering costs of capital and
bankruptcy risks, the BOJ’s policy may aggravate Japan’s ongoing “zombie firm” problem, and


18
     Total cumulative BOJ ETF purchases, ¥19.3 trillion, equal 3.1 % of the aggregate assets of our sample firms (mean
     assets of ¥373.4 billion/firm ×1,612 firms = ¥602 trillion). Multiplying this by the 0.060 coefficient on quarterly
     tangible investment in Table 8 puts BOJ ETF-driven aggregate capital investment at 0.19% of aggregate assets, or
     ¥1.158 trillion. Analogous calculations put BOJ ETF-driven current asset accumulation and cash and short-term
     securities accumulation at ¥15 trillion and ¥7.257 trillion, respectively. In annual regressions, tangible investment
     is insignificant and the 0.496 coefficient on cash increases associate BOJ share purchases with ¥9.573 trillion in
     aggregate corporate cash accumulation.

                                                            22
other central banks emulating this policy might further spread zombification (Banerjee and
Hofmann 2018). Zombie firms, whose survival depends on ongoing cost of capital suppression,
are associated with low productivity growth, deflationary pressure, and the continued
ineffectiveness of monetary stimulus policies (Acharya et al. 2019).
       This lesson is important because central banks holding corporate equities on a large scale
raises serious issues. First, central banks heavily buying the shares of firms without genuine growth
opportunities can misallocate capital. Second, central banks that are major shareholders can cast
votes in shareholder meetings. While the BOJ does not vote its shares, a central bank with large
equity blocks that opts to cast its voting power could influence CEO selection, CEO pay, and
corporate strategies. Equity purchases by a central bank subject to political pressure could project
political agendas into corporate boardrooms. If equity purchases gave central banks an additional
stimulus tool, offsetting social welfare gains might counter these issues. However, the BOJ’s
experience suggests this tool has limited power for stimulating aggregate investment.


Bibliography
Acharya, Viral, Tim Eisert, Christian Eufinger & Christian Hirsch. 2019. Whatever It Takes: The
    Real Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy. Review of Financial Studies 124(2)3366–
    411

Agarwal, Sumit, Ben Charoenwong & Pulak Ghosh. 2020. Foregone Consumption & Return-
    Chasing Investments. National University of Singapore Business School Working Paper

Banerjee, Ryan & Boris Hofmann. 2018. The Rise of Zombie Firms: Causes & Consequences.
    BIS Quarterly Review September: 67–78.

Barbon, Andrea & Virginia Gianinazzi. 2019. Quantitative Easing & Equity Prices : Evidence
    from the ETF Program of the Bank of Japan. Review of Asset Pricing Studies 9(2)210–55.

Battiston, Stefano, Domenico Delli Gatti, Mauro Gallegati, Bruce Greenwald & Joseph E
     Stiglitz. 2007. Credit Chains & Bankruptcy Propagation in Production Networks. Journal of
     Economic Dynamics & Control 31(6)2061–84.

Beason, Richard & Dennis Patterson. 2004. The Japan That Never Was: Explaining the Rise &
    Decline of a Misunderstood Country. New York: SUNY Press.

Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler & Simon Gilchrist. 1999. The Financial Accelerator in a
    Quantitative Business Cycle Framework. In Handbook of Macroeconomics 1:1341–93.
    Elsevier.


                                                 23
Bernanke, Ben S & Vincent R Reinhart. 2004. Conducting Monetary Policy at Very Low Short-
    Term Interest Rates. American Economic Review 94(2)85–90.

Bharath, Sreedhar T. & Tyler Shumway. 2008. Forecasting Default with the Merton Distance to
    Default. Review of Financial Studies 21(3)1339–69.

Billett, Matthew, Jon Garfinkel & Yi Jiang. 2011. The Influence of Governance on Investment:
     Evidence from a Hazard Model. Journal of Financial Economics 102(3). Elsevier: 643–70.

Blanchard, Olivier J & Lawrence H Summers. 2020. Automatic Stabilizers in a Low-Rate
    Environment. PIIE Policy Brief February.

Caballero, Ricardo J, Takeo Hoshi & Anil K Kashyap. 2008. Zombie Lending & Depressed
    Restructuring in Japan. American Economic Review 98(5)1943–77.

Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher & Jan Szilagyi. 2008. In Search of Distress Risk. Journal of
   Finance 63(6)2899–2939.

Cooper, Russell & João Ejarque. 2003. Financial Frictions & Investment: Requiem in Q. Review
    of Economic Dynamics 6(4)710–28.

Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani & Kaveh Majlesi. 2020. Stock Market Returns &
    Consumption. Journal of Finance, Forthcoming: 1–52.

Dierker, Martin, Jung Wook Kim, Jason Lee & Randall Morck. 2016. Investors’ Interacting
    Demand & Supply Curves for Common Stocks. Review of Finance 20(4)1517–47.

Farre-Mensa, Joan & Alexander Ljungqvist. 2016. Do Measures of Financial Constraints
     Measure Financial Constraints? Review of Financial Studies 29(2)271–308.

Ferrarini, G. F., Marilena. (2015). Independent directors and controlling shareholders around the
     world. In J. Hill & R. Thomas (Eds.), Research Handbook on Shareholder Power. (pp.
     269): Elgar.

Fresard, Laurent. 2012. Cash Savings & Stock Price Informativeness. Review of Finance
     16(4)985–1012.

Greenwood, Robin. 2008. Excess Comovement of Stock Returns: Evidence from Cross-
    Sectional Variation in Nikkei 225 Weights. Review of Financial Studies 21(3)1153–86.

Grossman, Sanford J & Joseph E Stiglitz. 1980. On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient
    Markets. American Economic Review 70(3)393–408.

Handa, Puneet & Robert A Schwartz. 1996. Limit Order Trading. Journal of Finance
    51(5)1835–61.

Hayashi, Fumio. 1982. Tobin’s Marginal q & Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation.
    Econometrica 50(1)213–24.

                                               24
Hayashi, Fumio. 2006. The Over-Investment Hypothesis. Long-Run Growth & Short-Run
    Stabilization: Essays in Memory of Albert Ando, no. 12124202: 275–87.

Hennessy, Christopher A, Amnon Levy & Toni M Whited. 2007. Testing Q Theory with
    Financing Frictions. Journal of Financial Economics 83(3)691–717.

Hilscher, Jens & Mungo Wilson. 2017. Credit Ratings & Credit Risk: Is One Measure Enough?
     Management Science 63(10)3414–37.

Honda, Yuzo, Yoshihiro Kuroki & Minoru Tachibana. 2013. An Injection of Base Money At
    Zero Interest Rates: Empirical Evidence from the Japanese Experience 2001 - 06. Graduate
    School of Economics & Osaka School of International Public Policy, Disc. Paper 07-08: 24.

Hong, Harrison & Jeremy C Stein. 2007. Disagreement & the Stock Market of of Both Theory &
    Empirical Evidence. Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2)109–28.

Hoshi, Takeo, Satoshi Koibuchi & Ulrike Schaede. 2018. The Decline in Bank-Led Corporate
    Restructuring in Japan: 1981-2010. Journal of the Japanese & International Economies 47,
    81–90.

International Monetary Fund. 2017. Japan Financial System Stability Assessment. IMF.

Jain, Prem C. 1987. The Effect on Stock Price of Inclusion in or Exclusion from the S&P 500.
     Financial Analysts Journal 43(1)58–65.

Jensen, Michael C. 1986. Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance & Takeovers.
     American Economic Review 76(2)323–29.

Kaplan, Steve & Luigi Zingales. 1997. Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
    Measures of Financing Constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1)169–215.

Kaul, Aditya, Vikas Mehrotra & Randall Morck. 2000. Demand Curves for Stocks Do Slope
    down: New Evidence from an Index Weights Adjustment. Journal of Finance 55(2)893–
    912.

Kim, E Han & Amiyatosh Purnanandam. 2014. Seasoned Equity Offerings, Corporate
    Governance & Investments. Review of Finance 18(3)1023–57.

Kuroda, Haruhiko. 2013. Quantitative & Qualitative Monetary Easing. Speech at Yomiuri
    International Economic Society in Tokyo

Kuttner, Kenneth N. 2018. Outside the Box: Unconventional Monetary Policy in the Great
    Recession & Beyond. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32(4)121–46.

Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk & Jesus Saa-Requejo. 2001. Financial Constraints & Stock
   Returns. Review of Financial Studies 14(2)529–54.

Mehrotra, Vikas, Dimitri Van Schaik, Jaap Spronk & Onno Steenbeek. 2011. Creditor-Focused

                                              25
    Corporate Governance: Evidence from Mergers & Acquisitions in Japan. Journal of
    Financial & Quantitative Analysis 46(4)1051–72.

Morck, Randall & Masao Nakamura. 2007. Business Groups & the Big Push: Meiji Japan’s
    Mass Privatization & Subsequent Growth. Enterprise & Society 8(3)543–601.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 1990. The Stock Market & Investment: Is the
    Market a Sideshow? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 157–215.

Pinkowitz, Lee, René Stulz & Rohan Williamson. 2006. Does the Contribution of Corporate
    Cash Holdings & Dividends to Firm Value Depend on Governance? A Cross-Country
    Analysis. Journal of Finance 61(6)2725–51.

Poterba, James M. 2000. Stock Market Wealth & Consumption. Journal of Economic
     Perspectives 14(2)99–118.

Sandas, Patrik. 2001. Adverse Selection & Competitive Market Making: Empirical Evidence
    from a Limit Order Market. Review of Financial Studies 14(3)705–34.

Shleifer, Andrei. 1986. Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down? Journal of Finance
     41(3)579–90.

Taketa, K., & Udell, G. (2006). Lending Channels & Financial Shocks: The Case of SME Trade
    Credit & the Japanese Banking Crisis. Tokyo: Bank of Japan.

Thomas, Julia K. 2002. Is Lumpy Investment Relevant for the Business Cycle? Journal of
   Political Economy 110(3)508–34.

Tobin, James. 1969. A General Equilibrium Approach To Monetary Theory. Journal of Money,
    Credit & Banking 1(1)15–29.

Whited, Toni M. & Guojun Wu. 2006. Financial Constraints Risk. Review of Financial Studies
    19(2)531–59.




                                             26
Tables and Figures
            Table 1. Bank of Japan Key Monetary Policy Dates and Announcements
     Date          ETF amounts                        Bank of Japan policy announcement
 Oct. 5, 2010                          Implementation of the Comprehensive Monetary Easing (CME)
                                       program to increase base money by ¥35 trillion yen (7% of GDP):
                                       ¥30 trillion for loans against collateral and ¥5 trillion for the Asset
                                       Purchase Program (APP). The assets to be purchased included
                                       government securities (JGBs), commercial paper (CP), corporate
                                       bonds, equity index ETFs, and REITs. BOJ also pursued the virtually
                                       zero interest rate policy.
 Oct. 28, 2010     ¥0.45 trillion      Set up the cap for ETF purchases to be conducted by Dec. 2011.
 Nov. 5, 2010                          Specified target ETFs tracking the Tokyo Stock Price Index
                                       (TOPIX) or the Nikkei 225 index; with ETF purchases proportional
                                       to ETF market values.
 Mar. 14, 2011      ¥0.9 trillion      Increased the ETF purchasing cap to ¥0.9 trillion and extended the
                                       purchasing program to Jun. 2012.
 Aug. 4, 2011       ¥1.4 trillion      Increased the ETF purchasing cap to ¥1.4 trillion and extended the
                                       purchasing program to Dec. 2012.
 Apr. 27, 2012      ¥1.6 trillion      Increased the ETF purchasing cap to ¥1.6 trillion.
 Oct. 30, 2012      ¥2.1 trillion      Increased the ETF purchasing cap to ¥2.1 trillion.
 Jan. 22, 2013                         Announced a monthly purchase policy and extended the purchasing
                                       program to Dec. 2013.
 Apr. 4, 2013      ¥1 trillion/year    New BOJ governor launched the Quantitative and Qualitative Easing
                                       (QQE) to increase the monetary base by ¥60-70 trillion per year; and
                                       set an annual target for ETF purchases.
 Oct. 31, 2014     ¥3 trillion/year    Tripled annual ETF purchases.
Nov. 19, 2014                          BOJ purchases can include ETFs tracking JPX-NIKKEI 400.
 Mar. 15, 2016    ¥3.3 trillion/year   Increased annual ETF purchases to 3.3 trillion.
 Mar. 15, 2016    ¥0.3 trillion/year   Established a supplementary program to buy ETFs tracking JPX-
                                       Nikkei Index 400 and ETFs tracking firms “proactively investing in
                                       physical and human capital.”
 Jul. 29, 2016     ¥6 trillion/year    Increased annual ETF purchases to ¥6 trillion.
 Sep. 21, 2016                         Revised purchasing weights: ¥2.7 trillion for ETFs tracking TOPIX
                                       only; remainder allocated proportionally by ETF market value across
                                       the other three indices.
 Mar 16, 2020     ¥12 trillion/year    Doubled annual ETF purchases to ¥12 trillion to cope with the
                                       COVID-19 crisis.
Data source: Policy announcements listed on the website of the Bank of Japan.


                                                     27
                             Table 2. Summary Statistics of Main Variables
Panel A presents summary statistics for the daily-level panel for the BOJ purchase basket with 1,675,132 firm-day
observations on BOJ purchase days. Panel B presents summary statistics of quarterly variables over 42,919 firm-
quarter observations and annual variables over 6,114 firm-year observations, respectively, except for the corporate
governance indicators for the CEO not chairing the board, the chair not being an ex-CEO, and the board being
independent, which are available only for Nikkei 225 firms. All figures are rounded to three significant digits, except
number of BOJ purchase days, an integer whose mean and standard deviation are rounded to one decimal place.
Appendix Tables A1.1 and A1.2 show variable definitions and summary statistics for additional variables used in
robustness checks.
Panel A. Daily Variables                                        Percentiles                                 Standard
                                                         25th           50th         75th          Mean     Deviation
                       BOJ Purchases (¥ M)               0.11           0.74         4.22           11.4         61.9
BOJ Purchases (bps of Market Capitalization)             0.03           0.24         1.49           1.53         3.23
                           Stock return (%)             -1.26         -0.15          0.71          -0.27         2.62
Panel B. Quarterly and Annual Variables      Quarterly data    Std.                          Annual data      Std.
Quarterly and Annual Tests             25th 50th 75th Mean Dev.                   25th      50th  75th Mean Dev.
                BOJ Purchases (¥ M) 10.9 40.3      154    324 1,510               32.9       129  491 1,050 5,190
            BOJ Purchases (%Assets) 0.02 0.07 0.23 0.33 1.47                      0.07      0.24 0.77 1.15 5.23
           BOJ No. of Purchase Days      12   19    32 26.5 21.6                    26        71  150 86.4 73.4
          Accounts Receivable (¥ B)     2.7  9.8 32.7 66.1      329               2.49      9.07 30.2 60.3     307
           Book Leverage (%Assets) 8.33 19.2 32.6 22.1 16.6                       6.73      17.7 31.5 20.9 16.8
                      Market-to-Book 0.59 0.88 1.43 1.36 1.94                     0.63      0.94 1.53 1.47 2.13
                Return on Assets (%) 1.46 3.02 5.12 3.20 5.34                     4.15      9.66 17.7 11.8 19.5
                     Stock Return (%) -5.54 2.59 12.7 5.25 22.0                  -4.17      9.44 28.3 17.2 42.6
               Tangible Capital (¥ B)   4.8 15.1 51.1     128   557               4.48      13.9 46.8    120   546
                    Total Assets (¥ B) 19.6 55.1   166    373 1,640               18.8      51.3  152    344 1,530
    𝛥Accounts Receivable (%Assets) -0.60 0.00 1.00 0.23 5.20                     -0.60      0.00 1.50 0.57 6.72
        𝛥Tangible Capital (%Assets) -0.31 -0.03 0.45 0.29 13.4                   -0.66      0.05 1.42 0.96 24.5
                    𝛥Total Assets (%) -1.81 0.81 3.79 1.39 8.40                  -1.44      2.78 8.05 4.52 15.5
Quarterly Tests Only
      Altman Manufacturing Z-Score 1.80 2.49 3.36 2.90 2.13
 Altman Non-Manufacturing Z-Score 1.87 3.41 5.38 4.18 4.17
     Bharath-Shumway Default Prob. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 2.33
        Campbell et al. Default Prob. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.31
 Cash & Short-term Investment (¥ B)     2.5  7.3 22.0 43.8      267
CEO Does Not Chair Board Indicator 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.38 0.48
           Chair is Ex CEO Indicator 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.29 0.45
                 Current Assets (¥ B)   9.8 28.2 86.9     159   642
             Interest Coverage Ratio 4.89 18.8 64.7       110   447
                       Inventory (¥ B)  1.5  5.8 20.9 37.7      133
  𝛥Cash & ST Investment (%Assets) -1.30 0.11 1.70 0.60 31.2
          𝛥Current Assets (%Assets) -1.70 0.49 3.03 1.01 8.15
               𝛥Inventory (%Assets) -0.52 0.05 0.80 0.21 4.30
Annual Tests Only
                           Cash (¥ B)                                             2.39      6.93   20.5    33.9    135
      Research & Development (¥ B)                                                0.14      0.62   2.76    9.52   53.1
         Short-term Investment (¥ B)                                              0.00      0.00   0.10    7.26   74.8
                     𝛥Cash (%Assets)                                             -1.39      1.04   5.37    5.92   31.2
𝛥Research & Development (%Assets)                                                -0.07      0.03   0.28    0.42   3.62
  𝛥Short-term Investment (%Assets)                                                0.00      0.00   0.00    0.17   10.2


                                                         28
         Table 3. Returns and BOJ ETF Purchases in the Time-series and Cross-section
This table shows stocks subject to greater BOJ-driven ETF purchases rising relative to other stocks. The sample
includes all stocks and all trading days from 15 Dec. 2010 to 31 Mar. 2018 except in (3A.1), which uses the subsample
of days with 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑡 > 0, where 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑡 is BOJ-driven equity index ETF purchases in hundreds of million yen. Panel A
presents time-series regressions, which reveal a positive daily premium for the portfolio of stocks in the BOJ’s ETF
purchase basket, 𝑟𝑡𝐵𝑂𝐽 , over that of other stocks, 𝑟𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑛−𝐵𝑂𝐽 on days when BOJ-driven ETF purchases are larger.
Numbers in parentheses are Newey-West p-values allowing autocorrelation up to 5 lags, boldface indicating
significance at 5% or better. Panel B presents panel regressions explaining how fixed-effects clarify the relation
between 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 , stock 𝑖’s return on day 𝑡, and 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡 , BOJ-driven ETF demand for stock 𝑖 on day 𝑡, scaled by firm 𝑖’s
prior month market capitalization. Standard errors cluster by firm and day, with p-values in parentheses and boldface
indicating significance at 5% or better.

Panel A: Time-series portfolio return regressions
Explained variable: (as %)                      𝑟𝑡
                                                  𝐵𝑂𝐽
                                                    − 𝑟𝑡
                                                           𝑛𝑜𝑛−𝐵𝑂𝐽                  𝑛𝑜𝑛−𝐵𝑂𝐽
                                                                                   𝑟𝑡                   𝑟𝑡
                                                                                                          𝐵𝑂𝐽

                                             (3A.1)              (3A.2)                 (3A.3)         (3A.4)
                                              0.002              0.001              -0.222             -0.221
ln(1 + 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑡 )
                                             (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.016)            (0.016)

                                             -0.006             -0.003               0.474              0.471
Intercept
                                             (0.001)            (0.000)             (0.036)            (0.036)
Sample                                  Purchase Days          All Days            All Days           All Days
Observations                                  553                1,350                  1,350           1,350
R   2                                        0.104               0.138                  0.199          0.199



Panel B: Panel regressions of daily individual stock returns with alternative fixed-effects
Explained variable: (as %)                                                  𝑟𝑖,𝑡
                                              (3B.1)             (3B.2)                 (3B.3)         (3B.4)
                                             -2.559             -2.627               1.620              1.684
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡
                                             (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)

                                              0.734
Intercept or fixed-effects                                       Stock                   Day        Industry-Day
                                             (0.000)
Observations                                1,675,132          1,675,132           1,675,132         1,675,132
R2                                            0.001              0.020                  0.210          0.388




                                                        29
                 Table 4. Individual Stock Returns and BOJ-driven ETF Demand
The table summarizes firm-day panel regressions associating BOJ purchases with positive cumulative log returns over
successively longer trading day windows, their start and end points indicated in square brackets, around BOJ purchase
date, 𝑡. The explanatory variable 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡 is BOJ-driven ETF demand for stock 𝑖, as a fraction of firm 𝑖’s prior month
market capitalization, on trading day 𝑡. In all regressions, 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡 is winsorized at 0.5%. Regressions include industry-
day fixed-effects where industries are 4-digit SIC codes. Panel A uses all trading days and stocks in the BOJ purchase
basket. Panel B uses all trading days and stocks. Panel C uses only days with BOJ purchases on day 𝑡 alone in the
interval [𝑡 − 𝑘, 𝑡 + 𝑘] for 𝑘 = 0, 1, 2, 4, 9, 21 trading days and stocks in the BOJ purchase basket. Numbers in
parentheses are p-values, with boldface indicating significance at the 1% level or better.

Return horizon              1 day          2 days          3 days          1 week          2 weeks         1 month
Return window               [t, t]        [t, t +1 ]      [t, t + 2]       [t, t + 4]      [t, t + 9]     [t, t + 22]


Panel A. All trading days and only stocks in BOJ ETF-tracked indexes
                            1.684           1.331           1.217           1.081           0.924           0.626
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡
                           (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
Observations             1,675,132       1,674,295       1,673,442       1,671,777        1,668,119       1,658,068
R2                          0.403           0.407           0.404           0.383           0.361           0.333

Panel B. All trading days and all stocks
                            1.478           1.250           1.250           1.127           1.003           0.645
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡
                           (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
Observations             4,690,250       4,687,230       4,684,210       4,678,174        4,663,104       4,627,048
R2                          0.360           0.374           0.380           0.376           0.365           0.351

Panel C. Trading days with isolated (no others within k trading days) BOJ ETF purchases and only
          stocks in BOJ ETF-tracked indexes
                            1.684           2.162           2.823           3.699           4.119           2.828
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑡
                           (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
𝑘                             0               1                2               4               9              21
Observations             1,675,132        678,756         281,882          127,072         33,415           6,888
Number of Events            2,675            334             144              67              19               4
R   2                       0.403           0.409           0.447           0.334           0.316           0.356




                                                          30
                                         Table 5. External Financing
This table summarizes regressions explaining external financing, indicated by a seasoned equity issuance (SEO)
          𝑆𝐸𝑂
dummy, 1𝑖,𝑞   , set to 1 if firm 𝑖 made seasoned equity offering (SEO) during quarter 𝑞 and zero otherwise or a debt
issuance dummy, 1𝐷   𝑖,𝑞 set to 1 if firm 𝑖 increased its long-term debt outstanding in quarter 𝑞, and 0 otherwise, with
BOJ-driven ETF purchases of their shares, 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 . Panel A reports OLS (linear probability model), Probit, and Logit
regressions. Panel B reports instrumental variables versions of the same regressions with (5B.1.1) as a first stage (F-
stat = 7.028) estimating the change in market-to-book ratio explained by BOJ ETF demand. All regressions use 42,919
firm-quarters and include control variables – lagged changes in market-to-book ratio, ROA, log total assets and book
leverage – and firm and industry-quarter fixed-effects in OLS regressions or pseudo-fixed-effects (de-meaning
explanatory variables by firm and industry-quarter) in Probit and Logit regressions. Standard errors cluster by firm,
with p-values in parentheses, boldface indicating significance at 10% or better. Appendix Table A1 provides detailed
variable definitions; Tables A2 and A3 provide coefficients of control variables.

Panel A. Regressions of external financing indicators on BOJ share purchases
Explained variable:                              SEO indicator 1𝑖,𝑞
                                                                𝑆𝐸𝑂
                                                                                     Debt issuance indicator 1𝐷
                                                                                                              𝑖,𝑞
Model                                      Linear        Probit        Logit        Linear       Probit       Logit
                                           (5A.1)        (5A.2)       (5A.3)        (5A.4)       (5A.5)      (5A.6)
                                            0.015        0.007         0.007        -0.002       -0.002      -0.002
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                           (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.493)      (0.472)     (0.446)
Observations                               42,919       42,919        42,919        42,919       42,919      42,919
R2                                          0.309        0.024         0.025         0.322       0.004        0.005

Panel B. Instrumental Variables Regressions
Explained variable: Δ𝑀𝑖,𝑞 /𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1                SEO indicator 1𝑖,𝑞
                                                                𝑆𝐸𝑂
                                                                                     Debt issuance indicator 1𝐷
                                                                                                              𝑖,𝑞
Model                   1st stage OLS      Linear        Probit        Logit        Linear       Probit       Logit
                           (5B.1.1)        (5B.1)        (5B.3)       (5B.4)        (5B.4)       (5B.5)       (5B.6)
Δ𝑀𝑖,𝑞                                       0.038        0.025         0.024        -0.006       -0.004      -0.004
       | 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1                                     (0.010)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.475)      (0.109)     (0.108)

                             0.384
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                            (0.000)
Observations                42,919         42,919       42,919        42,919        42,919       42,919      42,919
R2                           0.175         -0.355        0.011         0.012         0.306       0.004        0.005




                                                          31
                        Table 6. Changes in Components of Corporate Assets
This table explains changes in the components of firms’ assets using quarterly (Panel A) or annual (Panel B) OLS
regressions on 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖, , total BOJ-driven ETF purchases of their shares in the quarter or year, accounting for firms
entering or leaving indexes. All explained variables are scaled by prior fiscal-period-end total assets except (6A.1.1),
(6B.1.1), which explain raw percentage returns. All regressions also include control variables: lagged changes in each
of market-to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by-fiscal period fixed-effects.
Regressions 6A.1.1 and 6B.1.1 cluster bidirectionally by firm and fiscal period; all other regressions cluster by firm.
Numbers in parentheses are p-values with boldface indicating significance at 10% or better. Appendix Table A1
provides detailed variable definitions; Appendix Tables A4 and A5 provide coefficients of control variables.


Panel A: Firm-quarter panel regressions
                                                                           ΔCash &
Explained                            ΔTotal      ΔTangible      ΔCurrent                       ΔAccounts
                      Returns                                            Short-Term ΔInventory
variable:                            Assets       Capital        Assets                        Receivable
                                                                         Investments
                      (6A.1.1)       (6A.1)        (6A.2)        (6A.3)     (6A.4)    (6A.5)     (6A.6)

𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞                 1.022          0.272         0.023         0.300         0.144          0.050         0.065
                      (0.059)        (0.001)       (0.026)       (0.001)       (0.007)        (0.009)       (0.001)
Observations           42,919        42,919        42,919        42,919         42,919        42,919        42,919
R2
                       0.430          0.401         0.340         0.405         0.312          0.438         0.471

Panel B: Firm-year panel regressions
                                                                               ΔShort-
Explained                            ΔTotal      ΔTangible                                                ΔAccounts
                      Returns                                     ΔCash          Term         ΔR&D
variable:                            Assets       Capital                                                 Receivable
                                                                             Investments
                      (6B.1.1)       (6B.1)        (6B.2)         (6B.3)        (6B.4)        (6B.5)        (6B.6)

𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦                 0.340          0.226         0.005         0.084        -0.006          0.004         0.020
                      (0.342)        (0.090)       (0.662)       (0.096)       (0.699)        (0.430)       (0.469)
Observations           6,114          6,114         6,114         6,114         6,114          3,543         6,114
R2                     0.387          0.357         0.353         0.322         0.379          0.238         0.343




                                                          32
                      Table 7. Changes in Components of Corporate Assets via
                                 Changes in Market-to-Book Ratio
This table explains changes in the components of firms’ assets with changes in their market-to-book ratios attributable
to BOJ-driven ETF purchases of their shares. Panel A and Panel B present quarterly and annual regressions,
respectively. 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖, is total BOJ purchases in the quarter or year, accounting for firms entering or exiting indexes
partway through. All variables are scaled by prior fiscal-period-end total assets except change in market-to-book ratio
in (7A.1) and (7B.1), where Δ𝑀/𝐵 is fiscal-period market-capitalization growth in yen scaled by prior-fiscal-period-
end book value in yen. All regressions also include control variables: lagged changes in each of market-to-book, return
on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by-fiscal period fixed-effects. Regressions 7A.1.1 and 7B.1.1
have 1st stage F-statistics 6.888 and 1.709, respectively. Other regressions are second-stage regressions with 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,
instrumented by Δ𝑀𝑖, /𝐵𝑖,−1 . Regressions 7A.1.1 and 7B.1.1 cluster bidirectionally by firm and fiscal period; all
others cluster by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values, with boldface indicating significance at 10% or better.


Panel A: Firm-quarter panel instrumental-variable regressions
                                                                            ΔCash &
Explained                          ΔTotal     ΔTangible ΔCurrent                                ΔAccounts
                      Δ𝑀/𝐵                                                Short-Term ΔInventory
variable                           Assets      Capital   Assets                                 Receivable
                                                                          Investments
                     (7A.1.1)      (7A.1)       (7A.2)         (7A.3)        (7A.4)    (7A.5)     (7A.6)
Δ𝑀𝑖,𝑞                               0.710        0.060          0.781         0.376     0.132      0.170
       | 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1                             (0.011)      (0.047)        (0.010)      (0.020)         (0.024)        (0.009)
                      0.384
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                    (0.00001)
Observations          42,919       42,919       42,919         42,919        42,919         42,919         42,919
R 2
                       0.163        0.271        0.322         0.202         0.210           0.403          0.450

Panel B: Firm-year panel instrumental-variable regressions
Explained                          ΔTotal     ΔTangible                  ΔShort-Term                     ΔAccounts
                      Δ𝑀/𝐵                                     ΔCash                        ΔR&D
variable                           Assets      Capital                   Investments                     Receivable
                     (7B.1.1)      (7B.1)      (7B.2)          (7B.3)       (7B.4)          (7B.5)         (7B.6)
Δ𝑀𝑖,𝑦                               1.335        0.027          0.496       -0.034           0.027          0.117
       | 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦
𝐵𝑖,𝑦−1                             (0.040)      (0.651)        (0.065)      (0.695)         (0.449)        (0.475)
                       0.169
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦
                      (0.003)
Observations           6,114        6,114        6,114         6,114         6,114           3,543          6,114
R 2
                       0.501       -1.084        0.350         -0.051        0.377          -0.275          0.247




                                                          33
                            Table 8. Changes in Company Bankruptcy Risk
This table associates BOJ share purchases with reduced bankruptcy risk. Alternative bankruptcy risk measures include
interest coverage ratios (EBIT over interest, Altman‘s (1968) Z-Score for manufacturing, Altman’s (2001) Z-score
for non-manufacturing sector firms, Bharath and Shumway's (2008) default probabilities, and Campbell et al. (2008)
distress measures. Quarterly OLS regressions explain quarterly first differences in bankruptcy risk with 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 , total
BOJ-driven ETF purchases of firm 𝑖 ‘s shares in quarter 𝑞 , accounting for firms entering or leaving indexes.
Regressions explaining manufacturing and non-manufacturing Altman z-scores use subsamples of manufacturing (1-
digit SIC 2 or 3) and non-manufacturing (all other SICs) firms, respectively. All regressions also include control
variables: lagged changes in each of market-to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book leverage as well as
SIC4-by-fiscal period fixed-effects. All regressions cluster by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values with boldface
indicating significance at 10% or better.
                                                                                    ΔBharath-
                                              ΔAltman       ΔAltman                                  ΔCampbell et
                       ΔInterest                                                    Shumway
 Explained variable:                          Z-Score     Z-Score Non-                                al. Distress
                     Coverage Ratio                                                  Default
                                            Manufacturing Manufacturing                                Measure
                                                                                    Probability
                              (8.1)              (8.2)              (8.3)              (8.4)              (8.5)

𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞                        2.227              0.028              0.050             -0.104             -0.009
                             (0.176)            (0.033)            (0.057)            (0.022)            (0.185)
Observations                 38,755             21,230             17,525             38,755             38,755
R 2
                              0.287              0.427              0.229              0.098              0.326




                                                          34
                                   Table 9. Corporate Actions by Low- versus High Market-to-Book Firms
This table presents quarterly (Panel A) and annual (Panel B) OLS regression explaining changes in the components of firms’ assets with 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖, , total BOJ share
                                                                                                                           𝑀 ⁄𝐵   >1
purchases in the fiscal period, adjusting for firms entering or leaving indexes within the period, an indicator variable 1𝑖,• 𝑖,•−1 flagging growth firms as those
with market-to-book ratios above one the previous fiscal quarter or year, and their interaction. All explained variables are scaled by prior fiscal-period-end total
assets except returns in (9A.1.1) and (9B.1.1), which explain raw percentage returns. All regressions also include control variables: lagged changes market-to-book,
return on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by-fiscal period fixed-effects. Regression 9A.1.1 and 9B.1.1 cluster bidirectionally by firm and fiscal
period; all other regressions cluster by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values with boldface indicating significance at 10% or better.
Panel A: Quarterly changes in components of firm assets
                                                                         ΔTangible          ΔCurrent        ΔCash & Short-                           ΔAccounts
       Explained Variable:           Returns        ΔTotal Assets                                                                 ΔInventory
                                                                          Capital            Assets        Term Investments                          Receivable
                                     (9A.1.1)            (9A.1)           (9A.2)              (9A.3)            (9A.4)              (9A.5)             (9A.6)
 𝑀⁄𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1 >1                          -0.900              0.736            0.126               0.544             0.208               0.091              0.224
1𝑖,𝑞                                  (0.088)           (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)          (0.000)              (0.005)           (0.000)
                                       1.724              0.315            0.019               0.481             0.373               0.137              0.118
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                      (0.008)          (0.00001)          (0.611)            (0.0004)          (0.000)              (0.052)           (0.078)
             𝑀⁄𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1 >1              -0.736             -0.056            0.003              -0.200            -0.247              -0.093             -0.059
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 × 1𝑖,𝑞                         (0.058)           (0.596)           (0.948)             (0.197)          (0.005)              (0.186)           (0.418)
Observations                          42,919            42,919            42,919              42,919           42,919               42,919            42,919
R2                                     0.431              0.403            0.341               0.406             0.313               0.438              0.471
Panel B: Annual changes in components of firm assets
                                                                         ΔTangible                            ΔShort-Term                            ΔAccounts
       Explained Variable:           Returns        ΔTotal Assets                             ΔCash                                 ΔR&D
                                                                          Capital                             Investments                            Receivable
                                    (9B. 1.1)            (9B.1)           (9B.2)              (9B.3)             (9B.4)                (9B.5)          (9B.6)
 𝑀⁄𝐵𝑖,,𝑦−1 >1                         6.755              3.812              0.815              1.186             -0.242              0.097              0.723
1𝑖,𝑦                                 (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.009)            (0.521)            (0.028)            (0.000)
                                      0.534              0.849              0.200             -0.061              0.030             -0.003              0.149
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦
                                     (0.430)            (0.001)            (0.054)            (0.664)            (0.760)            (0.886)            (0.006)
             𝑀⁄𝐵𝑖,𝑦−1 >1             -0.232             -0.676             -0.210              0.150             -0.037              0.007             -0.140
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦 × 1𝑖,𝑦                        (0.764)            (0.016)            (0.045)            (0.316)            (0.717)            (0.743)            (0.010)
Observations                          6,114              6,114              6,114              6,114              6,114              3,543              6,114
R2                                    0.390              0.366              0.359              0.324              0.379              0.241              0.346

                                                                                35
                Table 10. Corporate Actions by Corporate Governance Indicators
This table explains changes in the components of firms’ assets using quarterly data. The sample includes Nikkei 225
firms. OLS regression on 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,q , total BOJ purchases in the fiscal period, CG is a corporate governance indicator set
to one if the CEO does not chair the board, an ex-CEO chairs the board, and a majority of directors is nominally
independent in Panels A, B and C, respectively, and to zero otherwise. These variables are available for Nikkei 225
firms only. All explained variables are scaled by prior fiscal-period-end total assets. All regressions also include
control variables: lagged changes market-to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by-
fiscal period fixed-effects. All regressions cluster by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values with boldface
indicating significance at 10% or better.

Panel A: 𝑪𝑮𝒊,𝒒 = 1 if the CEO Does Not Chair the Board and Zero Otherwise
                                           ΔTangible     ΔCurrent   ΔCash & Short-
    Explained Variable:     ΔTotal Assets                                           ΔGoodwill
                                             Capital      Assets   Term Investments
                              (10A.1)       (10A.2)       (10A.3)      (10A.4)      (10A.5)
                                     0.237            0.249           -0.017            -0.057            0.037
𝐶𝐺𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.400)          (0.023)          (0.925)           (0.652)          (0.418)
                                     3.093            0.864            1.444             0.815            0.306
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.002)          (0.004)          (0.038)           (0.133)          (0.080)
                                    -1.787           -0.722           -0.557            -0.352           -0.339
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 × 𝐶𝐺𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.074)          (0.024)          (0.452)           (0.575)          (0.081)
Observations                         4,517            4,517            4,517            4,517             4,517
R2                                   0.726            0.470            0.717            0.672             0.704
Panel B: 𝑪𝑮𝒊,𝒒 = 1 if an ex-CEO Chairs the Board and Zero Otherwise
                                            ΔTangible   ΔCurrent    ΔCash & Short-
    Explained Variable:      ΔTotal Assets                                                              ΔGoodwill
                                             Capital      Assets  Term Investments
                               (10B.1)       (10B.2)      (10B.3)      (10B.4)                          (10B.5)
                                    -0.533           -0.340           -0.115            -0.015           -0.057
𝐶𝐺𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.065)          (0.002)          (0.496)           (0.914)          (0.241)
                                     1.285            0.119            0.902             0.485           -0.033
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.148)          (0.382)          (0.118)           (0.167)          (0.781)
                                     1.645            0.817            0.316             0.127            0.329
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 × 𝐶𝐺𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.097)          (0.011)          (0.644)           (0.827)          (0.098)
Observations                         4,517            4,517            4,517            4,517             4,517
 2
R                                    0.726            0.472            0.716            0.672             0.704




                                                         36
                                           Figure 1. Stock Return Reactions to BOJ ETF Purchases
This figure shows the estimated coefficients of daily BOJ purchases in firm-day panel regressions explaining daily
stock returns. Time 𝑡 = 0 is the date of a BOJ ETF purchase. Vertical lines represent 95% confidence intervals from
standard errors clustered by day and by stock. All regressions include firm and industry-day fixed-effects. Panel A
graphs coefficients averaged across all stocks over all time in a regression including BOJ-driven ETF purchases of a
stock on trading day 𝑡 + 𝑘, with 𝑘 ∈ [−5, +5], as a percentage of its market capitalization 22 trading days prior as
explanatory variables. Panel B graphs the coefficient from a similar regression including only the t = 0 term by year.
The 2018 plotted coefficient only includes data through March 31, 2018 while all other years use a full year of data.

Panel A. Event-Time Impact of BOJ Purchases
                        1.5
 Impact on Return (%)




                          1




                        0.5




                          0




                        -0.5
                               -6     -5       -4     -3      -2     -1         0     1     2      3     4    5          6

                                                           Days Relative to Purchase Day (t=0)

Panel B. Mean Impact on Daily Return (%) of BOJ Purchases by Calendar Year

                        30

                        25
 Impact on Return (%)




                        20

                        15

                        10

                          5

                          0

                         -5
                                    2011       2012        2013       2014          2015    2016       2017       2018




                                                                          A37
                     Figure 2. Amount of BOJ ETF Purchases and Returns
Panel A. Bank of Japan cumulative ETF purchases by year-end (Trillions of Yen)

  18         Nikkei 225
             Topix
  16
             Nikkei 400
  14         R&D-Targetted
  12

  10

   8

   6

   4

   2

   0 2011       2012        2013       2014        2015       2016       2017     2018
  Dec-2010     Dec-2011    Dec-2012   Dec-2013   Dec-2014   Dec-2015   Dec-2016

Panel B. Bank of Japan breakdown of holdings of non-government securities
100%
              Loans
 90%          Foreign currency assets
              Corporate Bonds & Commercial Paper
 80%          ETFs
 70%

 60%

 50%

 40%

 30%

 20%

 10%

  0%
    2011         2012        2013       2014       2015      2016        2017     2018




                                           A38
     Bank of Japan Equity Purchases: The (Non-)Effects of
        Extreme Quantitative Easing, Online Appendix

           Ben Charoenwong, Randall Morck & Yupana Wiwattanakantang


A. Appendix: Robustness and Additional Empirical Details

This section (1) provides detailed definitions of variables, including those used in robustness
checks, (2) shows summary statistics for all variables used in our main results and in the robustness
tests below, (3) reproduces the tables in the paper including the coefficients and significance levels
of all control variables, and (4) presents and discusses the robustness test results. All untabulated
robustness checks are available upon request.

A.1 Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

The two tables below provide detailed variable definitions and summary statistics. Appendix Table
A.1.1 shows variable definitions with the corresponding Thomson Reuters WorldScope data codes.
Appendix Table A.1.2 provides summary statistics for all variables used in our empirical analyses,
including the following robustness tests for the calculations of the economic significance and
aggregate implications of the BOJ equity ETF purchasing policy.




                                                 A1
  Appendix Table A1.1 Definitions of Corporate Action and Securities Issuance Variables
Variable                       Definition (including Thompson-Reuters WorldScope data codes)
Altman Manufacturing Z-        Constructed as in Altman (1968) with lower values indicating highest likelihood
Score                          of bankruptcy
Altman Non-Manufacturing       Constructed as in Altman (2001) adapted to non-manufacturing firms with lower
Z-Score                        values indicating highest likelihood of bankruptcy
Bharath-Shumway Default        Constructed as in Bharath-Shumway (2008) with higher values indicating
Probability                    highest likelihood of bankruptcy
Campbell et al. Default Risk   Constructed as in Campbell et al. (2008) using coefficients reported in Column
                               (1) of Table IV from the logistic model in equation (1) of the paper, with higher
                               values indicating greater default risk
Corporate governance           In alternative specifications, indicator variable set to one if CEO does not chair
indicator variable (ICG)       the board, the chair is an ex CEO, or the board is nominally independent and set
                               to zero otherwise in each case. Available only for Nikkei 225 firms
Debt Issuance Indicator        Derived from total long-term debt outstanding (WC03251A): 1 if the firm’s
(1𝐷
  𝑖,𝑞 )                        long-term debt strictly increased in the quarter, 0 otherwise.
Interest Coverage Ratio        EBIT divided by interest expenses
Kaplan-Zingales Measure        Calculated from coefficients in equation 13 in Section 1.4 of Whited and Wu
                               (2006). Cash dividends is from WC04551 and total capital is total liability
                               (WC03351) minus shareholder’s book equity (WC06798)
Net Issuance                   Amount of Seasoned Equity Issue multiplied by ,over lagged assets, as (%)
Seasoned Equity Issue          Derived from shares outstanding (OTNOSH) and stock split data from the
Indicator (1𝑖,𝑞
            𝑆𝐸𝑂
                )              Development Bank of Japan. An indicator taking the value 1 if seasoned equity
                               offering (SEO) was issued during the quarter, 0 otherwise.
Stock Return                   Quarterly stock returns accounting for dividends.
Whited-Wu Index                Calculated from coefficients in equation 14, Section 1.4 of Whited & Wu (2006).
𝛥Accounts Receivable           Change in accounts receivable (WC08131A) over lagged assets, as %
ΔBook Leverage                 Change in book long-term debt (WC08236A) over lagged assets, as %
ΔCash                          Change in cash holdings (WC02003) over lagged assets, as % (annual only)
ΔCash & Short-term             Change in cash plus short-term investments (assets not strategically held and are
Investments                    non-recurring) (WC02001A, WC02001) over lagged assets, as %
ΔCurrent Assets                All standard liquid assets, inventories, and other assets with mean maturity under
                               1 year (WC02201A, WC02201) over lagged assets, as %
ΔGoodwill                      Change in goodwill (WC06693A) over lagged assets, as (%)
ΔInventory                     Change in inventory (WC02101A) over lagged assets, as (%)
ΔLong-term Debt                Change in total long-term debt, average maturity ≥ 1 yr. (WC03251A) over
                               lagged assets, as %
ΔMarket-to-Book (ΔM/B )        Change in market value of equity plus debt (WC09304A, WC09304) all over
                               lagged assets, as %
ΔResearch & Development        Change in research and development spending (WC01201) over lagged assets, as
                               % (annual only)
ΔReturn on Assets (ROA)        Change in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization
                               (EBITDA) over lagged assets (WC08326A), as %
ΔShort-Term Investments        Change in holdings of marketable securities (WC02008) over lagged assets, as %
                               (annual only)
ΔTangible Capital              Change in property, plant and equipment (WC02501A, WC02501) over lagged
                               assets, as %
ΔTotal Assets                  Change in assets (WC02999A) over lagged assets, as %


                                                       A2
                          Appendix Table A1.2 Detailed Summary Statistics
Panel A presents summary statistics for the daily-level panel for the BOJ purchase basket with 1,675,132 firm-day
observations on BOJ purchase days. Panel B presents summary statistics of monthly variables for 173,391 firm-month
observations. Panel C presents summary statistics of quarterly fundamental variables for 42,919 firm-quarter
observations, with the exception of the Whited-Wu Index which has data for 41,232 firm-quarter observations due to
some missing dividend data, riskiness variables for 38,755 firm-quarter variables due to some missing non-headline
financial statement data, and corporate governance for 4,517 firm-quarter observations for firms within the Nikkei
225 due to data availability; and, Panel D presents summary statistics of yearly variables for 6,119 firm-year
observations, except for R&D spending which covers 3,543 firm-year observations because its disclosure is not
mandatory (and we do not impute values). The variables are as defined in Table A1. All figures are rounded to three
significant digits, except for the number of BOJ purchase days, which is an integer whose mean and standard deviation
are rounded to one decimal place.

Panel A. Daily Variables
                                                  25th         Median            75th          Mean Std. Dev.
               BOJ Purchases (¥ M)                 0.11           0.74            4.22          11.38           61.9
BOJ Purchases/market cap (bps) (b.p.)              0.03           0.24            1.49           1.53           3.23
                   Stock return (%)               -1.26          -0.15            0.71          -0.27           2.62
Panel B. Monthly Variable
                                                  25th         Median            75th          Mean Std. Dev.
               BOJ Purchases (¥ M)                 3.14           12.0            47.4            110           540
BOJ Purchases/market cap (bps) (b.p.)              1.57           4.75            14.2            14.7          27.8
                   Stock return (%)               -3.74           0.65            5.56            1.63          12.4
              Monthly Volatility (%)               5.65           8.11            11.7            9.74          7.09
      Monthly Upside Volatility (%)                3.24           5.03            7.96            6.85          7.01
   Monthly Downside Volatility (%)                 2.95           4.53            6.92            5.64          4.49
Panel C. Quarterly Variables
                                                    25th       Median             75th         Mean      Std. Dev.
                 BOJ Purchases (¥ M)                 10.9           40.3          154            324          1,510
         BOJ Purchases (% of Assets)                 0.02           0.07          0.23           0.33          1.47
           BOJ No. of Purchase Days                    12             19            32           26.5          21.6
           Accounts Receivable (¥ B)                  2.7            9.8          32.7           66.1           329
               Altman Manu. Z-Score                  1.80           2.49          3.36           2.90          2.13
          Altman Non-Manu. Z-Score                   1.87           3.41          5.38           4.18          4.17
        Bharath-Shumway Probability                  0.00           0.00          0.00           0.07          2.33
         Book Leverage (% of Assets)                 8.33           19.2          32.6           22.1          16.6
              Buyback Amount (¥ B)                    0.0            0.0           0.0            0.0            0.1
         Campbell et al. Default Risk.               0.00           0.00          0.00           0.11          0.31
   Cash & Short-term Investment (¥ B)                 2.5            7.3          22.0           43.8           267
                  Current Assets (¥ B)                9.8           28.2          86.9           159            642
              Debt Issuance Indicator                0.00           0.00          1.00           0.43          0.50
                     Ex-CEO is Chair                 0.00           0.00          1.00           0.29          0.45
              Interest Coverage Ratio                4.89           18.8          64.7           110            447
                       Inventory (¥ B)                1.5            5.8          20.9           37.7           133
               Kaplan-Zingales Index                 5.75           48.2          97.0           40.1           118
                      Market-to-Book                 0.59           0.88          1.43           1.36          1.94
                    CEO is Not Chair                 0.00           0.00          1.00           0.38          0.48
           Net Issuance (%of Assets)                 0.00           0.00          0.00           0.00          0.16
                   Net Issuance (¥ B)                -0.0            0.0           0.0            0.0            2.8
                 Return on Assets (%)                1.46           3.02          5.12           3.20          5.34


                                                          A3
                           Sales (¥ B)     5.0       14.5    47.0    82.1         296
  Secondary Equity Issuance Indicator     0.00       0.00    0.00    0.07        0.25
                    Stock Return (%)     -5.54       2.59    12.7    5.25        22.0
               Tangible Capital (¥ B)      4.8       15.1    51.1     128         557
                    Total Assets (¥ B)    19.6       55.1     166     373       1,640
                    Whited-Wu Index      -0.57      -0.51   -0.45   -0.51        0.11
 𝛥 Accounts Receivable (% of Assets)     -0.60       0.00    1.00    0.23        5.20
             𝛥Altman Manu. Z-Score       -0.08       0.01    0.12    0.02        0.58
        𝛥Altman Non-Manu. Z-Score        -0.13       0.04    0.22    0.05        1.02
  𝛥Bharath-Shumway Probability (%)        0.00       0.00    0.00    0.08        2.38
𝛥Cash & ST Investment (% of Assets)      -1.30       0.11    1.70    0.60        31.2
       𝛥Current Assets (% of Assets)     -1.70       0.49    3.03    1.01        8.15
         𝛥Interest Coverage Ratio(%)     -10.5       0.89    15.2    5.48         353
            𝛥Inventory (% of Assets)     -0.52       0.05    0.80    0.21        4.30
                           𝛥Sales (%)    -6.66       1.63    10.6    6.52         109
     𝛥Tangible Capital (% of Assets)     -0.31      -0.03    0.45    0.29        13.4
          𝛥Total Assets (% of Assets)    -1.81       0.81    3.79    1.39        8.40
Panel D. Annual Variables
                                         25th     Median    75th    Mean    Std. Dev.
          BOJ No. of Purchase Days           26        71     150    86.4        73.4
                BOJ Purchases (¥ M)       32.9      129.3   490.6   1,050       5,190
           BOJ Purchases/assets (%)       0.07       0.24    0.77    1.15        5.23
          Accounts Receivable (¥ B)       2.49       9.07    30.2    60.3         307
         Book Leverage (%of Assets)       6.73       17.7    31.5    20.9        16.8
  Cash & Short-term Investment (¥ B)      2.53       7.24    21.5    41.7         248
                          Cash (¥ B)      2.39       6.93    20.5    33.9         135
                 Current Assets (¥ B)     9.51       26.9    82.7     150         613
                          Employees        516      1,390   4,410   6,840      23,100
                      Inventory (¥ B)       1.4       5.4    19.8    35.6         131
                     Market-to-Book       0.63       0.94    1.53    1.47        2.13
                R&D Expenses (¥ B)        0.14       0.62    2.76    9.52        53.1
                Return on Assets (%)      4.15       9.66    17.7    11.8        19.5
                          Sales (¥ B)     13.7       42.3     143     268       1,040
        Short-term Investments (¥ B)      0.00       0.00    0.10    7.26        74.8
                    Stock Return (%)     -4.17       9.44    28.3    17.2        42.6
               Tangible Capital (¥ B)       4.5      13.9    46.8     120         546
                   Total Assets (¥ B)     18.8       51.3     152     344       1,520
 𝛥 Accounts Receivable (% of Assets)     -0.60       0.00    1.50    0.57        6.72
      𝛥 Short-term Investments (% of      0.00       0.00    0.00    0.17        10.2
𝛥Cash & ST Investment (% of Assets)      -1.33       0.50    2.85    1.86        56.9
                 𝛥Cash (% of Assets)     -1.39       1.04    5.37    5.92        31.2
       𝛥Current Assets (% of Assets)     -1.24       1.71    5.62    3.13        13.8
                    𝛥Employees (%)       -0.81       1.78    5.99    5.97        44.5
            𝛥Inventory (% of Assets)     -0.56       0.12    1.21    0.64        7.18
      𝛥R&D Expenses (% of Assets)        -0.07       0.03    0.28    0.42        3.62
                          𝛥Sales (%)     -8.12       3.84    26.9    27.4         805
     𝛥Tangible Capital (% of Assets)     -0.66       0.05    1.42    0.96        24.5
         𝛥Total Assets (% of Assets)     -1.44       2.78    8.05    4.52       15.52




                                             A4
A.2 Full Tables of Main Results

This section reproduces the tables in the paper including the coefficients and significance levels
of all control variables. These are omitted in the main tables to conserve space.



                            Appendix Table A2. Share Issuances – Full Table
The table reproduces Table 5 Panel A, which links firms’ external financing to BOJ-driven ETF purchases, and
includes coefficients for all control variables. Explained variables are a seasoned equity issuance (SEO) indicator,
  𝑆𝐸𝑂
1𝑖,𝑞  , set to 1 if firm 𝑖 made seasoned equity offering (SEO) during quarter 𝑞 and zero otherwise; and a debt issuance
indicator, 1𝐷
            𝑖,𝑞 set to 1 if firm 𝑖 increased its long-term debt outstanding in quarter 𝑞, and 0 otherwise. Panel A reports
OLS (linear probability model), Probit, and Logit regressions. All regressions use 42,919 firm-quarters and include
control variables – lagged changes in market-to-book ratio, ROA, log total assets and book leverage – as well as firm
and industry-quarter fixed-effects or pseudo-fixed-effects. Pseudo-fixed-effects, de-meaning explanatory variables by
firm and industry-quarter, are used instead of fixed-effects in Probit and Logit regressions. Standard errors are
clustered by firm, with p-values in parentheses, boldface indicating significance at 10% or better. Appendix Table A1
provides detailed variable definitions.

Explained Variable:          Seasoned equity offering indicator                  Debt Issuance indicator 1𝐷
                                                                                                          𝑖,𝑞
                                            𝑆𝐸𝑂
                                           1𝑖,𝑞
Model:                        Linear      Probit        Logit                 Linear          Probit           Logit
                              (5A.1)     (5A.2)        (5A.3)                 (5A.4)         (5A.5)          (5A.6)
                               0.015      0.007         0.007                  -0.002         -0.002          -0.002
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                              (0.002)    (0.001)       (0.002)                (0.493)        (0.472)         (0.446)
                              -0.0004         -0.0004        -0.0006           -0.001         -0.002          -0.002
𝛥𝑀/𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1
                              (0.254)         (0.748)        (0.680)          (0.083)        (0.169)         (0.173)
                              0.0003           0.001           0.001           -0.007         -0.009          -0.009
𝛥𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖,𝑞−1
                              (0.781)         (0.132)         (0.141)         (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)
                               0.189           0.155           0.154           -0.032         0.032           0.051
𝛥𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑞−1
                              (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.609)        (0.605)         (0.332)
                               0.000           0.001           0.001           -0.011         -0.010          -0.011
𝛥𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑞−1
                              (0.409)         (0.008)         (0.001)         (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)
Observations                  42,919          42,919          42,919           42,919        42,919          42,919
R2                             0.309          0.110            0.110            0.322         0.059           0.059




                                                           A5
                  Appendix Table A3. Share Issuances through M/B – Full Table

The table reproduces Table 5 Panel B, which links firms’ external financing to BOJ-driven ETF purchases, but
                                                                                                                    𝑆𝐸𝑂
includes all control variable coefficients. Explained variables are a seasoned equity issuance (SEO) indicator, 1𝑖,𝑞    ,
set to 1 if firm 𝑖 made seasoned equity offering (SEO) during quarter 𝑞 and zero otherwise; and a debt issuance
indicator, 1𝐷𝑖,𝑞 set to 1 if firm 𝑖 increased its long-term debt outstanding in quarter 𝑞, and 0 otherwise. Estimation is
by OLS (linear probability model), Probit, or logit instrumental variables regressions, with 1 st stage regression 5B.1.1
(F-stat = 7.028) estimating change in market-to-book ratio attributable to BOJ ETF demand. All regressions use 42,919
firm-quarters and include control variables – lagged changes in market-to-book ratio, ROA, log total assets and book
leverage – as well as firm and industry-quarter fixed-effects or pseudo-fixed-effects. Pseudo-fixed-effects, de-meaning
explanatory variables by firm and industry-quarter, are used in Probit and Logit regressions instead of fixed-effects.
Standard errors are clustered by firm, with p-values in parentheses, boldface indicating significance at 10% or better.
Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definitions.


                              Δ𝑀𝑞
Explained Variable:                                        SEO                                Debt Issuance
                              /𝐵𝑞−1
                               First
Model:                                       Linear       Probit       Logit         Linear      Probit        Logit
                              Stage
                             (5B.1.1)        (5B.1)       (5B.3)      (5B.4)         (5B.4)      (5B.5)       (5B.6)
                                              0.038       0.025        0.024         -0.006       -0.004      -0.004
Δ𝑀𝑞 /𝐵𝑞−1 |𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                             (0.010)     (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.475)      (0.109)     (0.108)
                              0.384
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                             (0.000)
                              -0.082          0.003       -0.001       -0.001        -0.001       -0.002      -0.002
𝛥𝑀/𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1
                             (0.227)         (0.221)     (0.560)      (0.343)       (0.180)      (0.110)     (0.130)
                              0.016         -0.0003       0.001        0.001         -0.007       -0.009      -0.009
𝛥𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖,𝑞−1
                             (0.101)        (0.744)      (0.091)      (0.175)       (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
                              0.910           0.154       0.094        0.095         -0.026       0.039       0.058
𝛥𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑞−1
                             (0.316)         (0.001)     (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.675)      (0.531)     (0.273)
                              0.022         -0.0003       0.001        0.001         -0.011       -0.010      -0.011
𝛥𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑞−1
                             (0.470)        (0.809)      (0.081)      (0.031)       (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
Observations                  42,919         42,919      42,919       42,919        42,919       42,919       42,919
R2                             0.163          0.152       0.058        0.058         0.320        0.004        0.005




                                                          A6
                                        Appendix Table A4. Quarterly Firm Fundamentals – Full Table

This table reproduces Panel A of Table 6. Regressions use BOJ purchases to explain quarterly changes in the components of firms’ assets. 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 is total BOJ
purchases of the firm 𝑖’s shares in quarter 𝑞. All explained variables are scaled by prior quarter-end total assets except raw percentage returns in regression 6A.1.
All regressions also control variables: lagged changes in each of market-to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by-quarter fixed-
effects. Regression 7A1.1 clusters bidirectionally by firm and year; all others cluster by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values, with boldface indicating
significance at 10% or better. Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definitions.

                                                                                                          ΔCash & Short-
                                                                        ΔTangible          ΔCurrent            Term                                 ΔAccounts
    Explained Variable:             Returns        ΔTotal Assets         Capital            Assets         Investments   ΔInventory                 Receivable
                                    (6A.1.1)          (6A.1)             (6A.2)             (6A.3)            (6A.4)       (6A.5)                     (6A.6)
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞                                1.022            0.272              0.023              0.300             0.144        0.050                      0.065
                                     (0.059)         (0.001)             (0.026)            (0.001)          (0.007)       (0.009)                   (0.001)
𝛥𝑀/𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1                            0.0004             -0.007             -0.003            -0.004              -0.001             -0.002             -0.002
                                     (0.987)           (0.338)            (0.012)           (0.537)             (0.687)            (0.120)            (0.671)
𝛥𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖,𝑞−1                             -0.057           0.106               -0.007             0.100             0.066               0.013              0.019
                                     (0.634)          (0.0004)            (0.068)           (0.0002)           (0.0002)            (0.020)            (0.052)
𝛥𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑞−1                    1.611             -5.477             1.230             -7.151              -1.284             -1.167             -3.778
                                     (0.689)           (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.040)            (0.003)            (0.000)
𝛥𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑞−1                   0.051             0.082              0.009             0.049               -0.002             -0.010             0.036
                                     (0.326)           (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.030)             (0.883)            (0.102)            (0.004)
Observations                         42,919            42,919             42,919             42,919             42,919             42,919              42,919
R2                                    0.430             0.401              0.340              0.405              0.312              0.438               0.471




                                                                                A7
                                  Appendix Table A5. Annual Changes in Assets Components – Full Table
This table reproduces Panel B of Table 6. Regressions use BOJ purchases to explain annual changes in the components of firms’ assets. 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦 is total BOJ
purchases of the firm 𝑖’s shares in year 𝑦. All explained variables are scaled by prior fiscal-period-end total assets except raw percentage returns in regression
6B.1.1. All regressions also control variables: lagged changes in each of market-to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by- year
fixed-effects. Regression 7B1.1 clusters bidirectionally by firm and year; all others cluster by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values, with boldface indicating
significance at 10% or better. Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definitions.

                                                                      ΔTangible                           ΔShort-Term                             ΔAccounts
Explained Variable:                 Returns       ΔTotal Assets                            ΔCash                                 ΔR&D
                                                                       Capital                            Investments                             Receivable
                                   (6B.1.1)          (6B.1.1)          (6B.1)              (6B.2)            (6B.3)              (6B.6)             (6B.7)
                                     0.340             0.226             0.005             0.084              -0.006             0.004               0.020
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦
                                    (0.342)           (0.090)           (0.662)           (0.096)            (0.699)            (0.430)             (0.469)
                                     -0.027            -0.019            -0.007            -0.008             0.002             -0.0001              -0.001
𝛥𝑀/𝐵𝑖,𝑦−1
                                    (0.670)           (0.003)           (0.021)           (0.252)            (0.282)            (0.807)             (0.829)
                                     0.438             0.057             0.001             -0.046             0.013              0.009               0.001
𝛥𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖,𝑦−1
                                    (0.093)           (0.561)           (0.921)           (0.451)            (0.548)            (0.227)             (0.989)
                                     9.767            17.857             5.319             2.335              0.246              0.397               2.093
𝛥𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑦−1
                                    (0.153)           (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.245)            (0.737)            (0.103)             (0.056)
                                     -0.004            0.043             0.001             0.048              0.003              -0.002              -0.023
𝛥𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑦−1
                                    (0.967)           (0.246)           (0.932)           (0.021)            (0.756)            (0.424)             (0.079)
Observations                         6,114             6,114             6,114             6,114              6,114              3,543               6,114
R2                                   0.387             0.357             0.353             0.322              0.379              0.238               0.343




                                                                                A8
A.3 Robustness Tests

A series of robustness tests generate qualitatively similar results to those in the main tables. By
this, we mean they produce the same pattern of signs and statistical and economic significance.
Selected robustness checks are tabulated below. All robustness checks are available in tabulated
form upon request.

       Winsorization. We apply various winsorization methods, namely winsorizing the BOJ
purchases and corporate policy variables at 1% as well as winsorizing stock returns at 1%, 2% and
5%. All these tests generate qualitatively similar results.

       Firm fixed-effects. Including firm fixed-effects yields qualitatively similar results. This
eliminates time-invariant firm-level latent factors as possible alternative explanations of our
findings. Firm-specific latent variables include head office location, corporate management
traditions, stable shareholders, keiretsu membership, constant growth trends, and other variables.
For example, a firm’s long-run trend growth, and hence the expansion of its balance sheets, could
correlate with its weight in the BOJ purchase basket because the indexes select rapidly growing
firms or, if growth correlated with size, larger firms. Re-estimating all our quarterly and annual
regression results (untabulated) including firm-fixed-effects, preserves the results in the tables.
BOJ purchases remain correlated with asset expansion reflecting economically significant short-
term assets accumulation and economically insignificant tangible investment.

       Policy date effects. We find that corporate policy changes associated with BOJ ETF
purchases are larger prior to July 29, 2016, when the BOJ doubled its purchasing target to 6 trillion
yen. In untabulated results, BOJ share purchases in the earlier sub-period elicit larger price gains,
upside returns volatility increases, downside returns volatility decreases, and total assets increases.
However, the composition of the balance sheet expansion is similar to our main results: 81% is
current assets accumulation and about 40% is cash and short-term investments accumulation.

       Other major government interventions. Our findings are robust to excluding 2011 and
2012, when an earthquake, tidal wave and nuclear incident necessitated unusually high
government spending in Fukushima and other areas of Japan. Untabulated regressions excluding




                                                 A9
these years show results quantitatively and qualitatively similar to those in the tables.19

           Issuance amounts. If BOJ ETF purchases increase firms’ share prices, share buybacks
should be less attractive means of disbursing cash to shareholders. Regressions A6.4, A6.5, and
A6.6 in Appendix Table A6, analogous to those in Table 5, show that firms are less prone to
repurchasing shares as BOJ-driven ETF purchases of their shares rise. Regression A6.1 in Table
A6 also shows that BOJ-driven ETF purchases, despite being related to more secondary equity
offerings, are unrelated to net equity issuance amount scaled by lagged total assets. This is because
although firms increase SEOs along the extensive margin, conditional on raising more equity,
firms may issue more or less.

           Allowing a longer response period for external financing. Firms might take more than
one quarter to tap increased external financing in response to the BOJ interventions. Tables A7A
and A7B revisit Table 5 permitting responses across two and three quarters, respectively. The
results are stronger—the estimated coefficients on equity and debt issuance are larger. The R2
measure of fit on the regressions using one quarter and two quarter lags increases when compared
to the contemporaneous results. Appendix Table A8 shows the horserace between
contemporaneous and lagged terms and indicates that the effect on equity issuance is due to the
contemporaneous BOJ purchases. BOJ-driven ETF purchases, insignificantly associated with debt
issuances in the main results, become negatively associated with debt issuances another period on.
One interpretation of this finding is that major equity issuances one period obviate the need for
debt issuances the next period. Allowing longer delays for corporate actions (untabulated) leaves
our results unchanged: larger BOJ equity purchases are related to economically significantly
greater growth in assets, current assets, and cash and short-term investment, but not capital
investment, over the current and subsequent quarters combined.
           Industry focus. Policymakers may also be more concerned about corporate investment
and growth in certain sectors such as manufacturing, construction, or real estate. Appendix Table
A9 therefore presents regressions allowing BOJ-driven share purchase to have different
coefficients for firms in those sectors. Panel A, using quarterly data, links greater BOJ purchases
of manufacturing firms shares with expansions in tangible assets, current assets, cash holding,


19
     Repeating the construction, manufacturing, and real estate sector analyses excluding 2011 and 2012 generates
     quantitatively similar results.


                                                       A10
inventory, and good will. However, all the results disappear in the annual data regression analysis
in Panel B. Appendix Figure A2 shows estimated coefficients for individual major corporate
sectors, suggesting that increased BOJ equity purchases associates with asset expansions in all
major sectors except real estate. BOJ-driven expansions in tangible assets appear confined to firms
in the manufacturing and construction sectors.

       Employment and sales growth. Rather than investing in more capital, firms might employ
more workers. We therefore estimate regressions (not shown) of the same form as those in Table
6, explaining firm employment growth and sales growth. Employee growth is defined as change
in employees over lagged employees, which is only available annually. BOJ-driven ETF purchases
attract a positive and statistically significant coefficient of 0.329 ( 𝑝 = 0.01) in explaining
employment growth. In regressions of the form of Table 6, explaining quarterly and annual sales
growth, the coefficients are 1.30 (𝑝 =0.04) and 0.078 (p=0.07) respectively.

       This result suggests that the BOJ’s equity purchases might have traction in outcomes other
than corporate investment. However, we are reluctant to emphasize these results for two reasons.
First, the coefficients are economically insignificant. The employment increase is about 0.02
standard deviations and the sales increase is less than 0.01 standard deviations. Second, both sets
of results do not survive the battery of robustness checks as shown in the Appendix tables. The
sign actually flips in regressions analogous to those in Tables A9, which include interactions of
BOJ-driven ETF demand with construction and manufacturing sector dummies. In these, BOJ
purchases of a construction firm’s shares are actually associated with statistically significant
decreases in its employment. A BOJ’s purchases relative to last fiscal year’s total assets of one-
percentage-point decreases employment in construction firms by 16% of a standard deviation
compared to companies in other industries.

       Nikkei 225 firms. Stocks’ weights in indexes and in the BOJ’s purchase basket, though
determined mechanically, may be correlated with firm characteristics. TOPIX weights depend on
firms’ public floats, and thus on firm size. The JPX-Nikkei 400 also uses public floats, but caps
firm’s weights at 1.5% and thus value-weights small firms but equal-weights large firms, and also
uses performance and corporate governance criteria to select which firms are included in this index.
The Nikkei 225 uses price weights, rather than market value weights, but includes large and
prominent firms. Moreover, Nikkei 225 price weights change with stock prices, and thus with



                                                 A11
market-to-book ratios and their correlates. Nonetheless, the cross sectional variation in BOJ
purchase weights among Nikkei 225 stocks may be less endogenous in some contexts. Using only
Nikkei 225 firms reduces the sample by almost 90%. However, for completeness we repeat our
tests using only stocks in the Nikkei 225 index.

       Appendix Table A10, which revisits the tests in Table 4 using Nikkei 225 stocks, associates
positive one-day price impact point estimates with BOJ purchases. However these are statistically
insignificant, perhaps because of the smaller sample size. In two-day and longer windows, the
price impact is positive and significant, larger in magnitude than in Table 4, and exhibits a
comparable partial reversal after the second day.

       Appendix Table 11 revisits the quarterly tests in Tables 5 through 7 using Nikkei 225 firms
only. Regression A11.1.1 associates quarterly BOJ-driven ETF purchases shares worth one percent
of assets with a 1.5% higher stock return, roughly the same point estimate as in the full sample,
but statistically insignificant in this smaller sample. Regressions A11.1 through A11.3 associate
BOJ purchases of Nikkei 225 stocks with secondary equity issuances, though only the linear
probability model does so significantly. As in the full sample, debt issues appear unaffected in
regressions A11.4 through A11.6. As with the return effects, the corporate policy changes are
larger than in the full sample: BOJ stock purchase worth one percent of assets increases total assets
by 1.8%, of which over 60% is increased current assets, of which 55% is increased cash and short-
term holdings. Less than 18% of the increase in assets is capital investment. The point estimate on
increase in tangible assets in A11.8 is 0.32, which – though larger than the 0.023 point estimate in
regression 6A.2 – is nonetheless an economically insignificant 5% of its standard deviation in the
Nikkei 225 subsample. Also echoing the tables, regressions using annual data for Nikkei 225 firms
associate BOJ share purchases with significant increases in assets (𝜉 = 0.135, 𝑝 = 0.067); no
statistically significant increase in tangible capital; and significant cash accumulation (𝜉 = 0.783,
𝑝 = 0.038). Overall, the Nikkei 225 results affirm the full sample results, though with reduced
statistical significance in some cases. BOJ ETF purchases increased share prices, induced more
equity but not debt financing, and showed a balance sheet expansion which overwhelmingly
reflects higher current assets, most notably cash and short-term investments.




                                                A12
                                                       Appendix Table A6. Net Equity Issuances
The table studies net equity issuance amounts, taking into account the intensive margin by considering the amount raised in secondary offerings minus the amount
paid in stock buybacks. Regression (1) shows the net issuances in a quarter scaled by the previous quarter’s total assets multiplied by 100. Regressions (2) and (3)
show linear and Tobit regressions for the inverse hyperbolic sine of equity issue amounts. Regressions (4) and (5) analyse share buybacks and use the same
specifications. Regressions (6) and (7) analyse total amount of debt issuances. Regression (1), (2), (4), and (6) estimate a linear model with industry-quarter fixed-
effects. Regression (3) and (5) estimate Tobit models, regression (7) estimates a Probit model, and regression (8) estimates a logit model. We difference all
explanatory variables within industry-quarter groups for the Tobit, Probit, and Logit models. Reported numbers correspond to the estimated coefficients. Standard
errors are clustered by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values, with boldface indicating significance at 10% or better. McFadden pseudo-R2s are shown for
Tobit models. Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definitions.

                               Net Equity Issued                           Inverse Hyperbolic Sine
 Explained Variable:           over Lagged Total Inverse Hyperbolic   Sine     of Share Buyback
                                  Assets (%)     of Equity Issue Amount             Fraction                                Indicator for Stock Buyback
 Model Type:                         Linear         Linear        Tobit      Linear          Tobit                       Linear         Probit       Logit
                                     (A6.1)         (A6.2)      (A6.3)       (A6.4)        (A6.5)                        (A6.6)        (A6.7)      (A6.8)
                                    0.00002          0.057       0.497        -0.015        -0.080                        -0.009        -0.010      -0.011
 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.035)        (0.027)      (0.393)      (0.016)       (0.038)                       (0.004)       (0.055)     (0.008)
                                   -0.00000         -0.005       -0.520       0.004         0.006                        0.0005        0.0003      0.0003
 𝛥𝑀/𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1
                                    (0.197)        (0.004)      (0.055)      (0.004)       (0.393)                       (0.001)       (0.568)     (0.573)
                                   -0.00000         -0.006       -0.768       0.005         -0.007                        0.002         -0.0001         -0.0001
 𝛥𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖,𝑞−1
                                    (0.407)        (0.007)      (0.001)      (0.006)       (0.370)                       (0.001)        (0.814)         (0.836)
                                     0.0001          1.045      30.785        -0.354        0.333                         -0.042          0.037          0.035
 𝛥𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑞−1
                                    (0.001)        (0.319)      (0.000)      (0.270)       (0.249)                       (0.038)         (0.152)        (0.179)
                                    0.00000          0.004       -0.155       -0.004        -0.003                        -0.001          -0.001         -0.001
 𝛥𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑞−1
                                    (0.541)        (0.006)      (0.394)      (0.005)       (0.646)                       (0.001)         (0.094)        (0.115)
                                                                 3.507                      1.142
 Log (Sigma)
                                                                (0.000)                    (0.000)
 Observations                        42,919        42,919       42,919       42,919        42,919                         42,919         42,919         42,919
 R2                                   0.391          0.349       0.005        0.478        0.0003                          0.414          0.044          0.045




                                                                                A13
Appendix Table A7A. External Financing – Allowing Up to One Quarter Lag in Financing
                                                                                                     𝑆𝐸𝑂
This table summarizes external financing, indicated by a seasoned equity issuance (SEO) dummy, 1𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+1] , set to 1
if firm 𝑖 made seasoned equity offering (SEO) during quarter 𝑞 or quarter 𝑞 + 1 and zero otherwise or a debt issuance
           𝐷
dummy, 1𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+1] set to 1 if firm 𝑖 increased its long-term debt outstanding in quarter 𝑞 or quarter 𝑞 + 1, and 0
otherwise, with BOJ-driven ETF purchases of their shares, 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 . Panel A reports OLS (linear probability model),
probit, and logit regressions. Panel B reports instrumental variables versions of the same regressions with (A7B.1.1)
as a first stage (F-stat = 7.028) estimating the change in market-to-book ratio explained by BOJ ETF demand. All
regressions use 42,919 firm-quarters and include control variables – lagged changes in market-to-book ratio, ROA,
log total assets and book leverage – and firm and industry-quarter fixed-effects in OLS regressions or pseudo-fixed-
effects (de-meaning explanatory variables by firm and industry-quarter) in Probit and Logit regressions. Standard
errors cluster by firm, with p-values in parentheses, boldface indicating significance at 10% or better. Appendix Table
A1 provides detailed variable definitions.

Panel A. Regressions of external financing indicators on BOJ share purchases
                                                                 Debt issuance indicator
Explained variable:                 SEO indicator 1𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+1]
                                                   𝑆𝐸𝑂
                                                                        1𝐷𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+1]
Model                            Linear     Probit       Logit Linear    Probit     Logit
                                                         (A7                      (A7AA.4 (A7AA.5 (A7AA.6
                                        (A7AA.1)                    (A7A.3)
                                                        AA.2)                        )       )       )
                                           0.016        0.009         0.010         -0.006      -0.005       -0.005
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                          (0.001)      (0.015)       (0.005)       (0.151)     (0.110)      (0.121)
Observations                              42,919        42,919       42,919        42,919       42,919      42,919
R2                                         0.326        0.103         0.104         0.315       0.056        0.056

Panel B. Instrumental Variables Regressions
Explained                                                                            Debt issuance indicator
                 Δ𝑀𝑖,𝑞 /𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1    SEO indicator 1𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+1]
                                                 𝑆𝐸𝑂
variable:                                                                                   1𝐷𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+1]
Model              1st stage
                                Linear    Probit       Logit                       Linear       Probit       Logit
                     OLS
                                                                                  (A7AB.4 (A7AB.5 (A7AB.6
                        (A7AB.1.1) (A7AB.1) (A7AB.2) (A7AB.3)
                                                                                     )       )       )
Δ𝑀𝑖,𝑞                                      0.043        0.038         0.038         -0.014      -0.007       -0.007
       | 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1                                    (0.007)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.130)     (0.009)      (0.008)
                            0.384
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                           (0.000)
Observations               42,919         42,919        42,919       42,919        42,919       42,919      42,919
R2                          0.175          0.199        0.060         0.060         0.304       0.003        0.003




                                                        A14
Appendix Table A7B External Financing – Allowing Up to Two Quarter Lags in Financing
                                                                                                       𝑆𝐸𝑂
This table summarizes external financing, indicated by a seasoned equity issuance (SEO) dummy, 1𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+2]      , set to 1
if firm 𝑖 made seasoned equity offering (SEO) during quarter 𝑞 through quarter 𝑞 + 2 and zero otherwise or a debt
issuance dummy, 1𝐷 𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+2] set to 1 if firm 𝑖 increased its long-term debt outstanding in quarter 𝑞 through quarter 𝑞
+ 2, and 0 otherwise, with BOJ-driven ETF purchases of their shares, 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 . Panel A reports OLS (linear probability
model), probit, and logit regressions. Panel B reports instrumental variables versions of the same regressions with
(A10B.1.1) as a first stage (F-stat = 7.028) estimating the change in market-to-book ratio explained by BOJ ETF
demand. All regressions use 42,919 firm-quarters and include control variables – lagged changes in market-to-book
ratio, ROA, log total assets and book leverage – and firm and industry-quarter fixed-effects in OLS regressions or
pseudo-fixed-effects (de-meaning explanatory variables by firm and industry-quarter) in probit and logit regressions.
Standard errors cluster by firm, with p-values in parentheses, boldface indicating significance at 10% or better.
Appendix Table A provides detailed variable definitions.

Panel A. Regressions of external financing indicators on BOJ share purchases
                                                   𝑆𝐸𝑂           Debt issuance indicator
Explained variable:                 SEO indicator 1𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+2]
                                                                        1𝐷𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+2]
Model                            Linear     Probit       Logit Linear    Probit     Logit
                                         (A7BA1) (A7BA2) (A7A3)                    (A7BA4) (A7BA5) (A7BA6)
                                            0.017        0.010         0.011         -0.006       -0.005       -0.005
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                           (0.003)      (0.018)       (0.007)       (0.108)      (0.051)      (0.053)
Observations                               42,919        42,919       42,919        42,919       42,919       42,919
R2                                          0.340        0.095         0.095         0.301        0.059        0.059

Panel B. Instrumental Variables Regressions
Explained                                        𝑆𝐸𝑂                                   Debt issuance indicator
                 Δ𝑀𝑖,𝑞 /𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1    SEO indicator 1𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+2]
variable:                                                                                     1𝐷𝑖,[𝑞,𝑞+2]
Model            1st stage OLS Linear     Probit       Logit                         Linear       Probit       Logit
                         (A7BB1.1) (A7BB.1) (A7BB.3) (A7BB.4) (A7BB.4) (A7BB.5) (A7BB.6)
Δ𝑀𝑖,𝑞                                       0.044        0.047         0.048         -0.016       -0.008       -0.008
       | 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1                                     (0.010)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.090)      (0.001)      (0.001)

                            0.384
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                           (0.000)
Observations                42,919         42,919        42,919       42,919        42,919       42,919       42,919
R2                          0.175           0.233        0.055         0.057         0.286        0.004        0.004




                                                         A15
     Appendix Table A8. External Financing Including Lagged Bank of Japan Purchases
                                                                                                       𝑆𝐸𝑂
This table summarizes external financing, indicated by a seasoned equity issuance (SEO) dummy, 1𝑖,𝑞        , set to 1 if
firm 𝑖 made seasoned equity offering (SEO) in quarter 𝑞 and zero otherwise or a debt issuance dummy, 1𝐷     𝑖,𝑞 set to 1
if firm 𝑖 increased its long-term debt outstanding in quarter 𝑞, and 0 otherwise, with BOJ-driven ETF purchases of
their shares in the current and two prior quarters, 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 , 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞−1 .and 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞−2 . The table reports OLS linear
probability model, Probit, and Logit regressions. All regressions use 35,669 firm-quarter and include control variables
– lagged changes in market-to-book ratio, ROA, log total assets and book leverage – and firm and industry-quarter
fixed-effects in OLS regressions or pseudo-fixed-effects (de-meaning explanatory variables by firm and industry-
quarter) in Probit and logit regressions. Standard errors cluster by firm, with p-values in parentheses, boldface
indicating significance at 10% or better.


                                                               𝑆𝐸𝑂
Explained variable:                             SEO indicator 1𝑖,𝑞                  Debt issuance indicator 1𝐷
                                                                                                             𝑖,𝑞
Model                                      Linear        Probit       Logit         Linear       Probit       Logit
                                           (A8.1)       (A8.2)        (A8.3)        (A8.4)       (A8.5)      (A8.6)
                                           0.016         0.008         0.008         0.003       0.004        0.004
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                          (0.001)       (0.007)      (0.001)        (0.474)     (0.304)      (0.298)
                                           0.002        -0.001        -0.001        -0.013       -0.014      -0.014
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞−1
                                          (0.777)       (0.841)      (0.813)        (0.070)     (0.080)      (0.094)
                                           -0.003        -0.001      -0.0004         0.006       0.007        0.007
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞−2
                                          (0.720)       (0.896)      (0.915)        (0.309)     (0.342)      (0.365)
Observations                               35,669       35,669        35,669        35,669      35,669       35,669
R2                                         0.292         0.016        0.016          0.331       0.006        0.006




                                                         A16
                            Appendix Table A9. Comparing Construction and Manufacturing to Other Sectors
This table compares changes in the components of firms assets in the construction and manufacturing sectors to those for of firms using quarterly (Panel A) and
annual (Panel B) OLS regressions on 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖, total BOJ purchases of firm 𝑖’s shares in in the fiscal quarter or year (accounting for firms entering or leaving indexes
                                                                                                                    𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑔
partway through) and its interactions with on J-SIC code manufacturing and construction sector dummies, 1𝑖,𝑞                          and 1𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
                                                                                                                                             𝑖,𝑞           . Explained
variables are scaled by prior fiscal-period-end total assets except in (9A.1.1) and (9B.1.1), which explain raw percentage returns. All regressions include as control
variables lagged changes in market-to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by-fiscal period fixed-effects. Regression 9A.1.1 and
9B.1.1 clusters bidirectionally by firm and fiscal period; all other regressions cluster by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values, boldface indicating significance
at 10% or better.

Panel A: Quarterly Actions
                                                                          ΔTangible          ΔCurrent        ΔCash & Short-                           ΔAccounts
Explained Variable:                  Returns        ΔTotal Assets                                                                  ΔInventory
                                                                            Capital           Assets              Term                                Receivable
                                   (A9A.1.1)            (A9A.1)            (A9A.2)            (A9A.3)           (A9A.4)
                                                                                                              Investments           (A9A.5)            (A9A.6)
                                      1.110                0.273             0.005               0.251            0.107                0.021             0.062
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.084)              (0.006)            (0.428)            (0.006)           (0.035)             (0.066)            (0.023)
                                     -1.756                0.125             0.216              -0.532            0.344               -0.209             0.111
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 × 1𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
          𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.445)              (0.894)            (0.109)            (0.559)           (0.267)             (0.647)            (0.235)
             𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑔            -0.515               -0.008             0.114               0.343            0.232                0.199             0.020
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 × 1𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.551)              (0.955)            (0.000)            (0.005)           (0.004)             (0.000)            (0.038)
Observations                        42,919               42,919             42,919             42,919            42,919              42,919             42,919
R2                                    0.431                0.401             0.341               0.405            0.313                0.439             0.259
Panel B: Annual Actions
   Explained Variable:               Returns        ΔTotal Assets         ΔTangible            ΔCash          ΔShort-Term            ΔR&D             ΔAccounts
                                                                            Capital                           Investments                             Receivable
                                   (A9B.1.1)            (A9B.1)            (A9B.2)            (A9B.3)           (A9B.4)              (A9B.5)           (A9B.6)
                                     0.173                 0.237             -0.001              0.098            -0.009                0.004            0.030
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦
                                    (0.589)              (0.124)            (0.907)            (0.090)           (0.541)              (0.488)           (0.311)
                                     2.310                 1.416             0.172              -0.810            0.441                -0.012            0.114
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦 × 1𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
          𝑖,𝑞                       (0.456)              (0.098)            (0.446)            (0.115)           (0.180)              (0.216)           (0.593)
             𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑔            1.277                -0.128             0.041              -0.095            0.017              -0.0001             -0.087
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑦 × 1𝑖,𝑞
                                    (0.023)              (0.572)            (0.438)            (0.308)           (0.758)              (0.989)           (0.251)
Observations                         6,114                 6,114             6,114               6,114            6,114                 3,543            6,114
R2                                   0.389                 0.358             0.351               0.322            0.379                 0.238            0.344


                                                                                A17
                               Appendix Table A10. Impact on Stock Returns Using Only Nikkei 225 Stocks
The table below revisits Panels A and B of Table 4 restricting the sample to Nikkei 225 stocks. Firm-day panel regressions explain stock returns in intervals,
indicated by square brackets, around BOJ purchase date t holding periods, using cumulated log returns. Explanatory variable 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖𝑡 is the BOJ demand for stock 𝑖
associated with the BOJ’s ETF purchases on trading day 𝑡 as a fraction of the firm’s prior month-end market capitalization. In all regressions, 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖𝑡 is winsorized
at 1%. Regressions include industry-day fixed-effects where industries are 4-digit SIC codes. Panel A uses all trading days and stocks; Panel B uses only days with
isolated BOJ purchases around the return horizon in [𝑡 − 𝑘, 𝑡 + 𝑘] for 𝑘 = 0, 1, 2, 4, 9, 21 days and stocks in the BOJ purchase basket. Numbers in parentheses are
p-values, with boldface indicating significance at the 5% level or better.

Return horizon                         1 day                2 days                3 days               1 week                2 weeks               1 month
Return window                          [t, t]               [t, t+1]              [t, t+2]             [t, t+4]              [t, t+9]              [t, t+22]

Panel A. All trading days and only stocks in Nikkei 225
                                       2.550                6.194                 6.153                 5.628                4.722                  4.221
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖𝑡
                                      (0.471)              (0.009)               (0.001)              (0.00002)             (0.0002)              (0.0001)
Observations                         152,711               152,513               152,315               151,919               151,067               148,677
R2                                    0.826                 0.823                 0.820                 0.815                 0.807                 0.791

Panel B. Trading days with isolated (no others within k trading days) BOJ ETF purchases and only stocks in Nikkei 225
                                       2.526                8.505                 6.457                 4.992                 4.766                 2.894
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖𝑡
                                      (0.471)              (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.037)               (0.031)               (0.030)
𝑘                                       0                      1                     2                      4                    9                    21
Observations                         152,711                65,123                28,881                13,438                3,801                  798
Number of Events                      2,675                   334                   144                    67                   19                     4
R2                                    0.826                  0.816                 0.830                 0.798                0.785                 0.063




                                                                              A18
                               Appendix Table A11. Replication of Main Results Using Nikkei 225 Stocks Only
This table shows the effect of BOJ purchases on various corporate action variables at the quarterly level for stocks that are in the Nikkei 225, accounting for stocks
that enter the index within the quarter. 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 is defined as total BOJ purchases in the fiscal period, adjusting for firms entering or leaving indexes within the period.
All explained variables are scaled by prior fiscal-period-end total assets except returns in regressions 1.1, which are raw percentage returns. All regressions also
include a set of control variables: lagged changes in each of market-to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by-quarter or year fixed-
effects. Regression A11.1.1 clusters bidirectionally by firm and quarter; all other regressions cluster by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values with boldface
indicating significance at 10% or better. Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definitions.

  Explained               SEO issuance indicator Debt issuance indicator                      ΔTotal     ΔTangible ΔCurrent         ΔCash &       ΔInven- ΔAccounts
                                   𝑆𝐸𝑂
  Variable:       Returns         1𝑖,𝑞                    1𝐷𝑖,𝑞                               Assets      Capital   Assets          S.T. Inv.       tory  Receivable

Specification      OLS        OLS       Probit     Logit      OLS       Probit     Logit       OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS
                 (A11.1.1) (A11.1) (A11.2) (A11.3) (A11.4) (A11.5) (A11.6)                    (A11.7)      (A11.8)      (A11.9)     (A11.10)     (A11.11)     (A11.12)

𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞
                   1.606   0.279 0.305 0.331 -0.046 -0.041 -0.041                              1.826        0.321        1.119        0.623        0.310        0.302
                  (0.564) (0.019) (0.117) (0.106) (0.600) (0.628) (0.628)                     (0.080)      (0.034)      (0.069)      (0.096)      (0.016)      (0.166)

                  -1.020 0.027 -0.017 -0.017 0.007 0.001 0.0002                                0.280       -0.009        0.365        0.298       -0.044        0.200
𝛥𝑀/𝐵𝑖,𝑞−1
                  (0.222) (0.438) (0.324) (0.329) (0.780) (0.953) (0.992)                     (0.224)      (0.899)      (0.083)      (0.035)      (0.392)      (0.086)

                   0.499 -0.001 0.007 -0.007 -0.016 -0.028 -0.029                              -0.027      -0.030        0.103        0.054        0.037       -0.035
𝛥𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖,𝑞−1
                  (0.094) (0.903) (0.109) (0.109) (0.106) (0.000) (0.000)                     (0.707)      (0.070)      (0.171)      (0.250)      (0.141)      (0.092)

𝛥𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙            -3.929 -0.234 -0.560 -0.558 0.166 0.221 0.210                                0.523        2.754       -4.392       -3.455       -0.413        0.291
𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑞−1       (0.674) (0.476) (0.001) (0.001) (0.708) (0.228) (0.255)                     (0.898)      (0.003)      (0.063)      (0.087)      (0.547)      (0.820)

𝛥𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘         -0.107 -0.001 0.004 0.004 -0.019 -0.017 -0.017                                   -0.006       0.002       -0.035       -0.053       -0.003        0.001
𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑞−1 (0.456) (0.822) (0.064) (0.068) (0.004) (0.000) (0.000)                         (0.854)      (0.831)      (0.236)      (0.032)      (0.802)      (0.962)

Observations       4,970      4,970     4,970      4,970     4,970      4,970      4,970       4,970        4,970        4,970        4,970        4,970        4,970
R2                 0.821      0.705     0.026      0.026     0.613      0.031      0.031       0.732        0.589        0.728        0.672        0.760        0.811




                                                                                  A19
                               Appendix Table A12. Financial Constraints
This table updates Panel A of Table 6 by including two indices for financial constraints: the Whited-Wu index (Panel
A) and the Kaplan-Zingales index (Panel B). Regressions use BOJ purchases to explain quarterly changes in the
components of firms’ assets. 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 is total BOJ purchases of the firm 𝑖’s shares in quarter 𝑞. All explained variables
are scaled by prior quarter-end total assets except raw percentage returns in regression A12A.1.1. FC is the financial
constraint index, specified in the Panel label. All regressions also control variables: lagged changes in each of market-
to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by-quarter fixed-effects. Regressions A12A1.1
and A12B.1.1 cluster bidirectionally by firm and year; all others cluster by firm. Numbers in parentheses are p-values,
with boldface indicating significance at 10% or better.

                                      Panel A: FC Index = Whited-Wu Index
                                                               ΔCash &
     Explained                     ΔTotal ΔTangible ΔCurrent                       ΔAccounts
                         Returns                             Short-Term ΔInventory
     Variable:                     Assets Capital    Assets                        Receivable
                                                             Investments
                       (A12A.1.1) (A12A.1) (A12A.2) (A12A.3) (A12A.4) (A12A.5) (A12A.6)
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞                    0.349     0.943    4.300    0.220      -3.258    -0.370    0.744
                         (0.676) (0.014) (0.326) (0.849)        (0.276)   (0.739)   (0.147)
FC Index                   3.136         0.554       -3.174        1.222         4.458          0.929         -0.498
                          (0.301)       (0.520)     (0.247)       (0.272)       (0.169)        (0.380)       (0.450)
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 × FC Index          -1.742        0.754       7.708         -2.837       -12.826         -2.692        1.674
                          (0.489)       (0.126)     (0.320)       (0.220)       (0.201)        (0.384)       (0.298)
Observations              41,232        41,232       41,232       41,232        41,232         41,232        41,232
R2                         0.430         0.322        0.182        0.281         0.276          0.292         0.338
                                    Panel B: FC Index = Kaplan-Zingales Index

Explained                          ΔTotal ΔTangible ΔCurrent ΔCash &               ΔAccounts
                          Returns                           Short-Term  ΔInventory
Variable:                          Assets Capital    Assets                        Receivable
                                                            Investments
                       (A12B.1.1) (A12B.1) (A12B.2) (A12B.3) (A12B.4) (A12B.5) (A12B.6)
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞                     1.082         0.786       1.628         1.429         1.572          0.678         0.176
                          (0.009)       (0.001)     (0.340)       (0.004)       (0.097)        (0.094)       (0.327)
FC Index                  0.00003        -0.007      -0.003   -0.006             -0.004         -0.002        -0.001
                          (0.989)       (0.000)     (0.223) (0.00000)           (0.032)        (0.006)       (0.040)
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 × FC Index          0.001         0.001       0.002         0.002         0.002          0.001        0.0005
                          (0.501)       (0.003)     (0.385)       (0.024)       (0.218)        (0.165)       (0.220)
Observations              42,919        42,919       42,919       42,919        42,919         42,919        42,919
R2                         0.431         0.326        0.172        0.285         0.222          0.284         0.335




                                                         A20
4.3     Monthly Volatility Tests

The BOJ’s stated purpose in buying equity-index ETFs is to reduce costs of capital. Because higher

market volatility (systematic risk) increases investors’ discount rates and firms’ costs of capital,

the BOJ might advance its purpose by intervening to reduce stock volatility for a large cross-

section of firms to reduce systematic risk. Therefore, we study whether BOJ ETF purchases are

related to stock-specific volatility in the cross-section.

        Appendix Table A13 explores whether BOJ ETF purchases are related to monthly stock-

level volatility by relating BOJ ETF purchases of each stock 𝑖—summed over each calendar month,

𝑚, and scaled by its previous month’s market capitalization—to its monthly stock return volatility,

𝜎𝑖,𝑚 (𝑟𝑖,𝑡 ), calculated from daily returns in a month. We focus on the intensive margin by only

including stocks in the BOJ ETF basket. The sample accounts for stocks that enter the BOJ basket

partway through the month due to revisions in index-component lists. Aggregating to the monthly

level yields a sample with 173,404 stock-month observations. All measures of volatility are

annualized and defined based on daily returns within a month, with returns in percentages.

        Regression A13.1 in Table A13 associates higher BOJ ETF purchases during a month with

higher stock return volatilities. Regressions A13.2 and A13.3, decomposing volatility into upside

and downside volatilities, associate BOJ ETF purchases with more upside volatility and less

downside volatility. Stock 𝑖’s upside volatility in month 𝑚, 𝜎𝑖,𝑚 (𝑟𝑖,𝑡 |𝑟𝑖,𝑡 > 0), is the volatility

using all days 𝑡 in month 𝑚 on which the return 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 is positive and its downside volatility,

𝜎𝑖,𝑚 (𝑟𝑖,𝑡 |𝑟𝑖,𝑡 < 0), is the volatility using all days 𝑡 in month 𝑚 on which the return 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 is non-

positive. Consistent with the BOJ buying ETFs when the market drops, the table links lower

downside volatility to larger BOJ ETF purchases. Also consistent with BOJ ETF purchases


                                                 A21
increasing share prices, the table links higher upside volatility to higher BOJ ETF purchases.

         Overall, the results are consistent with the BOJ’s stated policy of putting upward pressure

on stocks, in that more BOJ-driven ETF purchases are associated with a more positive skewness

in the returns distributions. These results suggest the BOJ’s ETF purchases are more focused on

keeping share valuations up than on reducing systematic volatility. This justifies our primary tests

in Table 4 using returns, rather than volatilities. It also motivates our exploration of the impact of

BOJ equity purchases on firms’ financial distress risk in Section 4.7.


                              Appendix Table A13. Monthly Volatility Tests
The table below shows more monthly BOJ ETF purchases are slightly positively related to monthly volatility, with an
increase in upside volatility and decrease in downside volatility. Regressions explain the volatility of stock 𝑖’s daily
returns, 𝑟𝑖𝑡 , estimated over all trading days 𝑡 in calendar month 𝑚, represented as percentages and denoted 𝜎𝑖,𝑚 (𝑟𝑖,𝑡 ).
The explanatory variables are total BOJ-driven ETF purchases of that stock in the same calendar month, denoted
𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑚 , and the explained variable lagged one month. 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑚 is scaled by total market capitalization in yen of stock 𝑖
in the previous month. Variants of the explained variable are upside volatility, 𝜎𝑖,𝑚 (𝑟𝑖,𝑡 |𝑟𝑖,𝑡 > 0), calculated using
returns of stock 𝑖 only for days 𝑡 in month 𝑚 on which the return 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 > 0 and downside volatility, 𝜎𝑖,𝑚 (𝑟𝑖,𝑡 |𝑟𝑖,𝑡 < 0),
using returns of stock 𝑖 only for days 𝑡 in month 𝑚 on which the return 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 < 0. A log-log specification facilitates
interpretation. Sample sizes differ because some stocks have only positive or negative returns in some months.
Numbers in parentheses are p-levels clustering by firm, boldface indicating significance at 1% or better.

                               Log Monthly                    Log Monthly                     Log Monthly
Explained                       Volatility                   Upside Volatility              Downside Volatility
variable:
                            ln[1 + 𝜎𝑖,𝑚 (𝑟𝑖,𝑡 )]         ln[1 + 𝜎𝑖.𝑚 (𝑟𝑖 |𝑟𝑖𝑡 > 0)] ln[1 + 𝜎𝑖,𝑚 (𝑟𝑖 |𝑟𝑖𝑡 < 0)]
                                 (A13.1)                         (A13.2)                    (A13.3)
                                  0.011                           0.037                      -0.015
     ln 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑚                   (0.001)                         (0.000)                   (0.0001)
Explained                           0.362                            0.209                           0.155
variable lagged 1                  (0.000)                          (0.000)                         (0.000)
month
Observations                      173,391                          173,391                          173,391
R2
                                   0.590                            0.382                            0.444




                                                          A22
                    Appendix Figure A1. Announcement Effect of BOJ Purchases
This figure plots event-study cumulative stock returns by calendar day, where time-event zero represents the two
announcement dates, October 31, 2014, and July 29, 2016. The high-exposure and low-exposure baskets are calculated
from only stocks in the BOJ purchase basket based on 10% extremes. The results are shown for value-weighted
portfolios, and 95% confidence error bars are shown. Event-time values (on the x-axis) with no corresponding data
point or error bars signify a non-trading day. These results corroborate the impact of BOJ ETF purchase
announcements found in Barbon and Gianinazzi (2019).

                                       Cumulative Stock Returns (%)
10


 9


 8


 7


 6


 5


 4


 3


 2


 1


 0


-1
     -15      -10         -5          0           5          10          15         20         25          30
                                          High Exposure           Low Exposure




                                                      A23
                                     Appendix Figure A2. Firm Actions by Industry
This figure shows estimated coefficients of quarterly corporate policy around BOJ equity purchases, by J-SIC 1-digit
industry. The bars represent the coefficient of the BOJ demand variable, defined as total BOJ purchases in the fiscal
period, adjusting for firms entering or leaving indexes within the period. All explained variables are in changes relative
to the previous quarter's total assets. Coefficients and standard errors are from regressions of the form similar to the
analysis in Table 6. All explained variables are scaled by prior fiscal-period-end total assets. All regressions also
include a set of control variables: lagged changes in each of market-to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book
leverage and SIC4-by-quarter fixed-effects. Two standard error bars are shown.

                         ΔTotal Assets                                                                       ΔTangible Assets
                       (% of Total Assets)                                                                  (% of Total Assets)

   Manufacturing                                                                      Manufacturing
     Construction                                                                       Construction
 Trade & Utilities                                                                  Trade & Utilities
         Services                                                                           Services
       Real Estate                                                                       Real Estate
   Transportation                                                                     Transportation

                          -0.6 -0.3       0     0.3        0.6     0.9                                -0.35      -0.2   -0.05        0.1     0.25         0.4

                        ΔCurrent Assets                                                       Δ Cash & Short-term Investments
                       (% of Total Assets)                                                          (% of Total Assets)

   Manufacturing                                                                      Manufacturing
     Construction                                                                       Construction
 Trade & Utilities                                                                  Trade & Utilities
         Services                                                                           Services

       Real Estate                                                                       Real Estate

   Transportation                                                                     Transportation

                     -1     -0.5      0       0.5      1         1.5                                  -0.45 -0.2        0.05     0.3       0.55     0.8


                          Δ Inventory                                                               ΔAccounts Receivable
                       (% of Total Assets)                                                           (% of Total Assets)

   Manufacturing                                                                    Manufacturing
     Construction                                                                    Construction
 Trade & Utilities                                                              Trade & Utilities
         Services                                                                         Services
       Real Estate                                                                     Real Estate
   Transportation                                                                   Transportation

                     -0.5    -0.25        0     0.25        0.5        0.75                          -0.5     -0.3   -0.1      0.1     0.3        0.5




                                                                              A24
                                 Appendix Figure A3. Declining Effectiveness of BOJ Equity Purchases
The figures below shows the estimates of quarterly corporate actions from a regression similar to those shown in Table
6 where the BOJ effect is split by year. The coefficient shown is for the 𝐵𝑂𝐽𝑖,𝑞 variable, defined as total BOJ purchases
in the fiscal period, adjusting for firms entering or leaving indexes within the fiscal period. All variables are as defined
for Table 6 and scaled by prior fiscal-period-end total assets. All regressions also include control variables: lagged
changes in each of market-to-book, return on assets, log total assets and book leverage and SIC4-by-quarter or year
fixed-effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm and two-standard error bars are shown.


                        6                                                                 1.0

                        5
                                                                                          0.5




                                                                   Tangible Assets
                        4
      Total Assets




                        3
                                                                                          0.0
                        2

                        1                                                                -0.5

                        0
                                                                                         -1.0
                   -1
                                                                                             2011   2013   2015   2017
                     2011             2013     2015      2017
                     4                                                                    1.0

                        3
                                                                                          0.5
 Cash & Short-Term




                        2
                                                                   Inventory
    Investments




                        1                                                                 0.0

                        0
                                                                                         -0.5
                        -1

                        -2                                                               -1.0
                          2011        2013      2015     2017                                2011   2013   2015   2017
                            6                                                              1
                            5
                                                                   Accounts Receivable




                            4                                                            0.5
       Current Assets




                            3
                                                                                           0
                            2
                            1
                                                                                         -0.5
                            0
                         -1                                                               -1
                           2011        2013     2015     2017                               2011    2013   2015   2017




                                                                A25
