                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     STRICT ID LAWS DON’T STOP VOTERS:
               EVIDENCE FROM A U.S. NATIONWIDE PANEL, 2008–2018

                                       Enrico Cantoni
                                        Vincent Pons

                                     Working Paper 25522
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25522


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 2019, Revised March 2020




For suggestions that have improved this article, we are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Joshua
Angrist, Stephen Ansolabehere, Abhijit Banerjee, Tommaso Denti, Esther Duflo, Margherita
Fort, Ludovica Gazzè, German Gieczewski, Donald Green, Tetsuya Kaji, Benjamin Marx,
Benjamin Olken, Luca Repetto, and Marco Tabellini. We thank Catalist for providing the U.S.
individual-level panel data and responding to our queries about them, and Robert Freeman for
invaluable help setting up the data work. We gratefully acknowledge generous funding from the
Foundations of Human Behavior Initiative. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Enrico Cantoni and Vincent Pons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Strict ID Laws Don’t Stop Voters: Evidence from a U.S. Nationwide Panel, 2008–2018
Enrico Cantoni and Vincent Pons
NBER Working Paper No. 25522
February 2019, Revised March 2020
JEL No. D72

                                          ABSTRACT

U.S. states increasingly require identification to vote – an ostensive attempt to deter fraud that
prompts complaints of selective disenfranchisement. Using a difference-in-differences design on
a 1.6-billion-observations panel dataset, 2008–2018, we find that the laws have no negative effect
on registration or turnout, overall or for any group defined by race, gender, age, or party
affiliation. These results hold through a large number of specifications and cannot be attributed to
voters’ reaction against the laws, measured by campaign contributions and self-reported political
engagement. However, the likelihood that non-white voters were contacted by a campaign
increases by 5.4 percentage points, suggesting that parties’ mobilization might have offset modest
effects of the laws on the participation of ethnic minorities. Finally, strict ID requirements have
no effect on fraud – actual or perceived. Overall, our findings suggest that efforts to improve
elections may be better directed at other reforms.


Enrico Cantoni
University of Bologna
Department of Economics
Piazza Scaravilli 2, Bologna
Italy
enrico.cantoni@unibo.it

Vincent Pons
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 289
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vpons@hbs.edu
1    Introduction

    A tension exists in democracies between safeguarding the integrity of the vote and ensuring
broad participation. Electoral fraud – which takes the form of stuffing ballot boxes, buying or
intimidating voters, or impersonating citizens who are deceased, absentee, or no longer in resi-
dence – was prevalent in the early decades of Western democracies (e.g., Garrigou, 1992; Stokes
et al., 2013) and is still widespread in developing democracies today (e.g., Collier and Vicente,
2012). Combating such fraud is critical to build citizen confidence in election results and consol-
idate democratic regimes (Diamond, 1999; Berman et al., 2019). However, rules pursuing those
objectives can also weaken democracy if they keep eligible citizens away from the polling booth.
Compounding the matter, legislators have an incentive to push for restrictions if citizens enfran-
chised by flexible rules will likely vote for rival parties – or oppose restrictions if that will widen
their base.
    This paper presents empirical evidence on the consequences of strict ID laws in the context
of the United States, where the debate on control versus enfranchisement is particularly heated.
Between 2006 and 2018, 11 states, mostly with Republican majorities, adopted strict voter identi-
fication measures (Hicks et al., 2015).1 These laws require voters to present an accepted form of
identification document before voting. Voters who fail to do so can cast a provisional ballot but
their vote will be rejected unless they present proper ID to election officials within the next few
days. Other states either do not request identification or allow voters without ID to sign an affidavit
and cast a regular ballot.
    The effects of these measures on overall participation are ex-ante ambiguous. While strict ID
laws create additional costs for people without ID, those who want to vote can acquire it before the
election, and it is unclear what share of non-ID-holders would vote otherwise: groups of voters less
likely to hold an ID include Blacks and Hispanics, the young, the elderly, and poorer and less edu-
cated voters (Stewart, 2013; Ansolabehere and Hersh, 2017), who have long shown relatively low
propensity to vote (Wolfinger and Rosenstone, 1980; Verba et al., 1995; Schlozman et al., 2012).
Moreover, some citizens may become more likely to vote if the laws enhance their confidence in
the fairness of the election, similarly to the participation boost of improving beliefs about ballot
secrecy (Gerber et al., 2013b).
    Using a nationwide individual-level panel dataset, 2008–2018, and a difference-in-differences
(DD) design, we find that strict ID laws have no significant negative effect on registration or turnout,
overall or for any subgroup defined by age, gender, race, or party affiliation. These results hold
   1 These states are Arizona, Georgia, Indiana, Kansas, Mississippi, North Dakota, Ohio, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia,

and Wisconsin. North Dakota and Texas are the only states that experienced a reversal: both states adopted a strict ID
law in 2014, and both laws were struck down by federal courts in 2016. In 2018, North Dakota re-instituted a strict,
non-photo ID law.


                                                          2
through a large number of specifications and robustness checks. Our most demanding specification
controls for state, year, and voter fixed effects, along with state and voter time-varying controls.
Based on this specification, and considering the lower bound of the 95-percent confidence interval,
we can rule out that strict ID laws reduce aggregate registration and turnout by more than 2.0 and
2.7 percentage points. Focusing on voters living in adjacent counties across state borders, we can
further rule out that the laws reduce their participation by more than 1.3 percentage points.
    Most importantly, given the complaints of selective disenfranchisement, strict ID requirements
do not decrease the participation of ethnic minorities relative to whites. The lower bound of the 95-
percent confidence interval from our voter fixed effects regression rules out that the laws decrease
non-white turnout (relative to white) by more than 0.3 percentage points.
    Strict ID laws’ overall effects do not increase over time, they remain close to zero and non-
significant whether the election is a midterm or presidential election, and whether the laws are the
more restrictive type that stipulate photo IDs. Voters in treated states did have different turnout
levels prior to the laws, but they did not show different participation trends than others, lending
support for our identification strategy. Finally, in line with the lack of negative effect on the partic-
ipation of any subgroup of voters, strict ID laws do not affect the relative vote share of Democratic
and Republican candidates either.
    These results contrast with the large participation effects of other dimensions of election ad-
ministration: voter registration laws (Rosenstone and Wolfinger, 1978; Braconnier et al., 2017),
convenience voting (Gerber et al., 2013a; Hodler et al., 2015; Kaplan and Yuan, 2019), voting tech-
nology (Fujiwara, 2015), and distance to polling station (Cantoni, 2020). It could be that our null
findings reflect two mutually opposing forces: the laws’ negative effect on participation versus a
reaction of voters against a threat to their right to vote (Citrin et al., 2014; Biggers and Smith, 2018).
We do not find evidence of such backlash on the part of voters. Strict ID laws have no significant
effect on total campaign contributions, measured using administrative records from Bonica (2015),
or on an index of voter activity aggregating people’s self-reported having donated to a candidate,
the amount donated, their having attended a political meeting, put up a campaign sign, and volun-
teered for a campaign, all measured using the Cooperative Congressional Election Study surveys.
However, the laws increase the likelihood that non-white voters were contacted by a campaign by
5.4 percentage points, suggesting that parties and candidates who fear they might lose votes as a
result of strict ID requirements mobilize their supporters around this issue. These mobilization
efforts might have offset small direct negative effects on the participation of ethnic minorities.
    Previous studies comparing turnout in states with and without voter ID laws have found either
no effect (e.g., Mycoff et al., 2009; Erikson and Minnite, 2009; Highton, 2017; Pryor et al., 2019)
or negative effects of up to 4 percentage points on overall participation or on the participation of
Blacks and Hispanics (e.g., Alvarez et al., 2011; Government Accountability Office, 2014; Hajnal


                                                    3
et al., 2017; Highton, 2017).2 We improve on this literature in three critical ways. First, existing
estimates rely on state-level turnout aggregates, which make estimating heterogeneous effects by
voter characteristics difficult, or on national surveys, which have limited representativeness and
accuracy. National surveys’ samples can fail to reflect state voting populations; voters’ likelihood
to respond can differ across groups; and their turnout data are based on self-reports, which are un-
trustworthy (Silver et al., 1986; Ansolabehere and Hersh, 2012), or they use validation procedures
which vary across states and over time (Grimmer et al., 2018). By contrast, we use administra-
tive records of individual registration and turnout. Our data, collected by the political data vendor
Catalist, combine official voter registration and turnout records from all states and cover the near
universe of U.S. voting-age individuals, 2008–2018, resulting in a total of more than 1.6 billion
observations. This comprehensive individual-level dataset enables us to accurately measure the
effects of strict ID laws for different subgroups, which is critical given the concern of differential
negative impact on ethnic minorities. In addition, the fact that the data follow individuals over time
allows us to test the robustness of the results to specifications controlling for voter fixed effects and
estimating the laws’ impact out of individuals who faced them for some but not all years.
    Second, prior research has examined the effects of ID laws using samples of registered citizens
only, neglecting possible effects on voter registration (citizens who expect not to be able to vote
may not register in the first place), and possibly obtaining downward biased estimates of the laws’
effects on turnout (if citizens deterred from registering and absent from the sample have a low
propensity to vote). By contrast, Catalist data include unregistered voters, allowing us to measure
effects on both registration and turnout.
    Finally, previous papers have used unconvincing or untestable identification assumptions, such
as cross-sectional regressions or DD regressions with only two cross-sections. We use the full
length of our panel to show parallel pre-trends and bring support for the identification assumption
underlying our design; we demonstrate the robustness of our estimates to alternative specifications
including state and voter controls, linear state time trends (or state-by-year fixed effects, for hetero-
geneous effects), and voter fixed effects; and we show that our results hold when comparing voters
in contiguous county-pairs straddling a state border, which further enhances the causal credibility
of our estimates. This alternative estimation strategy requires restricting the sample to adjacent
counties in neighboring states and including county-pair-by-year fixed effects. It is only possible
because our dataset provides the location of each individual and contains a sufficiently large num-
ber of people living in these counties, thanks to its near-universal coverage of the U.S. voting-age
   2 Other  studies use surveys or administrative records to directly count people prevented from voting due to lack of
valid identification, and find small numbers (e.g., Ansolabehere, 2009; Henninger et al., 2018). However, administrative
counts of people who go to the polls and cannot vote for lack of ID exclude voters deterred from even trying. Estimates
based on survey responses might similarly be biased downwards, if non-voters underreport lacking a valid ID as the
reason for choosing not to vote, or upwards, if those without an ID overreport their desire to vote.



                                                           4
population.
    Furthermore, we give evidence on both sides of the debate: while most existing research has
focused on the effects of strict ID laws on participation, we also measure their effects on voter fraud
– the laws’ ostensive target. Research has shown that interventions such as deploying observers
(Ichino and Schündeln, 2012) or informing voters (Vicente, 2014) can successfully reduce fraud in
contexts where it is prevalent. Even if fraud is much more limited in the United States, the extensive
attention paid to existing cases could make any reduction consequential. We use two datasets listing
cases of voter fraud: one by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank, and another one
by News21, a more liberal initiative. We find no significant effect in either dataset. Irrespective of
any effect on fraud, the very existence of stricter controls at polling places could be perceived as an
improvement in election administration and increase voter confidence (Norris, 2004; Atkeson and
Saunders, 2007). Stewart et al. (2016) uses the Survey of the Performance of American Elections to
show that perceived occurrence of different types of fraud is similar in states with and without strict
ID laws. Our DD estimates use the same survey to show no significant impact on this outcome. In
addition, we use the American National Election Studies surveys to measure the laws’ impact on
citizens’ belief that elections were fair. Again, we find no significant effect.
    Our finding that voter ID laws have null effects is particularly salient in the United States, given
the country’s history of balancing the threat of fraud against the promise of enfranchisement. Well
into the 19th century, political parties took advantage of the lack of control over the identity of
people coming to vote. They hired large groups of “repeaters,” who walked from one polling place
to another and voted over and over again (Converse, 1972). After 1890, many states addressed
widespread fraud by requiring citizens to prove their identity and eligibility and sign a register be-
fore voting. Registration laws reduced voter impersonation, as voters’ signatures could be verified
on Election Day, and the registers were frequently purged of nonresidents and the deceased. How-
ever, they also created an additional burden for eligible voters, which has prevented many from
participating in elections ever since (Nickerson, 2015). Conversely, voting by mail, early voting,
and other forms of convenience voting, which have become more widespread since the turn of the
century, facilitate participation (e.g., Gerber et al., 2013a) but are more susceptible to fraud than
in-person voting on Election Day (Gronke et al., 2008).
    Over the last decade, strict ID laws have become one of the country’s most polarizing issues
(Hasen, 2012): they are supported by a large majority of the overall population, but with a growing
gap between Republicans and Democrats (Stewart et al., 2016). Advocates and opponents of these
laws disagree both on their benefits and costs.
    On benefits, advocates insist that electoral fraud still exists today – about one third of Americans
believe it is widespread (Kobach, 2011; Richman et al., 2014). They argue that strict ID laws are
required to deter voter impersonation, double-voting, and non-citizen voting, and to boost public


                                                   5
confidence in the integrity of elections (von Spakovsky, 2012). Opponents argue that voter fraud,
extremely rare, results from individual cases of initiative or error rather than a coordinated effort
(Minnite, 2010; Cottrell et al., 2018). On costs, advocates of strict laws argue that they impose only
a minor burden on voters, as proof of identification is also required for other activities, like cashing
a check. They point to the fact that most other Western democracies also require voters to show
identification (Commission on Federal Election Reform, 2005). Opponents observe that, unlike
other countries, the United States does not require its citizens to hold a national ID card, (Schaffer
and Wang, 2009), and as a result 5 to 19 percent of eligible voters (depending on the state) lack any
accepted form of identification (Government Accountability Office, 2014; Ansolabehere and Hersh,
2017). They see these laws as a deliberate and politically motivated attempt to disenfranchise
minorities, akin to the poll taxes, literacy tests, and other Jim Crow legislation prevalent before the
1965 Voting Rights Act (Rocha and Matsubayashi, 2014). The laws are enforced more stringently
against Blacks and Hispanics (Atkeson et al., 2014; White et al., 2015), who favor the Democratic
Party and are less likely to hold an ID in the first place.
    Our results suggest that efforts both to safeguard electoral integrity and enfranchise more voters
may be better served through other reforms.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides more information on
Catalist’s voter-level panel data and the other datasets we use. Section 3 presents the empirical
specifications and results. Section 4 concludes.


2     Data

2.1   Catalist Voter-Level Panel Data

    We measure voter turnout and registration using a novel individual-level panel dataset collected
by Catalist, a U.S. company that provides data and data-related services to progressive organiza-
tions and has a long history of collaborating with academics (e.g., Hersh and Nall, 2016; Nickerson
and Rogers, 2014). The panel covers the near universe of the U.S. voting-eligible population in the
2008, 2010, 2012, 2014, 2016, and 2018 presidential and midterm elections, resulting in a total of
about 1.6 billion observations.
    For each voter-election, the data report state and county of residence, registration status, voter
turnout, and party affiliation (in the 30 states in which it is available). The data also contain age,
race, and gender. These demographic characteristics are available for nearly all voters and have
been shown to be very reliable (Fraga, 2016, 2018). In eight states – Alabama, Florida, Georgia,
Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee – Catalist uses self-reports
of race that come directly from the voter rolls. For unregistered voters in these eight states and
all voters in other states, Catalist estimates race using voters’ full names, socio-demographic infor-

                                                   6
mation about their census block groups or tracts of residence, and, where available, self-reported
race from commercial and nonprofit databases. According to Fraga (2018), the average accuracy
of Catalist’s proprietary race model is very high (93.1 percent), with race-specific accuracy of
77.1, 79.8, and 97.8 percent for Black, Hispanic, and White voters, respectively.3 Next to race,
the Catalist data contain a categorical variable for the degree of confidence in a voter’s race esti-
mate (featuring five possible values: “highly likely,” “likely,” “possibly,” “uncoded,” and “no code
assigned”). For example, Catalist predicts some voters’ races with a relatively higher degree of
confidence when they reside in racially homogeneous areas or when they carry racially distinctive
names (Hersh, 2015). Appendix Table A5 shows that race-specific impact estimates remain very
close to those of Table 3 if we restrict the sample to voters whose race is estimated with highest
confidence. This indicates potential race misclassification is unlikely to bias our results.
     Catalist’s data on registered voters primarily come from official voter registration and turnout
records from all states. In addition, about 55 million unregistered voters are covered thanks to three
different data sources. First, Catalist keeps track of voters present in past voter files and absent
from the most recent one. Second, it identifies unregistered voters using information from data ag-
gregation firms (so-called “commercial data”) and customer files of retailers and direct marketing
companies. Finally, unregistered voters include individuals who moved to a state without register-
ing, according to commercial data or USPS National Change of Address data (NCOALink R ).
     Despite Catalist’s efforts and multiple data sources, coverage of the unregistered population
is likely incomplete: Jackman and Spahn (2018) estimate that at least 11 percent of the adult
citizenry – and a disproportionate share of minority voters – do not appear in commercial voter
lists like Catalist’s. This generates the following risk. Suppose some voters only register absent
strict ID laws. We will observe all these marginal registrants in states without ID requirements –
as the data cover the universe of the registered population – but might only observe a subset of
them in states with ID requirements – as they would not register in these states and coverage of the
unregistered population is incomplete. Under this scenario, our estimated registration effects would
be biased upward as we would underestimate the share of unregistered voters in state-years with
strict ID laws. Reassuringly, Appendix Table A2 shows that the probability of voters appearing in
or disappearing from the Catalist data is (conditionally) orthogonal to the presence of strict ID laws.
Specifications controlling for voter fixed effects further assuage this concern since they estimate the
effect out of individuals who faced a strict ID law for some but not all years. These individuals are
present in our sample before the implementation of the law, reducing the risk of sample selection
bias.
     Another potential issue is that some unregistered individuals in Catalist data may be ineligible to
   3 These  estimates indicate the fraction of 2016 CCES respondents matched to Catalist registration records with 90%
match confidence or greater and self-identifying with the indicated racial/ethnic group who have the same race/ethnicity
listed in the Catalist database.


                                                           7
vote. Yet, it seems implausible that the implementation of strict ID laws correlates systematically
with the presence of ineligible voters in the data. In addition, Tables 1 and A6 show that our
results hold when we restrict attention to registered voters, all of whom should be voting-eligible
individuals.
    Further details on the Catalist panel data are given in Appendix A.1.

2.2   Data on Mobilization and Campaign Contributions

    Measures of campaign contact and voter engagement come from the 2008—2018 post-electoral
Cooperative Congressional Election Study (CCES) surveys. We use questions on whether the in-
terviewee was contacted by a campaign, donated to a candidate or campaign (and how much she
contributed), attended a political meeting, posted a campaign sign, or volunteered for a campaign.4
We also construct a summary index of voter activity, defined to be the equally weighted average of
the z-scores of its components.
    Information on state-level campaign contributions is from Bonica (2015)’s Database on Ideol-
ogy, Money in Politics, and Elections (DIME), version 2.2. The data contain all political contri-
butions recorded by the Federal Elections Commission, 2004–2014. We compute the total dollar-
value contributed by residents of each state in each election cycle, normalize it by the state popula-
tion in that election year, and take the log, to reduce the impact of outlier states like New York.

2.3   Voter Fraud

    Measuring voter fraud represents a challenge, as federal and state agencies vary in the extent to
which they collect and share information on it (Government Accountability Office, 2014).
    We found two datasets covering reported cases of voter fraud. The first is by News21, an
investigative project funded by the Carnegie Corporation and the John S. and James L. Knight
Foundation. For the project, 24 students from 11 U.S. universities submitted more than 2,000
public-records requests and combed through nearly 5,000 court documents, official records, and
media reports about voter fraud. The result is a collection of 2,068 cases of suspected voter fraud
reported from 2000 through 2012. The database is admittedly incomplete, as the research team
received partial or no responses from several states, and even replying jurisdictions may have failed
to include some cases.5 The second dataset, by the Heritage Foundation, includes 1,277 proven
cases. Again, the Foundation’s website indicates that this database is non-exhaustive.6
    We define two outcomes separately in either dataset: the number of fraud cases documented
   4 For all survey data we use, exact questions are detailed in Appendix A.2.
   5 Further    details on News21 are available here:              https://votingrights.news21.com/article/
election-fraud-explainer/ Accessed: March 5, 2020.
   6 See https://www.heritage.org/voterfraud. Accessed: March 5, 2020.




                                                    8
in each state-year per 100,000 residents, and the number of cases potentially preventable by strict
identification requirements.7 We restrict attention to cases of fraud reported in or after 2004, the
last election year before the implementation of the country’s first strict ID law.
    In both datasets, the summaries are typically insufficient to reconstruct the election year the
alleged fraud took place. We thus take the reported years as given. We assign records with odd
years (i.e., years in which no general election took place) to the previous year’s treatment status
and covariates.
    Despite their limitations, these two datasets allow us to propose the first estimates of the effect
of strict ID laws on voter fraud.

2.4   Surveys on Perceived Election Integrity

     To assess if strict identification laws alter the perceived integrity of the electoral process, we
use the 2004, 2012, and 2016 waves of the American National Election Studies (ANES) survey and
the 2008–2016 waves of the Survey of the Performance of American Elections (SPAE). From the
ANES, we construct a dummy identifying respondents who think the past election was very fair or
fair. From the SPAE, we construct separate dummy outcomes for whether the respondent believes
the following frauds happen commonly or occasionally: pretending to be another voter, casting
multiple votes, non-citizens casting a ballot, casting an absentee ballot intended for another person,
officials changing the vote counts, stealing or tampering with ballots. As with voter activity, we
construct a standardized index of perceived election integrity based on the individual voter-fraud
outcomes.

2.5   Calendars of Voter ID Laws, Election Laws, and State Party Control

     We use the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) to identify the type of ID law en-
forced in each state-year. Following recent literature (e.g., Hajnal et al., 2017), our main treatment
is the presence of strict ID laws. Appendix Tables A14–A18 show that all results are substantively
identical using strict-photo ID laws as treatment.
     We also use the NCSL, together with data from Biggers and Hanmer (2015), to construct the
following state-level covariates. We build state-by-year indicators for the availability of no-excuse
absentee voting, early voting, all-mail voting, and Election-Day registration. Partisan control of
the state legislature is identified by three dummies indicating whether the state legislature was con-
trolled by Republicans, Democrats, or its control was split among the two main parties.8 Similarly,
   7 We  classify voter impersonation, duplicate voting, false registrations, and ineligible voting as preventable frauds.
Other categories are buying votes, altering the vote counts, fraudulent use or application of absentee ballots, illegal
assistance at the polls, and intimidation.
    8 We include Nebraska’s non-partisan state legislature in the final category.




                                                            9
the party affiliation of the governor can take three possible values, Democratic, Republican, and
independent.9


3     Results

3.1    Impact on turnout

    We first estimate the average impact of strict ID laws on all voters with DD specifications of the
following form:

                                                         0
                                     Yist = β IDst + Xist γ + αs + δt + µist ,                                    (1)

where Yist is a dummy equal to 1 if individual i in state s voted in election year t, IDst is a dummy
for whether the state used a strict ID law in that year, Xist is a vector of individual and state controls,
αs are state fixed effects, and δt election year fixed effects. Our individual controls include both
time-invariant (gender as well as race-by-state fixed effects) and time-varying covariates (age as
well as race-by-year fixed effects). All our state controls are time dependent (partisan control of
the state legislature, governor’s party, and other election administration rules affecting turnout:
no-excuse absentee voting, early voting, same-day registration, and all-mail voting). Since the
treatment varies at the state-year level, we follow Bertrand et al. (2004) and conservatively cluster
standard errors by state.10
    The coefficient of interest, β , measures the difference in average participation between states
with and without strict ID laws (henceforth, treated and control states), conditional on controls.
This represents the causal impact of the laws under the assumption that treated and control states
were on parallel trends, so that year-to-year turnout changes in control states correspond to the
counterfactual evolution in treated states, had they not implemented the law.
    The results from Equation (1) are presented in Table 1. Panel A restricts the sample to registered
citizens, following the existing literature. Using a specification with state and election-year fixed
effects but without any other control, we obtain an effect close to null and not statistically significant
(column 1). Angrist and Pischke (2015) suggest that credible DD estimates should be robust to the
inclusion or omission of covariates and linear state time trends. Accordingly, we test the robustness
of our result to three additional specifications.
    Namely, our second specification includes individual and state controls. Our third specification
also adds state time trends, to allow treated and control states to be on differential linear trajecto-
ries. While controlling for state time trends relaxes our identification assumption, it also decreases
    9 We include the District of Columbia in the final category.
    10 Appendix Tables A19–A23 show that the state-clustered asymptotic p-values of Tables 1–5’s coefficients are very
close to their wild cluster bootstrap counterparts (Esarey and Menger, 2017).


                                                         10
the precision and accuracy of the estimates for at least two reasons. First and most importantly,
using linear time trends in DD specifications is a source of bias. Neumark et al. (2014), Meer and
West (2016), and Goodman-Bacon (2019) note that with time-varying treatment effects, linear time
trends tend to absorb part of the effect of interest (i.e., to “overfit”), thus leading to attenuation bias.
Goodman-Bacon (2019) also points that controlling for time trends implicitly over-weights obser-
vations at the end of the panel, adding another source of bias (of a-priori unknown direction and
magnitude). Second, controlling for linear trends reduces the available treatment variation, making
resulting estimates less precise than un-detrended ones. These caveats mean that results obtained
using the third specification should be interpreted with caution. Our fourth and most demanding
specification includes voter fixed effects and hence estimates the impact using within-individual
variation, out of voters who faced a strict ID law for some but not all years because they experi-
enced a change in their state’s law (or because they moved between treated and control states).11
Corresponding estimates are unaffected by the possibility that strict ID laws changed people’s like-
lihood to appear in the Catalist sample, which is otherwise a possible source of bias as discussed
in Section 2.1. We find no significant effect in any of these alternative specifications (columns 2
through 4).
    In Panel B, we use the same specifications as in Panel A but include both registered and un-
registered individuals in the sample, which the existing literature has typically failed to do. This
is important, first, because effects on the turnout of registered citizens shown in Panel A miss pos-
sible effects on registration: while strict ID laws do not change registration requirements, citizens
who expect not to be able to vote might decide not to register in the first place, and citizens who
stop voting are more likely to be purged from voter rolls. In addition, restricting the sample to
registered voters might lead us to underestimate the laws’ true effects on turnout if they decrease
registration of citizens with lower propensity to vote than the average registrant. In other words,
the estimated null effect on registered voters’ turnout could reflect two negative effects: decreased
registration (leading to increased turnout of registered citizens, if those deterred from registering
have low propensity to vote) and decreased turnout of voters whose registration is unaffected. The
inclusion of both registered and unregistered individuals in Panel B addresses both issues. The re-
sults reported in this panel are thus our main estimates of the effects of strict ID laws on aggregate
participation.
    Panel B considers two outcomes: unconditional turnout (equal to 1 if the individual is registered
and votes, and 0 otherwise), in columns 1–4, and registration, in columns 5–8. The effects of strict
  11 Due   to the large sample size, the number of included covariates, and the architecture of Stata’s fixed-effects
routines, it is computationally very costly to estimate state-clustered standard errors in voter fixed-effects specifications.
Thus, standard errors for these specifications come from bivariate regressions of residualized outcomes on residualized
treatments with state-clustered standard errors. They do not account for the degrees of freedom lost by partialling
out the covariates and voter fixed effects, and are therefore underestimated. This works against finding the null result
which we obtain under this and other specifications.


                                                             11
ID laws on both outcomes are close to null and point estimates are not statistically significant in
any specification. Based on our most demanding specification controlling for state, year, and voter
fixed effects, along with state and voter controls, and considering the lower bound of the 95-percent
confidence interval, we can rule out that strict ID laws reduce aggregate registration and turnout
by more than 2.0 and 2.7 percentage points, respectively (columns 4 and 8). The precision of our
estimates is comparable across specifications

                                                  [Table 1 about here]

     In Appendix Table A3, we implement an alternative strategy based on Dube et al. (2010). We re-
strict our sample to adjacent counties in neighboring states to compare voters in contiguous county-
pairs straddling a state border. Focusing on voters living in adjacent counties across state borders
(and controlling for county-pair-by-year fixed effects) further enhances the causal credibility of our
estimates.12 In this table as well as in the remaining analysis on turnout, we use unconditional
turnout on the full sample as our outcome, unless specified otherwise. Again, we find no effect of
strict ID laws on turnout. Considering the lower bound of the 95-percent confidence interval, we
can rule out that strict ID laws reduce aggregate turnout by more than 1.3 percentage points.
     Table 2, Panel A, shows the robustness of the null result to different data. Specifically, in-
stead of using individual-level turnout data, we use McDonald’s aggregate state-level estimates,
whose denominator for turnout excludes non-citizens and ineligible felons (McDonald and Popkin,
2001). Since the share of ineligible voters fluctuates wildly across states and over time, McDonald’s
turnout estimates are considered more reliable than alternative measures using the Census Bureau
voting-age (or citizen voting-age) population. We use McDonald’s data for 2004–2018, since 2004
is the last year before Arizona and Ohio became the first states in the country to implement a strict
ID law.13 Also this strategy confirms the null result.

                                                  [Table 2 about here]

   Finally, to corroborate the validity of the parallel-trend assumption, we plot estimates of βτ ’s
from the following leads-and-lags regression:

                                                              0
                                     Yist = ∑ βτ IDτst + Xist γ + αs + δt + µist ,                                       (2)
                                              τ

where IDτst is a dummy equal to 1 if election year t occurs τ elections after state s first implemented
its strict ID law. τ ranges between -4 and +3. The βτ ’s measure the difference in participation
  12 As  in the specification controlling for voter fixed effects, we partial out county-pair-by-year fixed effects and voter
and state controls from the outcome and treatment, and run bivariate regressions of the residualized outcome on the
residualized treatment. Again, this leads us to slightly underestimate the standard errors.
   13 As shown in Appendix Table A4, we obtain very similar results when using the voting-age population instead of

the voting-eligible population as denominator (Panel A, columns 5 through 8) or when using McDonald’s turnout data
for 2008–2018, the period corresponding to the Catalist sample, instead of 2004–2018 (Panel B).

                                                            12
between treated and control states before (τ < 0) or after (τ ≥ 0) the first implementation of the law,
conditional on controls. All coefficients are normalized relative to the last pre-treatment election
(τ = −1).
    Figure 1 shows that turnout does not change differentially in treated states after the first im-
plementation of the law, consistent with the estimates in Table 1. Corroborating our identification
strategy, we also find no evidence of differential trends before implementation: though strict ID
laws are not randomly assigned to states (Appendix Table A1 shows slightly lower turnout level in
treated states), their implementation does not correlate with differential pre-trends in turnout.14

                                            [Figure 1 about here]

3.2   Heterogeneity analysis

    The null effects of strict ID laws on overall registration and turnout could potentially mask
negative effects on minorities (who are less likely to possess an accepted ID) and positive effects
on whites, or differences along other dimensions. To assess treatment impact heterogeneity, we
estimate regressions of the following form:

                                             0        0        0
                            Yist = IDst × Zist λ + Zist η + Xist γ + αs + δt + µist ,                         (3)

where Zist is the vector of characteristics along which we allow for heterogeneity in the treatment
effects. Since this specification does not include IDst uninteracted, the coefficients on the inter-
actions between IDst and Zist directly indicate the effects of strict ID laws on the corresponding
groups. In addition, we test for heterogeneous effects across groups.
    Table 3 reports the results for the main dimension of heterogeneity: race. We use the same
specifications as in Table 1, with two differences. First, all specifications control for race-by-year
and race-by-state fixed effects, to ensure that the interaction between IDst and race dummies is not
biased by race-specific shocks occurring in a given year (across all states) or in a given state (across
all years). Second, in column 4, we control for state-by-year fixed effects instead of state time
trends, thereby using a triple-difference framework. The inclusion of state-by-year fixed effects
allows us to account for a larger set of possible confounders. It precludes estimating the overall
effect of the laws, which varies at this level, but not differential effects by race.
    As shown in Panel A, in all specifications the point estimates are close to null for whites and
positive but statistically non-significant for non-whites. We cannot reject the null of identical ef-
fects on both groups. Considering the lower bounds of the 95-percent confidence intervals of the
differential effects estimated using our voter fixed effects specification (column 5), we can reject
  14 Appendix  Figure A1 reports event-study graphs based on McDonald’s turnout data, 2008–2018. The resulting
plots are remarkably similar to the main event-study graph based on the individual-level Catalist data (Figure 1).


                                                          13
that strict ID laws decrease non-white turnout (relative to white turnout) by more than 0.3 percent-
age points. Various other policies and institutions have been shown to induce substantially larger
differential turnout effects. For example, Cantoni (2020) estimates that the disproportionate effect
of distance to polling location widens the turnout gap between whites and non-whites by 1.6 to 4
percentage points, depending on the election; White (2019) shows that receiving a short jail sen-
tence causes black turnout to drop in the next election by approximately 13 percentage points, with
small and non-significant effects on white turnout; and Fraga (2016) reports that increasing the
within-district share of a race group from 10 to 50 percent would raise black and Hispanic general
election turnout by 9.3 to 6.4 percentage points, respectively, while the predicted effect on white
turnout is .6 percentage point.
    In Panel B, we allow the effects to differ by detailed race. Surprisingly, we find a large, positive,
and significant effect on Hispanics. The sign and magnitude of this effect are robust across spec-
ifications. The estimated difference relative to whites is 2.6 to 3.2 percentage points, depending
on the specification. The next subsection discusses one possible mechanism underlying this effect.
Instead, we do not find any significant direct or differential effect of the laws on blacks and on
voters of other races. The bottom line is that strict ID laws did not decrease the participation of any
race group.

                                         [Table 3 about here]

    The validity of this result relies on the assumption that turnout trends were parallel between
treated and control states for each race, which is supported by the lack of differential pre-trends in
race-specific event studies plotted in Figure 2.

                                         [Figure 2 about here]

    Estimates obtained when restricting attention to voters in adjacent counties across state borders
yield the consistent conclusion that the strict ID laws did not decrease the participation of any race
group (Table A3, columns 2–5). Appendix Tables A5 and A6 further show the robustness of our
race-heterogeneity results to restricting the sample to voters whose race is estimated with highest
confidence and to registered voters, respectively. (Table A6 uses the turnout of the registered voters
as outcome, as in Table 1, Panel A). Finally, in Appendix Table A7, we test the robustness of the
race heterogeneity results to state-by-race-level regressions. Specifically, we collapse the data by
race-state-years, counting ballots cast by voters of different races. We then construct two outcomes:
the natural logarithm of ballots cast and total ballots cast divided by estimates of the citizen voting-
age population based on U.S. Census Data in a given race-state-year. Point estimates and resulting
patterns of race heterogeneity are very similar to those reported in Table 3.
    Appendix Table A8 explores treatment impact heterogeneity along other individual characteris-
tics. We find that the laws did not negatively affect the participation of any group of voters defined

                                                   14
by age, gender, or party affiliation.15 This makes it unlikely that the laws changed electoral out-
comes. We test this prediction in Table 2, Panel B, and find that strict ID laws did not affect the
two-party Democratic vote share in elections from 2004 to 2018. In this panel, we pool results
from presidential and U.S. House elections. Units of observation are thus state-years, for presiden-
tial elections, and congressional district-years, for U.S. House elections. All point estimates are
positive but lower than 1 percentage point and not statistically significant. As shown in Appendix
Table A9, the results remain close to null and non-ignificant when we consider congressional and
presidential elections separately.
     Finally, we test whether specific components of the laws or contextual factors are associated
with larger effects. Strict ID laws requiring photo identification (like a driver’s license or a state-
issued identification card) could affect participation more negatively than those also allowing non-
photo IDs (like a bank statement or utility bill). However, we do not find support for this hypoth-
esis (Appendix Figures A2 and A3 and Tables A14 through A18). Out of 30 coefficients shown
in Appendix Tables A14 and A16, only one is negative and significant (at the 10 percent level). It
corresponds to the overall effect of strict photo ID laws on registration, in the specification control-
ling for state time trends, which is the least reliable as discussed in Section 3.1. The effects of strict
ID laws could also vary over time: they could be largest immediately following implementation,
if people are confused by the new rules, or escalate later, if the laws become more stringently en-
forced. Alternatively, the effects might vary with election type: they might be larger in presidential
elections, if these attract more voters unlikely to have an ID (Burden, 2018), or in midterms, if
these elections’ lower salience makes the administrative cost of acquiring an ID more prohibitive.
However, we find no evidence of differential effects along any of these dimensions (Appendix Ta-
ble A10). If anything, the overall and race-specific event studies show more positive (although
generally non-significant) effects on turnout in later elections (Figures 1 and 2).

3.3   Mobilization against the laws

    The null average effect of strict ID laws on participation and the positive effect on Hispanics
could result from the combination of a direct negative effect of the new requirements imposed by
the laws, on one hand, and mobilization against them, on the other.
    First, parties and candidates who fear they might lose votes as a result of the laws might mo-
bilize their supporters around this issue and they might help voters without an ID acquiring one
(Citrin et al., 2014; Neiheisel and Horner, 2019). A large body of evidence shows that get-out-
the-vote campaigns can have large participation effects (Gerber and Green, 2000, 2015), including
among disenfranchised members of ethnic minorities (Garcia Bedolla and Michelson, 2012; Pons
  15 Partyaffiliation is only available for one of the treated states. Corresponding estimates should thus be interpreted
with caution.


                                                          15
and Liegey, 2019), and that information and administrative help provided in person to voters can
help them overcome obstacles to voting such as registration requirements (Nickerson, 2015; Bra-
connier et al., 2017). While we do not measure the extent to which electoral campaigns specifically
refer to the laws or provide assistance to obtain acceptable ID, people’s self-reported likelihood to
be contacted by a campaign, in the CCES post-election survey data, is a good proxy for campaign
intensity. We report the effects of strict ID laws on this outcome in Table 4, columns 1 and 2.
    Second, even absent party mobilization, voters belonging to groups least likely to have an ID
might perceive these laws as an attempt to deprive them of their rights, and become more likely
to vote and engage politically as a result (Valentino and Neuner, 2017). Biggers and Smith (2018)
report large effects on turnout of being threatened to be purged from voter rolls, particularly for
Hispanics, and explain it based on psychological reactance theory (Brehm, 1966). According to
this theory, a threat to a right (here, the right to vote) can enhance its perceived value and lead
individuals to take steps to protect it even if they rarely used it previously. We do not have data
on feelings associated with strict ID laws, but can estimate their effects on forms of political en-
gagement beyond voting. After each election, the CCES surveys record whether people attended
political meetings, posted a campaign sign, volunteered for a campaign, donated to a candidate or a
campaign, and how much they contributed. We report effects on a standardized index aggregating
these five variables in Table 4, columns 3 and 4, and on the individual outcomes in Appendix Table
A11. Finally, we measure effects on total campaign contributions by state and election year using
official data from the Federal Election Commission collected by Bonica (2015) (Table 4, columns
5 and 6).

                                        [Table 4 about here]

    Panel A of Table 4 shows the average effect of strict ID laws on these outcomes for all voters.
We find no significant overall impact on any variable, whether we only control for year and state
fixed effects or also include state controls and, for individual-level outcomes, voter controls.
    Panel B explores treatment impact heterogeneity along race. The effect on the CCES index of
voter activity is small and non-significant for both whites and non-whites. As shown in Appendix
Table A11, Panel B, we only find a positive and significant effect (at the 10 percent level) for non-
whites on one out of five components of the index (i.e., volunteered for a campaign, in column 9).
For this outcome, the differential effect on non-whites compared to whites is significant at the 5 and
10 percent levels in the specifications with and without state and voter controls, respectively. But
overall, we do not find any systematic evidence that individual reaction against the laws alleviated
direct negative effects.
    Instead, we do observe a large and positive effect on campaign contact among non-white voters.
The laws increased the likelihood that these voters were contacted by a campaign by 5.4 percentage


                                                 16
points, which is significant at the 1 percent level (column 1). This effect is robust in significance
and magnitude to the inclusion of state and voter controls (column 2). White voters were not more
likely to be contacted by campaigns, differently than non-whites, leading to a differential effect of
5.1 percentage points. This differential effect remains significant (at the 1 percent level) and of
almost identical magnitude when using strict-photo ID laws as treatment (Appendix Table A17).
    This result should be interpreted with caution since it is based on self-reported survey data and
voters may misremember whether or not they were contacted during the campaign. In addition,
even if the increase in campaign contact is real, parties might have targeted a subset of non-white
voters unlikely to increase their participation as a result of being contacted. Our data do not allow
us to directly measure the consequences of increased party mobilization for voter participation.
However, we can test whether increases in the likelihood to be contacted by a campaign and in
participation are observed for the same groups of voters. Interestingly, as shown in Appendix
Table A12, Panel B, columns 1 and 2, the effect on campaign contact is particularly strong (6.0
percentage points) among Hispanics, who also showed a positive effect on participation, suggesting
that the former impact could contribute to explain the latter. The effect on campaign contact is less
precisely estimated but also large and positive for the residual race category and it is smaller and
non-significant for Blacks, whose participation was not affected by the strict ID laws.16
    Overall, these patterns bring suggestive indirect evidence that the increase in campaign contact
was consequential, but they do not allow us to estimate the magnitude of plausible downstream
effects on voter turnout. For this, we turn to the existing get-out-the-vote literature. In their review
of a large number of experiments conducted in the U.S., Gerber and Green (2015) report that it takes
about fifteen canvassing contacts to generate one vote among voters whose baseline propensity to
vote lies between 30 and 50 percent. The average turnout of non-white voters in the sample was
within this range, as shown in Table 3, Panel A, column 1. Therefore, taken at face value, the
increase in campaign contact might have increased the participation of non-white voters by about
0.34 percentage points (5.1 percentage points divided by 15). In other words, mobilization against
strict ID laws might have offset direct negative effects on the participation of ethnic minorities of
about one third of a percentage point.

3.4   Voter fraud and perception of fraud

   Finally, we explore the effects of strict ID laws on voter fraud and beliefs on election integrity.
Studies of crime face a well-known challenge: increases in crime statistics can reflect changes in
both the number of committed and reported crimes, and many treatments can have both direct and
  16 The  effect on the CCES index of voter activity is non-significant for any race, in any specification, except for
Blacks, in the specification without state and voter controls (column 3). When adding these controls, the effect is no
longer statistically significant (column 4).



                                                         17
reporting effects (e.g., Bhuller et al., 2013; Draca et al., 2018). Similarly, strict ID laws might affect
both the actual number of fraud cases and the likelihood that they get detected and reported. Other
limitations inherent to the data available to us and discussed in Section 2 compound this issue. With
these caveats in mind, we report the effects on the extent of fraud in Table 5. We consider both the
total number of cases (columns 1–2 and 5–6) and the subset of cases belonging to categories more
directly addressed by strict ID requirements (columns 3–4 and 7–8), as described in Section 2.3.
The total number of cases reported in both the News21 and Heritage Foundation datasets is very
low, corroborating existing studies (Minnite, 2010; Cottrell et al., 2018): 0.08 and 0.02 cases per
year per 100,000 residents, respectively. About one third (0.03) and one half (0.01) of these cases
were directly addressed by the laws. We do not find any significant effect of the laws on either
outcome in either dataset.
    The lack of effect on detected fraud does not preclude effects on voters’ beliefs on election
integrity. However, using SPAE data, we find the laws had no significant effect on the perceived
occurrence of voter impersonation, multiple voting, and non-citizen voting (columns 11–16). The
effect on an index aggregating these outcomes (along with the other outcomes reported in Appendix
Table A13) is small and non-significant (columns 9–10). Similarly, the laws did not significantly
affect citizens’ belief that the election was fair, recorded in the ANES (columns 17–18).

                                          [Table 5 about here]


4   Conclusion

    For all the heated debates around strict voter ID laws, our analysis of their effects obtains
mostly null results. First, the fears that strict ID requirements would disenfranchise disadvantaged
populations have not materialized. Using the largest individual-level dataset ever assembled to
study voter participation, we do not find any negative effect on overall turnout and registration rates
or on any group defined by race, age, gender, or party affiliation. Close to null turnout effects are
robust to the choice of the DD specification and to a large number of robustness checks. While we
cannot entirely rule out the interpretation that this null result may be due to voters reacting against
laws they felt could disenfranchise them, we do not find any effect on campaign contributions or
on other forms of political engagement different than voting. However, we find a 5.4 percentage
points increase in the fraction of non-white voters contacted by parties, bringing some support
for the alternative interpretation that parties responded to the laws by mobilizing their supporters
around them. It remains that based on existing estimates of the impact of campaign contact, these
mobilization efforts might only have offset direct negative effects on the participation of ethnic
minorities of about one third of a percentage point.



                                                   18
    Second, contrary to the argument used by the Supreme Court in the 2008 case Crawford v. Mar-
ion County to uphold the constitutionality of one of the early strict ID laws, we find no significant
impact on fraud or public confidence in election integrity. This result weakens the case for adopting
such laws in the first place.
    Because states adopted strict ID laws only 4 to 14 years ago, our results should be interpreted
with caution: we find negative participation effects neither in the first election after the adoption
of the laws nor in following ones, but cannot rule out that such effects will arise in the future. En-
forcement of the laws already varies across locations and could very well become more stringent
over time, especially if polarization on the issue increases. Partisan mobilization against the laws
could also weaken over time. So we do not see our results as the last word on this matter – quite the
opposite, we hope that they will provide guidance on the types of data and empirical strategies oth-
ers can use to analyze the longer-run effects of the laws in a few years. For now, there is a real need
to improve the administration of U.S. elections, including voting technology, and increase faith in
elections (Alvarez et al., 2012), but strict ID laws are unlikely to do that. At the same time, low
and unequal participation represent real threats to democracy – but these may be more effectively
addressed by reducing other barriers to voting, such as voter registration costs (Braconnier et al.,
2017) or long travel and waiting time in areas with low polling station density (Cantoni, 2020).




                                                  19
                                      Figure 1: Event-Study Graph of the Turnout Effect of Strict ID Laws
                      .15
                      .1
        Voter Turnout (Coefficient)
               0        .05
                      -.05
                      -.1




                                      -4       -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3
                                                    Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict ID Law

Notes: The figure plots event-study estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from a
regression (in the form of equation [2]) run on all registered and unregistered voters. The sample
includes treated and control states. To avoid picking up variation from 2016 North Dakota, 2016
Texas, and 2018 Texas (which, unlike 2014 and 2018 North Dakota and 2014 Texas, did not
enforce a strict law), we define IDτ=1           τ=1          τ=2
                                   ND,2016 = IDT X,2016 = IDT X,2018 = 0.




                                                                         20
                                   Figure 2: Event-Study Graphs of the Turnout Effect of Strict ID Laws by Race

                                        (A) Non-Hispanic Whites                                                                                                                     (B) Non-Hispanic Blacks
              .15




                                                                                                                                                    .15
              .1




                                                                                                                                                    .1
Voter Turnout (Coefficient)




                                                                                                                                      Voter Turnout (Coefficient)
                .05




                                                                                                                                                      .05
       0




                                                                                                                                             0
              -.05




                                                                                                                                                    -.05
              -.1




                                                                                                                                                    -.1

                              -4   -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3                                                                -4        -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3
                                        Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict ID Law                                                                                       Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict ID Law



                                                  (C) Hispanics                                                                                                                         (D) Other Races
                                                                                                                      .15
              .15
              .1




                                                                                                                      .1
Voter Turnout (Coefficient)




                                                                                                        Voter Turnout (Coefficient)
                .05




                                                                                                                        .05
       0




                                                                                                               0
              -.05




                                                                                                                      -.05
              -.1




                                                                                                                      -.1




                              -4   -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3
                                        Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict ID Law
                                                                                                                                             -4                          -3          -2          -1           0           1               2   3
                                                                                                                                                                              Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict ID Law

Notes: Each panel plots event-study estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from a separate
regression (in the form of equation [2]) run on all registered and unregistered voters of a given
race. The sample includes treated and control states. To avoid picking up variation from 2016
North Dakota, 2016 Texas, and 2018 Texas (which, unlike 2014 and 2018 North Dakota and 2014
                                                  τ=1      = IDτ=1           τ=2
Texas, did not enforce a strict law), we define IDND,2016       T X,2016 = IDT X,2018 = 0.




                                                                                                       21
                     Table 1: Turnout and Registration Effects of Strict ID Laws

                                        1(Voted)                              1(Registered)
                           (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)           (8)
                                                 Panel A. Only Registered Voters
1(Strict ID Law)          -.001      -.001    -.011     -.008         -         -        -             -
                          (.013)     (.011)   (.019)    (.015)
Outcome Mean               .620      .620       .620        .620

                                            Panel B. Registered and Unregistered Voters
1(Strict ID Law)          -.007      -.001     -.008     -.001       -.015     -.004    -.008        -.001
                          (.015)     (.012)    (.014)    (.013)      (.012)    (.011)   (.007)       (.010)
Outcome Mean               .428      .428       .428        .428      .686       .686      .686       .686

Year FEs                    9         9          9          9          9          9         9          9
State FEs                   9         9          9          9          9          9         9          9
State & Voter Controls                9          9          9                     9         9          9
State Linear Trends                              9                                          9
Voter FEs                                                   9                                          9
Notes: Each cell reports estimates from a separate regression run on the Catalist data. The sample for
Panels A and B consists of, respectively, registered voters and both registered and unregistered voters. The
sample size in the two panels is 1,100,864,771 and 1,604,600,687, respectively. State controls are dummies
for the availability of no-excuse absentee voting, early in-person voting, all-mail voting, and Election-Day
registration, along with indicators for the partisan composition of the state legislature and the governor's
party as of Election Day. Voter controls are gender, dummies for the voter's age ventile (defined in the full
panel data and including an additional dummy for voters with missing age information), and dummies for
whether the voter is black, Hispanic, or of other non-white, non-Hispanic (or unknown) race, along with
interactions of these race dummies with states and years. For computational reasons, voter FEs
specifications rely on Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem. From both the treatment and the outcome, we first
partial out voter FEs and the full set of controls used in columns 2 and 6. We then run a simple bivariate
regression of the residualized outcome on the residualized treatment. Standard errors clustered at the state
level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                       22
      Table 2: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Aggregate Outcomes

                          (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)
                        Panel A. Ballots Cast/VEP (McDonald's Data)
1(Strict ID Law)          .006         .006       .0001       .001
                         (.012)       (.013)     (.0118)     (.014)
Outcome Mean              .528          .528        .517          .517
N                         408           408         408           408

Year FEs                   9             9            9            9
State FEs                  9             9            9            9
State-Year Controls                      9            9            9
VEP Weights                                           9            9
State Linear Trends                                                9

                            Panel B. Democratic 2-Party Vote Share
1(Strict ID Law)          .0004        .009         .006         -
                         (.0189)      (.017)       (.010)        -
Outcome Mean              .520         .520         .520            -
N                        3,684        3,684        3,684            -

Year FEs                    9             9            9
State FEs                   9             9            9
State-Year Controls                       9            9
State Linear Trends                                    9
Notes: Panel A reports estimated turnout effects based on Michael
McDonald's state turnout data, 2004-2018 (2004 is the last year before
Arizona and Ohio became the first states in the country to implement a
strict ID law). Turnout is defined as the ratio between ballots cast for
the highest office on the ballot and the voting-eligible population (VEP)
in a given state-year. Panel B reports estimated effects on the
Democratic 2-party vote share based on constituency-level election
results, 2004-2018, collected by the MIT Election Data and Science
Lab. The sample in Panel B pools together congressional and
presidential elections; units of observation are state-years (or DC) or
congressional district-years. Standard errors clustered at the state level
in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10



                                   23
                         Table 3: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Race

                                              Outcome: 1(Voted)
                           Outcome Mean               Impact Estimates
                                (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)                         (5)
                                        Panel A. Whites vs. Non-Whites
1(Strict ID Law)×White          .458     -.006       -.003                                    -.005
                                         (.015)      (.014)                                   (.014)
1(Strict ID Law)×non-White      .340      .006        .006                                     .009
                                         (.014)      (.010)                                   (.010)
 nonwhite        white
ȕ           -ȕ                                     .013           .009          .007           .014
                                                  (.008)         (.007)        (.007)         (.008)
                                                    Panel B. By Detailed Race
1(Strict ID Law)×White               .458         -.006        -.003                          -.005
                                                  (.015)       (.014)                         (.014)
1(Strict ID Law)×Hispanic            .295          .025 *       .022 ***                       .026    ***

                                                  (.015)       (.008)                         (.009)
1(Strict ID Law)×Black               .380         -.009        -.006                          -.004
                                                  (.014)       (.013)                         (.012)
1(Strict ID Law)×Other Race          .330          .012         .007                           .008
                                                  (.028)       (.022)                         (.021)
 hispanic     white
ȕ           -ȕ                                     .032    ***    .026    **    .026    ***    .030    **

                                                  (.011)         (.011)        (.006)         (.012)
 black      white
ȕ        -ȕ                                       -.003          -.003         -.003           .001
                                                  (.008)         (.006)        (.006)         (.006)
 other      white
ȕ        -ȕ                                        .019           .010         -.001           .013
                                                  (.016)         (.010)        (.006)         (.010)

Race-by-Year FEs                                     9            9           9             9
Race-by-State FEs                                    9            9           9             9
State & Voter Controls                                            9           9             9
State-by-Year FEs                                                             9
Voter FEs                                                                                   9
Notes: The sample (N = 1,604,600,687) consists of both registered and unregistered voters. See
notes to Table 1 for details on the controls. Column 1 reports mean turnout in the interacting
category. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                24
Table 4: Effects of Strict ID Laws on CCES Campaign Contact, Voter Activity, and DIME Cam-
paign Contributions

                                      Was Contacted                   Index            Contributions
                                       by Campaign              of Voter Activity ln($1k/100k residents)
                                     (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)      (5)         (6)
                                                          Panel A. Average Effect
1(Strict ID Law)                     .015           .012        -.002       -.009     .039        .057
                                    (.019)         (.018)       (.015)      (.014)   (.123)      (.114)

Year & State FEs                      9              9             9         9           9         9
State & Voter Controls                               9                       9                     9

                                                        Panel B. Whites vs. Non-Whites
1(Strict ID Law)×White               .003           .0001         -.005       -.012
                                    (.020)         (.0186)        (.016)      (.015)
1(Strict ID Law)×non-White           .054    ***     .051  ***     .004       .0004
                                    (.019)          (.016)        (.014)     (.0139)

 nonwhite    white
ȕ           -ȕ                       .051    ***    .051    ***    .008      .013
                                    (.018)         (.017)         (.011)    (.009)

Race-by-Year FEs                        9               9              9           9      9            9
Race-by-State FEs                       9               9              9           9      9            9
State & Voter Controls                                  9                          9                   9
Outcome Mean                           .640            .640           .000        .000  14.548      14.548
N                                    221,926        221,926        308,704 308,704       306          306
Notes: The voter-level outcome for columns 1-2 is a dummy for whether a CCES survey respondent
reported being contacted by a campaign in the last general election. The voter-level outcome for columns 3-
4 is a summary index (i.e., sum of z-scores of individual components) of five variables measuring voter
engagement in the last general election and recorded in the CCES data: whether people attended political
meetings, posted a campaign sign, volunteered for a campaign, donated to a candidate or a campaign, and
how much they contributed. The outcome for columns 5-6 is the log of political contributions to candidates
and parties by state-year per 100k residents, 2004-2014. For a description of state controls, see the notes
to Table 1. Voter controls in columns 1-4 are education, gender, income, and race-by-year and race-by-
state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                    25
                               Table 5: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Reported and Perceived Frequency of Voter Fraud

                                     News21          News21 Preventable          Heritage        Heritage Preventable
                              Frauds/100k Residents Frauds/100k Residents Frauds/100k Residents Frauds/100k Residents
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)      (7)         (8)
     1(Strict ID Law)            .045       .025       .015       .004       .001        -.003     .005        .003
                                (.106)     (.101)     (.044)     (.046)     (.009)       (.010)   (.009)      (.011)

     Year & State FEs             9           9            9           9            9             9           9           9
     State & Voter Controls                   9                        9                          9                       9
     Outcome Mean                .078        .078         .033        .033         .020          .020        .013        .013
     N                           459         459          459         459          765           765         765         765
                                      SPAE                     SPAE                      SPAE                     SPAE                     ANES
                              Perceived Fraud Index     Voter Impersonation         Multiple Voting        Non-Citizen Voting           Fair Election
                                 (9)         (10)         (11)       (12)           (13)        (14)         (15)       (16)          (17)         (18)
     1(Strict ID Law)            .003        .007        -.004      -.002          -.009       -.013       -.020       -.024          .008         .018




26
                                (.030)      (.029)       (.017)     (.015)         (.023)      (.022)       (.024)     (.025)        (.045)       (.038)

     Year & State FEs               9            9           9           9            9            9            9            9          9           9
     State & Voter Controls                      9                       9                         9                         9                      9
     Outcome Mean                  .000         .000        .210        .210         .209         .209         .275         .275       .698        .698
     N                            42,600       42,385     42,488       42,277      30,534        30,424      30,533       30,423     11,397       11,397
     Notes: Regressions in columns 1-4 are at the state-year level and their sample includes both even (i.e., general election) and odd years. The
     News21 and Heritage data cover, respectively, the 2004-2012 and 2004-2018 years. Preventable frauds include voter impersonation, duplicate
     voting, false registration, and ineligible voting. The outcome for columns 9-10, described in the text, is constructed by normalizing and aggregating
     SPAE responses used as outcomes in columns 11-16 and in Appendix Table A13. The outcomes for columns 11-16 are dummies for whether
     SPAE survey respondents perceive different types of fraud as happening frequently or occasionally. The outcome for columns 17-18 is a dummy
     for whether ANES survey respondents agree the last election was "very fair" or "fair" (ANES 2004) or whether they agree ballots were counted
     fairly "very often" or "fairly often" (ANES 2012), "all of the time" or "most of the time" (ANES 2016). Standard errors clustered at the state level
     in parentheses.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
References

Alvarez, R. Michael, Delia Bailey, and Jonathan N. Katz, “An empirical Bayes approach to
  estimating ordinal treatment effects,” Political Analysis, 2011, 19 (1), 20–31.

  , Jonathan N. Katz, Charles III Stewart, Ronald L. Rivest, Stephen Ansolabehere, and
  Thad E. Hall, “Voting: What Has Changed, What Hasn’t, & What Needs Improvement,” Tech-
  nical Report, Caltech/MIT Voting Technology Project 2012.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, Mastering ’Metrics: The Path from Cause to Effect,
 Princeton University Press, 2015.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, “Effects of Identification Requirements on Voting: Evidence from the
 Experiences of Voters on Election Day,” PS: Political Science & Politics, 2009, 42 (01), 127–
 130.

   and Eitan D. Hersh, “Validation: What big data reveal about survey misreporting and the real
  electorate,” Political Analysis, 2012, 20 (4), 437–459.

  and , “The Measure of American Elections,” in Barry C. Burden and Charles III Stewart, eds.,
  Voter Registration: The Process and Quality of Lists, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
  2014, chapter 3, pp. 61–90.

  and , “ADGN: An Algorithm for Record Linkage Using Address, Date of Birth, Gender and
  Name,” Statistics and Public Policy, 2017, 4 (1), 1–10.

Atkeson, Lonna Rae and Kyle L. Saunders, “The Effect of Election Administration on Voter
  Confidence: A Local Matter?,” PS - Political Science and Politics, 2007, 40 (4), 655–660.

  , Yann P. Kerevel, R. Michael Alvarez, and Thad E. Hall, “Who Asks for Voter Identification?
  Explaining Poll-Worker Discretion,” Journal of Politics, 2014, 76 (4), 944–957.

Berman, Eli, Michael Callen, Clark C. Gibson, James D. Long, and Arman Rezaee, “Elec-
  tion Fairness and Government Legitimacy in Afghanistan,” Journal of Economic Behavior &
  Organization, 2019, 168, 292–317.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should We Trust
  Differences-in-Differences Estimates?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1),
  249–275.




                                              27
Bhuller, Manudeep, Tarjei Havnes, Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad, “Broadband Internet
  : Broadband Internet : An Information Superhighway to Sex Crime?,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 2013, 80 (4), 1237–1266.

Biggers, Daniel R. and Daniel A. Smith, “Does threatening their franchise make registered voters
  more likely to participate? Evidence from an aborted voter purge,” British Journal of Political
  Science, 2018, pp. 1–22.

   and Michael J. Hanmer, “Who Makes Voting Convenient? Explaining the Adoption of Early
  and No-Excuse Absentee Voting in the American States,” State Politics and Policy Quarterly,
  2015, 15 (2), 192–210.

Bonica, Adam, “Database on Ideology, Money in Politics, and Elections (DIME),” 2015.

Braconnier, Celine, Jean-Yves Dormagen, and Vincent Pons, “Voter Registration Costs and
  Disenfranchisement: Experimental Evidence from France,” American Political Science Review,
  2017, 111 (3), 584–604.

Brehm, Jack W., A theory of psychological reactance, New York: Academic Press, 1966.

Burden, Barry C, “Disagreement over ID Requirements and Minority Voter Turnout,” The Journal
  of Politics, 2018, 80 (3), 1060–1063.

Cantoni, Enrico, “A Precinct Too Far: Turnout and Voting Costs,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 2020, 12 (1), 61–85.

Citrin, Jack, Donald P. Green, and Morris Levy, “The Effects of Voter ID Notification on Voter
  Turnout: Results from a Large-Scale Field Experiment,” Election Law Journal: Rules, Politics,
  and Policy, 2014, 13 (2), 228–242.

Collier, Paul and Pedro C. Vicente, “Violence, bribery, and fraud: The political economy of
  elections in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Public Choice, 2012, 153 (1-2), 117–147.

Commission on Federal Election Reform, “Building Confidence in U.S. Elections,” Technical
  Report 2005.

Converse, Philip E, “Change in the American Electorate,” in “The human meaning of social
  change,” New York: Russell Sage, 1972, pp. 263–337.

Cottrell, David, Michael C. Herron, and Sean J. Westwood, “An exploration of Donald Trump’s
  allegations of massive voter fraud in the 2016 General Election,” Electoral Studies, 2018, 51,
  123–142.

                                               28
Diamond, Larry, Developing Democracy, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999.

Draca, Mirko, Theodore Koutmeridis, and Stephen Machin, “The Changing Returns to Crime:
  Do Criminals Respond to Prices?,” Review of Economic Studies, 2018.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich, “Minimum Wage Effects Across State
 Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2010,
 92 (4), 945–964.

Erikson, Robert S. and Lorraine C. Minnite, “Modeling Problems in the Voter Identification
  Voter Turnout Debate,” Election Law Journal, 2009, 8 (2), 85–101.

Esarey, Justin and Andrew Menger, “Practical and Effective Approaches to Dealing with Clus-
  tered Data,” Political Science Research and Methods, 2017.

Fraga, Bernard L., “Candidates or Districts? Reevaluating the Role of Race in Voter Turnout,”
  American Journal of Political Science, 2016, 60 (1), 97–122.

  , The Turnout Gap: Race, Ethnicity, and Political Inequality in a Diversifying America, Cam-
  bridge University Press, 2018.

Fujiwara, Thomas, “Voting Technology, Political Responsiveness, and Infant Health: Evidence
  From Brazil,” Econometrica, 2015, 83 (2), 423–464.

Garcia Bedolla, Lisa and Melissa R. Michelson, Mobilizing inclusion: Transforming the elec-
 torate through get-out-the-vote campaigns, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012.

Garrigou, Alain, Le Vote et la vertu, comment les Français sont devenus électeurs, Paris: Presses
 de Sciences Po, 1992.

Gerber, Alan S. and Donald P. Green, “The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and Direct
 Mail on Voter Turnout: A field experiment,” American Political Science Review, 2000, 94 (3),
 653–663.

   and    , Get out the vote, Brookings Institution Press, 2015.

  , Gregory A. Huber, and Seth J. Hill, “Identifying the Effect of All-Mail Elections on Turnout:
  Staggered Reform in the Evergreen State,” Political Science Research and Methods, 2013, 1 (1),
  91–116.

  , , David Doherty, Conor M. Dowling, and Seth J. Hill, “Do Perceptions of Ballot Secrecy
  Influence Turnout? Results from a Field Experiment,” American Journal of Political Science,
  2013, 57 (3), 537–551.

                                                29
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew, “Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Timing,”
 NBER Working Paper 25018, 2019.

Government Accountability Office, “Issues related to state voter identification laws,” Technical
 Report 2014.

Grimmer, Justin, Eitan Hersh, Marc Meredith, Jonathan Mummolo, and Clayton Nall, “Ob-
 stacles to Estimating Voter ID Laws’ Effect on Turnout,” Journal of Politics, 2018, 80 (3), 1045–
 1051.

Gronke, Paul, Eva Galanes-Rosenbaum, Peter A. Miller, and Daniel Toffey, “Convenience
 Voting,” Annual Review of Political Science, 2008, 11 (1), 437–455.

Hajnal, Zoltan, Nazita Lajevardi, and Lindsay Nielson, “Voter Identification Laws and the Sup-
 pression of Minority Votes,” The Journal of Politics, 2017, 79 (2), 363–379.

Hasen, Richard, The Voting Wars, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012.

Henninger, Phoebe, Marc Meredith, and Michael Morse, “Who Votes Without Identification?
 Using Affidavits from Michigan to Learn About the Potential Impact of Strict Photo Voter Iden-
 tification Laws,” Working Paper, 2018, pp. 1–34.

Hersh, Eitan D., Hacking the Electorate: How Campaigns Perceive Voters, Cambridge University
 Press, 2015.

   and Clayton Nall, “The Primacy of Race in the Geography of Income-Based Voting: New
  Evidence from Public Voting Records,” American Journal of Political Science, 2016, 60 (2),
  289–303.

Hicks, William D., Seth C. McKee, Mitchell D. Sellers, and Daniel A. Smith, “A Principle or a
  Strategy? Voter Identification Laws and Partisan Competition in the American States,” Political
  Research Quarterly, 2015, 68 (1), 18–33.

Highton, Benjamin, “Voter Identification Laws and Turnout in the United States,” Annual Review
  of Political Science, 2017, 20 (1), 149–167.

Hodler, Roland, Simon Luechinger, and Alois Stutzer, “The Effects of Voting Costs on the
 Democratic Process and Public Finances,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015,
 7 (1), 141–171.

Ichino, Nahomi and Matthias Schündeln, “Deterring or Displacing Electoral Irregularities?
  Spillover Effects of Observers in a Randomized Field Experiment in Ghana,” Journal of Pol-
  itics, 2012, 74 (1), 292–307.

                                               30
Jackman, Simon and Bradley Spahn, “Politically Invisible in America,” Working Paper, 2018.

Kaplan, Ethan and Haishan Yuan, “Early Voting Laws, Voter Turnout, and Partisan Vote Com-
 position: Evidence from Ohio,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2019.

Kobach, Kris W., “The Case for Voter ID,” may 2011.

McDonald, Michael P. and Samuel L. Popkin, “The Myth of the Vanishing Voter,” American
 Political Science Review, 2001, 95 (4), 963–974.

Meer, Jonathan and Jeremy West, “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics,”
 Journal of Human Resources, 2016, 51 (2), 500–522.

Minnite, Lorraine, The Myth of Voter Fraud, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2010.

Mycoff, Jason D., Michael W. Wagner, and David C. Wilson, “The Empirical Effects of Voter-ID
 Laws: Present or Absent?,” PS: Political Science & Politics, 2009, 42 (01), 121–126.

Neiheisel, Jacob R. and Rich Horner, “Voter Identification Requirements and Aggregate Turnout
  in the U.S.: How Campaigns Offset the Costs of Turning Out When Voting Is Made More Diffi-
  cult,” Election Law Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy, 2019, 18 (3), 227–242.

Neumark, David, J. M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher, “Revisiting the Minimum Wage-
  Employment Debate: Throwing out the Baby with the Bathwater?,” ILR Review, 2014, 67, 608–
  648.

Nickerson, David W., “Do Voter Registration Drives Increase Participation? For Whom and
  When?,” Journal of Politics, 2015, 77 (1), 88–101.

   and Todd Rogers, “Political Campaigns and Big Data,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  2014, 28 (2), 51–74.

Norris, Pippa, Electoral Engineering. Voting rules and Political Behavior, Cambridge University
  Press, 2004.

Pons, Vincent and Guillaume Liegey, “Increasing the Electoral Participation of Immigrants -
  Experimental Evidence from France,” Economic Journal, 2019, 129 (617), 481–508.

Pryor, Ben, Rebekah Herrick, and James A. Davis, “Voter ID Laws: The Disenfranchisement of
  Minority Voters?,” Political Science Quarterly, 2019, 134 (1), 63–83.

Richman, Jesse T., Gulshan A. Chattha, and David C. Earnest, “Do non-citizens vote in U.S.
  elections?,” Electoral Studies, 2014, 36, 149–157.

                                              31
Rocha, Rene R. and Tetsuya Matsubayashi, “The Politics of Race and Voter ID Laws in the
  States: The Return of Jim Crow?,” Political Research Quarterly, 2014, 67 (3), 666–679.

Rosenstone, Steven J. and Raymond E. Wolfinger, “The Effect of Registration Laws on Voter
  Turnout,” American Political Science Review, 1978, 72 (1), 22–45.

Schaffer, Frederic Charles and Tova Andrea Wang, “Is Everyone Else Doing It: Indiana’s Voter
  Identification Law in International Perspective,” Harvard Law and Policy Review, 2009, 3 (2),
  398–412.

Schlozman, Kay Lehman, Sidney Verba, and Henry E. Brady, The Unheavenly Chorus: Un-
  equal Political Voice and the Broken Promise of American Democracy, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
  University Press, 2012.

Silver, Brian D., Barbara A. Anderson, and Paul R. Abramson, “Who Overreports Voting?,”
   American Political Science Review, 1986, 80 (2), 613–624.

Stewart, Charles III, “Voter ID: Who Has Them? Who Shows Them?,” Oklahoma Law Review,
  2013, 66 (1), 21–52.

  , Stephen Ansolabehere, and Nathaniel Persily, “Revisiting Public Opinion on Voter Identi-
  fication and Voter Fraud in an Era of Increasing Partisan Polarization,” Stanford Law Review,
  2016, 68 (6), 1455–1489.

Stokes, Susan C., Thad Dunning, Marcelo Nazareno, and Valeria Brusco, “What Killed Vote
  Buying in Britain and the United States?,” in “Brokers, Voters, and Clientelism: The Puzzle of
  Distributive Politics,” Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 200–242.

Valentino, Nicholas A. and Fabian G. Neuner, “Why the Sky Didn’t Fall: Mobilizing Anger in
  Reaction to Voter ID Laws,” Political Psychology, 2017, 38 (2), 331–350.

Verba, Sydney, Kay Lehman Schlozman, and Henry E. Brady, Voice and Equality: Civic Vol-
  untarism in American Politics, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995.

Vicente, Pedro C., “Is Vote Buying Effective? Evidence from a Field Experiment in West Africa,”
  Economic Journal, 2014, 124 (574), 356–387.

von Spakovsky, Hans A., “Protecting the Integrity of the Election Process,” Election Law Journal:
  Rules, Politics, and Policy, 2012, 11 (1), 90–96.

White, Ariel R., “Misdemeanor Disenfranchisement? The Demobilizing Effects of Brief Jail
 Spells on Potential Voters,” American Political Science Review, 2019, pp. 1–14.

                                               32
  , Noah L. Nathan, and Julie K. Faller, “What Do I Need to Vote? Bureaucratic Discretion and
  Discrimination by Local Election Officials,” American Political Science Review, 2015, 109 (1),
  129–142.

Wolfinger, Raymond E. and Steven J. Rosenstone, Who votes?, New Haven: Yale University
 Press, 1980.




                                              33
A    Appendix for Online Publication
    – Appendix A.1: Additional Details on the Catalist Data
        – Table A1: Summary Statistics
    – Appendix A.2: Details on ANES, SPAE, and CCES Survey Outcomes
    – Appendix A.3: Additional Results
        – Figure A1: Event-Study Graphs of the Turnout Effect of Strict ID Laws – Michael McDonald’s
             State Turnout Data
         – Table A2: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Probability of Appearing in and Disappearing from the
             Catalist Data
         – Table A3: Turnout Effect of Strict-ID Laws – Adjacent County-Pair Estimates
         – Table A4: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws – Michael McDonald’s State Turnout
         – Table A5: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Race – Voters Whose Race is Estimated with
             Highest Confidence
         –   Table A6: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Race – Registered Voters Only
         –   Table A7: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Race – Race-by-State-Level Analyses
         –   Table A8: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Gender, Age, and Party Affiliation
         –   Table A9: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Democratic 2-Party Vote Share
         –   Table A10: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Election Timing
         –   Table A11: Effects of Strict ID Laws on CCES Voter Activities
         –   Table A12: Effect of Strict ID Laws on CCES Campaign Contact and Voter Activity by Detailed
             Race
         – Table A13: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Non-Preventable Frauds
    – Appendix A.4: Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws
        – Figure A2: Event-Study Graphs of the Turnout Effect of Strict-Photo ID Laws
        – Figure A3: Event-Study Graphs of the Turnout Effect of Strict-Photo ID Laws by Race
        – Table A14: Turnout and Registration Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws
        – Table A15: Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws on Aggregate Outcomes
        – Table A16: Turnout Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws by Race
        – Table A17: Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws on CCES Campaign Contact, Voter Activity, and
             DIME Campaign Contributions
         – Table A18: Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws on Reported and Perceived Voter Frauds
    – Appendix A.5: Wild Bootstrap P-Values
        – Table A19: Turnout and Registration Effects of Strict ID Laws: Asymptotic vs. Wild Bootstrap
             P-Values
         – Table A20: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Aggregate Outcomes: Asymptotic vs. Wild Bootstrap
             P-Values
         – Table A21: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Race: Asymptotic vs. Wild Bootstrap P-Values



                                                    34
– Table A22: Effects of Strict ID Laws on CCES Campaign Contact, Voter Activity, and DIME
  Campaign Contributions: Asymptotic vs. Wild Bootstrap P-Values
– Table A23: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Reported and Perceived Voter Frauds: Asymptotic vs.
  Wild Bootstrap P-Values




                                        35
A.1    Additional Details on the Catalist Data

     Over time, Catalist continually updates its database to incorporate new state voter files as well
as commercial data refreshes, and it identifies deceased voters based on the Social Security Death
Master File (SSDMF) datasets. Catalist also identifies people changing addresses based on NCOA
records and by systematically comparing voter lists and commercial records of different states.
Catalist gives each person a unique ID, invariant across years and files. Data matching procedures
are run to ascertain potential matches across files. For example, if a voter registered with the first
name “Tom,” but commercial records include an individual called “Thomas” with the same last
name, address, and sociodemographic characteristics, Catalist will recognize that it is the same
individual and reconcile the two sources of information (Ansolabehere and Hersh, 2014).
     The information Catalist shares with its clients usually stems from a cross-sectional “live file,”
containing the present-day address and information and the full voter turnout history of every in-
dividual who ever appeared in its database. Since 2008, however, Catalist has also been saving
“historical files”: snapshots of its live file as of the date of each biennial nationwide election.17
     We received six historical files, corresponding to the 2008, 2010, 2012, 2014, 2016, and 2018
nationwide elections, and matched them with the current live file. The live file constitutes our
source of longitudinal information on voter turnout and the historical files our source of longitudinal
information on voters’ residence.
     For each election, the historical files we received from Catalist report voters’ state and county
of residence at that time, a flag for whether the voter was deceased,18 registration status,19 party
affiliation (for voters registered in the 30 states in which it is available), an indicator for permanent
absentee status, and a flag for “best state.”20 From the Catalist live file, we received the following
variables: full turnout history, the state where the voter cast her ballot in each general election in
our sample, if any, age, race, source of race information, and gender.
  17 Since   it takes two to five months after Election Day for election administrators to process and give Catalist
individual-level voter turnout information, historical files are copies of the live file as of two to five months after
the corresponding Election Day. For instance, the 2008 historical file was saved between January and March 2009.
   18 Voters are flagged as deceased when they appear in the SSDMF or are reported as deceased in commercial records.
   19 Voter registration features five possible values: A, I, D, M, or U. “A” and “I” denote voters appearing on a state reg-

istration file with “active” or “inactive” registration status, respectively. “D” flags “dropped” individuals who appeared
on past state voter files, but not in the most recent one. “M” indicates “moved, unregistered” voters who, according to
NCOA or commercial data, moved into the state, but did not re-register in that state. “U” are voters whose status is
“unregistered”: they do not appear on current or past voter files but are known to reside in the state.
   20 When a voter is observed moving across states, Catalist creates a new record, and updates the original record (e.g.,

recoding the voter’s registration status from “active” to “dropped”) instead of erasing it. Consequently, the Catalist
database is uniquely identified by voter ID and state. After using voter ID and state to match the historical files with
the live file, we use the “best-state” flag to deduplicate on voter ID. Specifically, we deduplicate the matched historical
files using the following lexicographic rules: we privilege the record corresponding to the state where a voter voted,
if any; then records flagged as “best state”; then we use voter registration, privileging voter registration statuses in
this order: “A”, “M”, “U”, “I”, and “D”; then we privilege the record with the oldest registration date; finally, among
residual duplicates, we keep a reproducibly random record.


                                                            36
                                        Table A1: Summary Statistics

                                           Control States       Treated States             All States
                                          Catalist    Census    Catalist Census         Catalist    Census
                                            (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)           (5)         (6)
Female                                      .527        .514     .530       .513         .528         .514
White                                       .740        .705     .741       .699         .741         .703
Hispanic                                    .093        .110     .095       .113         .093         .111
Black                                       .111        .116     .130       .147         .116         .124
Other race                                  .056        .070     .034       .041         .050         .062
Age:
 Missing values                             .092        -         .109        -           .096         -
 Mean                                       49.0       47.1       48.5       46.4         48.8        46.9
 Std. dev.                                  18.3        -         18.0        -           18.2         -
Voted                                       .434        -         .410        -           .428         -
Registered                                  .688        -         .681        -           .686         -
Party registration:
 Living in a party registration state       .730          -       .104        -           .558         -
 …and registered as Democrat                .213          -       .021        -           .160         -
 …and registered as Republican              .147          -       .027        -           .114         -
 …and registered as unaffiliated            .123          -       .019        -           .095         -
 …and registered for a third party          .018          -       .005        -           .014         -

N                                     1,163,102,994 240        441,497,693 66          1,604,600,687 306
Notes: Treated states are defined as states that enforced a strict ID law in the sample years (2008-2018).
State-years are the units of observations in columns 2, 4, and 6. Here, the proportion of females and age
come from 2008, 2010, 2012, 2014, 2016, and 2018 "1-year" ACS data. In the same columns, state-by-
year race shares for the adult population come from the National Cancer Institute (2008) and the United
States Census Bureau (for all other years). These shares are then weighted by the estimated fraction of
adult population holding US citizenship in the corresponding race-year-state. Estimated citizenship ratios
come from "1-year" ACS data.




                                                     37
A.2   Details on ANES, SPAE, and CCES Survey Outcomes

    The survey questions used to construct the SPAE-based outcomes are as follows:
    – Voter impersonation: q38 (SPAE 2008), q29c (2012), Q37C (2014), Q37C (2016).
    – Multiple voting: q29a (2012), Q37A (2014), Q37A (2016).
    – Non-citizen voting: q29d (2012), Q37D (2014), Q37D (2016).
    – Absentee ballot fraud: q29e (2012), Q37E (2014), Q37E (2016).
    – Officials changing vote tallies: q29f (2012), Q37F (2014), Q37F (2016).
    – Votes stealing: q37 (2008), q29b (2012), Q37B (2014), Q37B (2016).
The SPAE survey was not administered in 2010. There were also no questions on multiple voting,
non-citizen voting, absentee ballot fraud, and officials changing vote counts in 2008.
    For the ANES-based outcome on whether the past election was fair, we use the following
post-election survey waves and questions: V045042 (2004), electintpo_countfair (2012), V162219
(2016). The question wording changed slightly across years. In 2004, the question was generically
whether the 2004 presidential election was fair. In 2012 and 2016, voters were asked whether votes
were counted fairly.
    CCES dummy outcomes are based on the following years and survey questions (omitted years
correspond to years in which the relevant survey question was not asked):
    – Voter was contacted by a campaign: v4065 (2006), CC425a (2010), CC425a (2012), CC425a
      (2014), CC16_425a (2016).
    – Donated to a candidate or campaign: v4062 (2006), CC415_6 (2008),CC417a_4 (2010),
      CC417a_4 (2012), CC417a_4 (2014), CC16_417a_4 (2016), CC18_417a_6 (2018).
    – Amount donated (equal to 0 for people who answered no to the “Donated to a candidate
      or campaign” question): CC416b (2008), CC417c (2010), CC417c (2012), CC417c (2014),
      CC16_417c (2016), CC18_417c (2018).
    – Attended a local political meeting: CC415_1 (2008), CC417a_1 (2010), CC417a_1 (2012),
      CC417a_1 (2014), CC16_417a_1 (2016), CC18_417a_1 (2018).
    – Posted a campaign sign: CC415_3 (2008), CC417a_2 (2010), CC417a_2 (2012), CC417a_2
      (2014), CC16_417a_2 (2016), CC18_417a_2 (2018).
    – Volunteered for a campaign: CC415_4 (2008), CC417a_3 (2010), CC417a_3 (2012), CC417a_3
      (2014), CC16_417a_3 (2016), CC18_417a_3 (2018).




                                              38
A.3   Additional Results




                           39
Figure A1: Event-Study Graphs of the Turnout Effect of Strict ID Laws – Michael McDonald’s
State Turnout Data

                                                                  (A) Ballots Cast/Voting-Age Population




                                        .15            .1
                        Ballots Cast/VAP (Coefficient)
                    -.05         0        .05
                                        -.1




                                                            -4   -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3
                                                                      Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict ID Law
                                        .15            .1
                        Ballots Cast/VEP (Coefficient)
                    -.05         0        .05
                                        -.1




                                                            -4   -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3
                                                                      Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict ID Law

                                                                 (B) Ballots Cast/Voting-Eligible Population
Notes: Each panel plots event-study estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from a separate
regression (in the form of equation [2]) run on Michael McDonald’s state turnout data, 2008–2018.
The outcomes for Panels A and B are total ballots cast divided by, respectively, the voting-age
and voting-eligible population in the state-year. The underlying regressions include state controls
and are weighted by voting-age (top panel) or voting-eligible (bottom panel) population. To avoid
picking up variation from 2016 North Dakota, 2016 Texas, and 2018 Texas (which, unlike 2014
and 2018 North Dakota and 2014 Texas, did not enforce a strict law), we define IDτ=1     ND,2016 =
   τ=1           τ=2
IDT X,2016 = IDT X,2018 = 0.


                                                                                          40
Table A2: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Probability of Appearing in and Disappearing from the
Catalist Data

                                         (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                                           Panel A. Appearing in the Sample
             1(Strict ID Law)            .009       .008       .030 ** .014
                                        (.016)     (.018)     (.012)     (.011)

             Outcome Mean                .096        .096        .096        .096

                                        Panel B. Disappearing from the Sample
             1(Strict ID Law)            .004      -.001       .002       .002
                                        (.006)     (.005)     (.004)     (.008)

             Outcome Mean                .062        .062        .062        .062

             Year FEs                     9          9            9            9
             State FEs                    9          9            9            9
             State & Voter Controls                  9            9            9
             State Linear Trends                                  9
             Voter FEs                                                         9
             Notes: The outcome for Panel A is a dummy indicating the first
             election in which a voter (previously not in the Catalist data) appears
             in the data. The outcome for Panel B is a dummy indicating the last
             election before a voter disappears from the data. The samples for
             panels A and B exclude, respectively, the 2008 and 2018 elections.
             N in the two panels is 1,358,011,608 and 1,309,156,087,
             respectively.
             *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                41
 Table A3: Turnout Effect of Strict ID Laws – Adjacent County-Pair Estimates

                                         Outcome: 1(Voted)
                         All Races Whites    Blacks Hispanics        Other
                            (1)     (2)       (3)       (4)           (5)
1(Strict ID Law)            .017    .016      .006      .024          .051    ***

                           (.015)  (.014)    (.015)    (.019)        (.013)
Year FEs                       9          9          9          9         9
State FEs                      9          9          9          9         9
State & Voter Controls         9          9          9          9         9
County-Pair-by-Year FEs        9          9          9          9         9
Notes: The table reports estimates from specifications run on registered and
unregistered voters living in adjacent counties across state borders based on
Dube et al. (2010)'s strategy. The sample size is: 1,225,049,077 (column 1),
934,530,439 (column 2), 152,990,940 (column 3), 87,570,867 (column 4), and
49,956,831 (column 5). Standard errors are two-way clustered by states and
border segments.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                      42
                         Table A4: Turnout Effect of Strict ID Laws – Michael McDonald’s State Turnout

                                   Outcome: Ballots Cast/VEP                        Outcome: Ballots Cast/VAP
                             (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)
                                                          Panel A. 2004-2018 Elections
     1(Strict ID Law)        .006       .006        .0001        .001         .005       .005        .001      .006
                            (.012)     (.013)      (.0118)      (.014)       (.011)     (.012)      (.011)    (.011)
     Outcome Mean           .528         .528          .517        .517           .492        .492        .468        .468
     N                      408          408           408         408            408         408         408         408

                                                             Panel B. 2008-2018 Elections
     1(Strict ID Law)       -.002        -.004        -.006        -.007        -.003        -.004       -.002         .003
                            (.016)       (.017)       (.014)       (.020)       (.014)       (.015)      (.012)       (.017)




43
     Outcome Mean           .529         .529          .519        .519           .493        .493        .470        .470
     N                      306          306           306         306            306         306         306         306

     Year FEs                  9            9            9             9            9             9           9           9
     State FEs                 9            9            9             9            9             9           9           9
     State-Year Controls                    9            9             9                          9           9           9
     VEP/VAP Weights                                     9             9                                      9           9
     State Linear Trends                                               9                                                  9
     Notes: The table reports estimated turnout effects based on Michael McDonald's state turnout data. Panels A and B
     include, respectively, election years 2004-2018 (2004 is the last year before Arizona and Ohio became the first states in
     the country to implement a strict ID law) and 2008-2018 (i.e., matching the Catalist years). VEP and VAP stand for Voting-
     Eligible and Voting-Age Population, respectively. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
Table A5: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Race – Voters Whose Race is Estimated with
Highest Confidence

                                                Outcome: 1(Voted)
                            Outcome Mean               Impact Estimates
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)                     (5)
                                         Panel A. Whites vs. Non-Whites
 1(Strict ID Law)×White          .479      -.009      -.003                                -.005
                                           (.013)     (.012)                               (.013)
 1(Strict ID Law)×non-White      .354      -.001       .002                                 .006
                                           (.011)     (.010)                               (.010)
  nonwhite        white
 ȕ           -ȕ                                   .007          .005           .008         .011
                                                 (.011)        (.011)         (.011)       (.013)
                                                  Panel B. By Detailed Race
 1(Strict ID Law)×White             .479         -.009       -.003                         -.005
                                                 (.013)      (.012)                        (.013)
 1(Strict ID Law)×Hispanic          .264          .020 **     .019 *                        .027    ***

                                                 (.009)      (.010)                        (.010)
 1(Strict ID Law)×Black             .412         -.018       -.011                         -.009
                                                 (.013)      (.012)                        (.011)
 1(Strict ID Law)×Other             .313          .029        .026 *                        .023
                                                 (.022)      (.014)                        (.015)
  hispanic     white
 ȕ           -ȕ                                   .028    **    .022           .030    *    .032    **

                                                 (.012)        (.015)         (.016)       (.016)
  black      white
 ȕ        -ȕ                                     -.009         -.008          -.006        -.004
                                                 (.010)        (.009)         (.007)       (.009)
  other      white
 ȕ        -ȕ                                      .038    **    .029    ***    .018         .028    **

                                                 (.015)        (.010)         (.016)       (.011)
 Race-by-Year FEs                                    9            9            9         9
 Race-by-State FEs                                   9            9            9         9
 State & Voter Controls                                           9            9         9
 State-by-Year FEs                                                             9
 Voter FEs                                                                               9
 Notes: The table replicates Table 3 restricting the sample to voters whose race is estimated by
 Catalist with high confidence. N = 1,049,126,053. Column 1 reports mean turnout in the
 interacting category. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                               44
              Table A6: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Race – Registered Voters Only

                                               Outcome: 1(Voted)
                           Outcome Mean               Impact Estimates
                                (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)                             (5)
                                        Panel A. Whites vs. Non-Whites
1(Strict ID Law)×White          .654      -.002      -.006                                        -.014
                                          (.012)     (.012)                                       (.017)
1(Strict ID Law)×non-White      .517       .016       .015                                         .011
                                          (.014)     (.011)                                       (.014)
 nonwhite        white
ȕ           -ȕ                                        .019           .021           .015           .024    *

                                                     (.013)         (.013)         (.010)         (.013)
                                                      Panel B. By Detailed Race
1(Strict ID Law)×White                  .654         -.002       -.006                            -.014
                                                     (.012)      (.012)                           (.017)
1(Strict ID Law)×Hispanic               .478          .051 **     .050 ***                         .044    ***

                                                     (.022)      (.017)                           (.017)
1(Strict ID Law)×Black                  .542         -.006       -.007                            -.010
                                                     (.010)      (.010)                           (.015)
1(Strict ID Law)×Other Race             .523          .019        .014                             .008
                                                     (.028)      (.025)                           (.028)
 hispanic      white
ȕ           -ȕ                                        .054    ***    .056    ***    .048    ***    .058    ***

                                                     (.020)         (.019)         (.008)         (.020)
 black      white
ȕ        -ȕ                                          -.004          -.001          -.001           .004
                                                     (.008)         (.007)         (.008)         (.009)
 other      white
ȕ        -ȕ                                           .021           .020           .006           .022
                                                     (.018)         (.015)         (.009)         (.016)
Race-by-Year FEs                                    9           9            9         9
Race-by-State FEs                                   9           9            9         9
State & Voter Controls                                          9            9         9
State-by-Year FEs                                                            9
Voter FEs                                                                              9
Notes: The table replicates Table 3 restricting the sample to registered voters. N =
1,100,864,771. Column 1 reports mean turnout in the interacting category. Standard errors
clustered at the state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                  45
            Table A7: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Race – Race-by-State-Level Analyses

                                   Votes Cast/Citizen Population 18+                   Ln(Votes Cast)
                               Outcome                Impact               Outcome             Impact
                                Mean                 Estimates               Mean             Estimates
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)     (6)       (7)             (8)
                                                          Panel A. Whites vs. Non-Whites
1(Strict ID Law)×White           .585      -.007       -.009                  13.95   -.019     -.026
                                (.110)     (.015)      (.016)                (1.01)   (.037)    (.038)
1(Strict ID Law)×non-White       .271       .005        .003                  10.35   -.003     -.012
                                (.143)     (.014)      (.013)                (1.96)   (.051)    (.048)
 nonwhite        white
ȕ           -ȕ                                .012          .012          .003                 .016     .014     .013
                                             (.012)        (.012)        (.012)               (.027)   (.024)   (.026)
                                                                  Panel B. By Detailed Race
1(Strict ID Law)×White            .585       -.007          -.009                 13.95       -.019    -.026
                                 (.110)      (.015)         (.016)                (1.01)      (.037)   (.039)
1(Strict ID Law)×Hispanic         .220        .026           .024 *               10.10        .044     .033
                                 (.112)      (.016)         (.013)                (1.88)      (.065)   (.055)
1(Strict ID Law)×Black            .348       -.003         -.0045                 10.84       -.041    -.047
                                 (.141)      (.017)        (.0175)                (2.25)      (.046)   (.047)
1(Strict ID Law)×Other Race       .246       -.021          -.026                 10.12        .008    -.010
                                 (.141)      (.028)         (.027)                (1.61)      (.106)   (.102)
 hispanic     white
ȕ           -ȕ                                .033    **    .032    **    .021    **           .063     .059     .073    **

                                             (.016)        (.015)        (.010)               (.045)   (.039)   (.032)
 black      white
ȕ        -ȕ                                   .004          .004          .001                -.022    -.021    -.021
                                             (.015)        (.015)        (.017)               (.029)   (.028)   (.032)
 other      white
ȕ        -ȕ                                  -.015         -.017         -.030    *            .027     .016    -.009
                                             (.019)        (.018)        (.016)               (.074)   (.068)   (.055)
Population Weights                             9            9          9                     9          9            9
Race-by-Year FEs                               9            9          9                     9          9            9
Race-by-State FEs                              9            9          9                     9          9            9
State Controls                                              9          9                     9          9            9
State-by-Year FEs                                                      9                                9
Notes: This table reports estimates from regressions run at the race-by-state level. Columns 1 and 5 report mean
outcomes in the interacting category. In columns 1-4, the outcome is counts of voters of a given race who turned out in
a state-year divided by counts of citizens 18 or older in the same race-state-year. Headcounts by state, year, age, and
race are from the National Cancer Institute (for 2008) and the United States Census Bureau (for all other years). These
headcounts are then multiplied by the share of adult population holding citizenship in the corresponding state-year-race
cell, which we estimate using "1-year" ACS data. The outcome for columns 5-8 is the natural logarithm of voters who
turned out in a given race-state-year. In each regression, the total number of observations is 1,224; that is, four races
(i.e., non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, non-Hispanic black, other race) times six elections times 50 states plus DC. All
regressions are weighted by total citizen population 18+ in a race-state-year. Standard errors clustered at the state
level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                             46
        Table A8: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Gender, Age, and Party Affiliation

                                                               Outcome: 1(Voted)
                                      Outcome Mean                      Impact Estimates
                                           (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)
                                                               Panel A. By Gender
1(Strict ID Law)×Male                       .431          -.005         .0004       -.007           .0001
                                                          (.014)       (.0123)      (.014)         (.0125)
1(Strict ID Law)×Female                     .437          -.008         -.003       -.009           -.002
                                                          (.015)        (.013)      (.015)          (.013)
                                                                 Panel B. By Age
1(Strict ID Law)×1(age < 35)                .348          -.001         .0002       -.007           .012
                                                          (.017)       (.0169)      (.019)         (.015)
1(Strict ID Law)×1(35 <= age < 60)          .475          -.003         -.003       -.009          -.003
                                                          (.016)        (.016)      (.018)         (.014)
1(Strict ID Law)×1(60 <= age)               .587         -.0003         -.001       -.006          -.003
                                                         (.0137)        (.013)      (.014)         (.012)
                                                                Panel C. By Party
1(Strict ID Law)×Republican                 .705          -.004        -.001         .018    **     .009
                                                          (.011)       (.008)       (.009)         (.008)
1(Strict ID Law)×Democrat                   .640           .021   *     .021 **      .039    ***    .019     **

                                                          (.012)       (.009)       (.009)         (.009)
1(Strict ID Law)×Other                      .204          -.008        -.003         .015    *      .007
                                                          (.009)       (.007)       (.008)         (.007)
Group-Specific Year FEs                                      9            9             9              9
Group-Specific State FEs                                     9            9             9              9
State & Voter Controls                                                    9             9              9
State Linear Trends                                                                     9
Voter FEs                                                                                              9
Notes: The table reports estimated heterogeneous effects by gender, age, and party affiliation. All
samples include both registered and unregistered voters. Samples for Panels A and B exclude voters
with missing gender and age, respectively. The sample in Panel C is restricted to the 30 states that record
voters' partisan affiliation. Every regression includes year- and state-specific fixed effects for the
interacting characteristic (e.g., female in Panel A). Column 1 reports mean turnout in the interacting
category. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                    47
Table A9: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Democratic 2-Party Vote Share

                         Outcome: Democratic 2-Party Vote Share
                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
                     Panel A. U.S. House of Representatives Elections
1(Strict ID Law)        .0002         .009        .007        .011
                       (.0196)       (.017)      (.011)      (.019)
Outcome Mean             .522           .522       .522         .522
N                       3,480          3,480      3,480        3,480

                            Panel B. U.S. Presidential Elections
1(Strict ID Law)        -.002         .001        -.007          -
                        (.011)       (.012)       (.022)         -
Outcome Mean             .493          .493        .493
N                        204           204         204

Year FEs                     9             9           9            9
State FEs                    9             9           9            9
State-Year Controls                        9           9            9
State Linear Trends                                    9
District FEs                                                        9
Notes: The table reports estimated effects on the Democratic 2-party
vote share based on constituency-level election results collected by the
MIT Election Data and Science Lab. The data cover the 2004-2018
general elections, 2004 being the last year before Arizona and Ohio
became the first states in the country to implement a strict ID law.
Panels A and B explore, respectively, effects on U.S. House of
Representatives and Presidential elections. In each year, units of
observations in Panels A and B are, respectively, the 435 congressional
districts and the 50 states plus DC. Standard errors clustered at the
state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                  48
                Table A10: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Election Timing

                                                        Outcome: 1(Voted)
                                     Outcome Mean                Impact Estimates
                                          (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)             (5)
                                                 Panel A. Presidential vs. Midterm
1(Strict Law)×Presidential                .498       .002         .009       -.001            .006
                                                    (.017)      (.015)       (.015)          (.016)
1(Strict Law)×Midterm                     .358      -.012       -.006        -.012           -.005
                                                    (.014)      (.011)       (.013)          (.011)
                                               Panel B. First Election vs. Following Ones
1(Strict Law)×Following Elections         .414         -.007         .002       -.019      .002
                                                       (.014)       (.011)      (.019)    (.010)
1(Strict Law)×First Election              .360         -.007        -.003       -.008     -.003
                                                       (.015)       (.013)      (.014)    (.014)
Year FEs                                                   9             9            9           9
State FEs                                                  9             9            9           9
State & Voter Controls                                                   9            9           9
State Linear Trends                                                                   9
Voter FEs                                                                                         9
Notes: The sample includes registered and unregistered voters. Panel A explores heterogeneous
effects in presidential vs. midterm elections, while Panel B compares effects in the election that
immediately follows the laws' implementation and in following elections. Column 1 reports mean
turnout in the interacting category. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                49
                                               Table A11: Effects of Strict ID Laws on CCES Voter Activities

                                        Donated to a             Amount Donated              Attended Political         Posted a Campaign       Volunteered for a
                                   Candidate or Campaign                                          Meetings                     Sign                 Campaign
                                      (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)          (10)
                                                                                          Panel A. Average Effect
     1(Strict Law)                    .008        -.0002         4.6           5.1           -.005        -.008 *       -.013       -.017        .005         .002
                                     (.009)       (.0092)       (22.5)        (22.1)         (.005)       (.004)        (.016)      (.015)      (.008)       (.008)

     Year and State FEs                9            9             9            9               9            9            9           9           9             9
     State & Voter Controls                         9                          9                            9                        9                         9

                                                                                       Panel B. Whites vs. Non-Whites
     1(Strict ID Law)×White           .006        -.002          7.7           6.0            -.005        -.009 *      -.016       -.019        .003        -.0007
                                     (.010)       (.010)        (20.1)        (19.9)          (.005)       (.005)       (.016)      (.016)      (.009)       (.0082)




50
     1(Strict ID Law)×non-White       .010         .006          1.4           2.2            -.007        -.007        -.007       -.007        .013    *     .012
                                     (.014)       (.013)        (56.3)        (54.5)          (.010)       (.009)       (.013)      (.013)      (.007)        (.007)

      nonwhite    white
     ȕ           -ȕ                   .005         .007          -6.3          -3.8           -.002        .002          .009        .012        .010    *    .012     **

                                     (.015)       (.013)        (53.3)        (52.6)          (.010)      (.010)        (.008)      (.008)      (.005)       (.005)

     Race-by-Year FEs                     9           9             9              9           9          9            9            9              9            9
     Race-by-State FEs                    9           9             9              9           9          9            9            9              9            9
     State & Voter Controls                           9                            9                      9                         9                           9
     Outcome Mean                        .270        .270        116.937         116.937      .147       .147         .209         .209           .082         .082
     N                                302,496      302,496       272,283         272,283    272,283    272,283      272,283      272,283        272,283      272,283
     Notes: The table reports estimated effects on the CCES campaign engagement variables used to construct the summary index of voter activity used as outcome in
     Table 4, columns 3 and 4. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
Table A12: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws on CCES Campaign Contact and CCES Voter Activ-
ity by Detailed Race

                                           Was Contacted                   Index
                                            by Campaign              of Voter Activity
                                          (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                 Panel A. Whites vs. Non-Whites
  1(Strict ID Law)×White                  .003        .0001         -.005         -.012
                                         (.020)      (.0186)        (.016)        (.015)
  1(Strict ID Law)×non-White              .054 ***     .051 ***      .004          .000
                                         (.019)       (.016)        (.014)        (.014)

   nonwhite        white
  ȕ           -ȕ                          .051     ***      .051    ***    .008          .013
                                         (.018)            (.017)         (.011)        (.009)

                                                         Panel B. By Detailed Race
  1(Strict ID Law)×White                  .003              .0001        -.005          -.012
                                         (.020)            (.0186)       (.016)         (.015)
  1(Strict ID Law)×Hispanic               .060     ***       .055 ***    -.017          -.028
                                         (.019)             (.016)       (.023)         (.024)
  1(Strict ID Law)×Black                  .039               .034         .031 **        .027
                                         (.025)             (.025)       (.015)         (.017)
  1(Strict ID Law)×Other Race             .078     ***       .083 ***    -.030          -.026
                                         (.026)             (.025)       (.032)         (.027)

   hispanic     white
  ȕ           -ȕ                          .057     **       .054    **    -.012         -.016
                                         (.025)            (.024)         (.023)        (.022)
   black      white
  ȕ        -ȕ                             .036              .034           .035    **    .039    **

                                         (.022)            (.021)         (.015)        (.016)
   other      white
  ȕ        -ȕ                             .075     ***      .083    ***   -.026         -.013
                                         (.026)            (.028)         (.026)        (.021)

  Race-by-Year FEs                           9              9              9           9
  Race-by-State FEs                          9              9              9           9
  State & Voter Controls                                    9                          9
  Outcome Mean                              .640           .640           .000        .000
  N                                      221,926        221,926        308,704     308,704
  Notes: This table reports impact estimates on CCES campaign contact and CCES voter
  activities across white and non-white voters (Panel A) and separately by detailed race
  (Panel B). Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
  *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10


                                              51
               Table A13: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Non-Preventable Frauds

                          People Cast Other         Officials Change      People Steal/Tamper
                       Voters' Absentee Ballots        Vote Counts            with Ballots
                           (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)
1(Strict ID Law)           .008        .003          .014        .011       .001         .005
                          (.023)      (.023)        (.014)      (.014)     (.015)       (.015)

Year & State FEs              9            9            9        9           9             9
State & Voter Controls                     9                     9                         9
Outcome Mean                 .261         .261         .190     .190        .188          .189
N                          30,535        30,424      30,539   30,429       42,518        42,307
Notes: The table reports estimated effects on the SPAE measures of perceived electoral integrity
used to construct Table 5's summary index and not already reported as outcomes in that table.
Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                               52
A.4   Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws




                                        53
                       Figure A2: Event-Study Graph of the Turnout Effect of Strict-Photo ID Laws
                      .15
                      .1
        Voter Turnout (Coefficient)
               0        .05
                      -.05
                      -.1




                                      -4   -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3
                                             Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict-Photo ID Law

Notes: The figure replicates Figure 1 using strict-photo (instead of strict) ID laws as treatment.
The underlying regression controls for a dummy identifying state-years with strict, non-photo ID
laws.




                                                                    54
                                   Figure A3: Event-Study Graphs of the Turnout Effect of Strict-Photo ID Laws by Race

                                           (A) Non-Hispanic Whites                                                                                                                    (B) Non-Hispanic Blacks
              .15




                                                                                                                                                       .15
              .1




                                                                                                                                                       .1
Voter Turnout (Coefficient)




                                                                                                                                         Voter Turnout (Coefficient)
                .05




                                                                                                                                                         .05
       0




                                                                                                                                                0
              -.05




                                                                                                                                                       -.05
              -.1




                                                                                                                                                       -.1



                              -4      -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3                                                                -4       -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3
                                        Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict-Photo ID Law                                                                                Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict-Photo ID Law



                                                     (C) Hispanics                                                                                                                        (D) Other Races
                                                                                                                         .15
              .15
              .1




                                                                                                                         .1
Voter Turnout (Coefficient)




                                                                                                           Voter Turnout (Coefficient)
                .05




                                                                                                                           .05
       0




                                                                                                                  0
              -.05




                                                                                                                         -.05
              -.1




                                                                                                                         -.1




                              -4      -3          -2          -1           0           1          2   3
                                        Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict-Photo ID Law
                                                                                                                                                -4                          -3          -2          -1           0           1          2       3
                                                                                                                                                                              Election Relative to First Election w/ Strict-Photo ID Law




Notes: The figure replicates Figure 2 using strict-photo (instead of strict) ID laws as treatment.
The underlying regressions control for a dummy identifying state-years with strict, non-photo ID
laws.




                                                                                                          55
               Table A14: Turnout and Registration Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws

                                                            Outcome:
                                        1(Voted)                              1(Registered)
                           (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)            (8)
                                                 Panel A. Only Registered Voters
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)    -.004      -.004    -.021     -.013         -         -        -              -
                          (.011)     (.009)   (.017)    (.013)
Outcome Mean               .620      .620       .620      .620

                                            Panel B. Registered and Unregistered Voters
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)    -.010      -.004     -.017     -.004       -.016     -.005    -.011     *   -.001
                          (.013)     (.011)    (.011)    (.011)      (.012)    (.011)   (.006)        (.009)
Outcome Mean               .428      .428       .428      .428        .686      .686       .686       .686

Year FEs                     9           9         9           9          9          9           9         9
State FEs                    9           9         9           9          9          9           9         9
State & Voter Controls                   9         9           9                     9           9         9
State Linear Trends                                9                                             9
Voter FEs                                                      9                                           9
Notes: This table replicates Table 1 using strict-photo (instead of strict) ID laws as treatment. To avoid
pooling together control states and state-years with strict, non-photo laws, all regressions in this table
control for a dummy identifying state-years with strict, non-photo ID laws. These state-years are 2012
Virginia, 2014 and 2018 North Dakota, as well as 2008-2018 Arizona and Ohio, which implemented a strict,
non-photo ID law throughout the sample period. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                    56
   Table A15: Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws on Aggregate Outcomes

                               (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)
                            Panel A. Ballots Cast/VEP (McDonald's Data)
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)       -.0003        -.002       -.003      -.011
                             (.0120)       (.013)      (.012)     (.013)
Outcome Mean                  .528          .528         .517         .517
N                             408           408          408          408

Year FEs                       9             9            9             9
State FEs                      9             9            9             9
State-Year Controls                          9            9             9
VEP Weights                                               9             9
State Linear Trends                                                     9

                               Panel B. Democratic 2-Party Vote Share
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)       .00003        .009        .002          -
                            (.02020)      (.018)      (.013)         -
Outcome Mean                  .520          .520         .520           -
N                            3,684         3,684        3,684           -

Year FEs                         9             9          9
State FEs                        9             9          9
State-Year Controls                            9          9
State Linear Trends                                       9
Notes: This table replicates Table 2 using strict-photo (instead of strict) ID
laws as treatment. Similarly to Table A14, all regressions control for a
dummy identifying state-years with strict, non-photo ID laws. Standard
errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                      57
                         Table A16: Turnout Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws by Race

                                                    Outcome: 1(Voted)
                                 Outcome Mean               Impact Estimates
                                      (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)                               (5)
                                              Panel A. Whites vs. Non-Whites
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)×White          .458      -.010       -.006                                        -.008
                                                (.014)      (.012)                                       (.012)
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)×non-White      .340       .004        .004                                         .006
                                                (.013)      (.009)                                       (.009)
 nonwhite        white
ȕ           -ȕ                                               .014    *      .010           .007           .015
                                                            (.008)         (.008)         (.007)         (.015)
                                                            Panel B. By Detailed Race
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)×White                    .458        -.010      -.006                             -.008
                                                            (.014)     (.012)                            (.012)
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)×Hispanic                 .295         .024 *     .022 ***                          .025    ***

                                                            (.014)     (.008)                            (.009)
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)×Black                    .380        -.012      -.009                             -.007
                                                            (.012)     (.011)                            (.010)
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)×Other Race               .330         .008       .003                              .003
                                                            (.026)     (.019)                            (.018)
 hispanic     white
ȕ           -ȕ                                               .034    ***    .028    ***    .026    ***    .033    ***

                                                            (.011)         (.010)         (.006)         (.012)
 black      white
ȕ        -ȕ                                                 -.002          -.002          -.003           .001
                                                            (.008)         (.006)         (.006)         (.006)
 other      white
ȕ        -ȕ                                                  .018           .009          -.002           .011
                                                            (.015)         (.009)         (.006)         (.009)
Race-by-Year FEs                                            9           9           9            9
Race-by-State FEs                                           9           9           9            9
State & Voter Controls                                                  9           9            9
State-by-Year FEs                                                                   9
Voter FEs                                                                                        9
Notes: This table replicates Table 3 using strict-photo (instead of strict) ID laws as treatment.
Column 1 reports mean turnout in the interacting category. Similarly to Table A14, all regressions
control for a dummy identifying state-years with strict, non-photo ID laws, along with its interactions
with a non-white voter dummy (Panel A) or with dummies for detailed race categories (Panel B).
Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10



                                                       58
Table A17: Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws on CCES Campaign Contact, Voter Activity, and DIME
Campaign Contributions

                                           Was Contacted                  Index            Contributions
                                            by Campaign             of Voter Activity ln($1k/100k residents)
                                          (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)      (5)         (6)
                                                              Panel A. Average Effect
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)                   .009           .005        -.005       -.012     .027        .049
                                        (.018)         (.017)       (.015)      (.015)   (.146)      (.132)

Year & State FEs                          9              9             9           9           9           9
State & Voter Controls                                   9                         9                       9

                                                           Panel B. Whites vs. Non-Whites
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)×White            -.004          -.007         -.008      -.015
                                        (.019)         (.018)        (.016)     (.016)
1(Strict-Photo ID Law)×non-White         .048    ***    .044 ***      .002      -.002
                                        (.018)         (.015)        (.014)     (.014)

 nonwhite    white
ȕ           -ȕ                           .051    ***    .051    ***    .009        .013
                                        (.019)         (.017)         (.011)      (.010)

Race-by-Year FEs                           9              9            9           9           9            9
Race-by-State FEs                          9              9            9           9           9            9
State & Voter Controls                                    9                        9                        9
Outcome Mean                              .640           .640         .000        .000       14.548      14.548
N                                       221,926       221,926       308,704 308,704           306          306
Notes: This table replicates Table 4 using strict-photo (instead of strict) ID laws as treatment. Similarly to
Table A14, all regressions control for a dummy identifying state-years with strict, non-photo ID laws, along
with its interactions with detailed race categories (in Panel B). Standard errors clustered at the state level in
parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                       59
                         Table A18: Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws on Reported and Perceived Frequency of Voter Fraud

                                   News21          News21 Preventable          Heritage        Heritage Preventable
                            Frauds/100k Residents Frauds/100k Residents Frauds/100k Residents Frauds/100k Residents
                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)      (7)          (8)
     1(Strict-Photo ID Law)    .067       .046       .025       .013      -.005       -.009      .001        -.003
                              (.166)     (.157)     (.068)     (.071)     (.010)      (.011)    (.011)       (.012)

     Year & State FEs             9            9           9            9           9            9            9            9
     State & Voter Controls                    9                        9                        9                         9
     Outcome Mean                .078         .078        .033         .033        .020         .020         .013         .013
     N                           459          459         459          459         765          765          765          765
                                    SPAE                       SPAE                      SPAE                     SPAE                      ANES




60
                            Perceived Fraud Index       Voter Impersonation         Multiple Voting        Non-Citizen Voting            Fair Election
                               (9)         (10)           (11)        (12)          (13)       (14)          (15)        (16)          (17)         (18)
     1(Strict-Photo ID Law)    .003        .008          -.005       -.003         -.008      -.010         -.026       -.030          .018         .029
                              (.034)      (.033)         (.019)     (.017)         (.026)     (.026)       (.024)       (.024)        (.049)       (.041)

     Year & State FEs               9          9             9           9             9           9           9            9            9            9
     State & Voter Controls                    9                         9                         9                        9                         9
     Outcome Mean                  .000       .000         .210         .210          .209        .209        .275         .275         .698         .698
     N                           42,600      42,385       42,488      42,277        30,534      30,424       30,533       30,423      11,397       11,397
     Notes: This table replicates Table 5 using strict-photo (instead of strict) ID laws as treatment. As in Table A14, all regressions in this table
     control for a dummy identifying state-years with strict, non-photo ID laws. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
A.5   Wild Bootstrap P-Values




                                61
Table A19: Turnout and Registration Effects of Strict ID Laws: Asymptotic vs. Wild Bootstrap
P-Values

                                                                Outcome:
                                          1(Voted)                                  1(Registered)
                            (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)             (8)
                                                     Panel A. Only Registered Voters
1(Strict ID Law)           -.001      -.001      -.011      -.008         -          -         -               -
                           [.942]     [.929]     [.580]     [.610]
                           {.944}     {.930}    {.642}      {.683}
Outcome Mean                .620       .620        .620        .620

                                                Panel B. Registered and Unregistered Voters
1(Strict ID Law)           -.007      -.001       -.008      -.001       -.015      -.004        -.008      -.001
                           [.628]     [.942]      [.565]     [.921]      [.215]     [.693]       [.248]     [.931]
                           {.675}     {.937}     {.649}     {.931}       {.282}    {.703}        {.495}     {.922}
Outcome Mean                .428       .428        .428        .428        .686       .686        .686        .686

Year FEs                       9           9           9           9             9          9            9          9
State FEs                      9           9           9           9             9          9            9          9
State & Voter Controls                     9           9           9                        9            9          9
State Linear Trends                                    9                                                 9
Voter FEs                                                          9                                                9
Notes: This table reports the same point estimates as Table 1. State-clustered asymptotic p-values are reported in
brackets. Wild bootstrap state-clustered p-values are reported in braces. Bootstrap p-values are based on Webb
weights and 999 repetitions, where this number was chosen following Davidson and MacKinnon (2000) to ensure
that the significance level times the sum of the number of bootstraps and one is an integer. To account for the
possibility of having too few treated clusters, we follow MacKinnon and Webb (2018) and assign bootstrap
weights at a finer level (i.e., by counties) than the level of clustering of the standard errors (i.e., by states).
Bootstrap p-values are computed using Stata boottest routine (Roodman et al., 2018).




                                                          62
Table A20: Effects of Strict-Photo ID Laws on Aggregate Outcomes: Asymptotic vs. Wild Boot-
strap P-Values

                                     (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)
                                   Panel A. Ballots Cast/VEP (McDonald's Data)
           1(Strict ID Law)          .006         .006        .0001       .001
                                    [.587]       [.643]      [.993]      [.955]
                                    {.583}       {.655}      {.988}     {.963}
           Outcome Mean             .528           .528        .517         .517
           N                        408            408         408          408

           Year FEs                   9             9            9            9
           State FEs                  9             9            9            9
           State-Year Controls                      9            9            9
           VEP Weights                                           9            9
           State Linear Trends                                                9

                                       Panel B. Democratic 2-Party Vote Share
           1(Strict ID Law)          .0004         .009        .006          -
                                    [.982]        [.594]      [.532]         -
                                    {.979}       {.602}       {.558}         -
           Outcome Mean             .520            .520       .520           -
           N                       3,684           3,684      3,684           -

           Year FEs                    9             9           9
           State FEs                   9             9           9
           State-Year Controls                       9           9
           State Linear Trends                                   9
           Notes: This table reports the same point estimates as Table 2. State-
           clustered asymptotic p-values are reported in brackets. Wild bootstrap
           state-clustered p-values are reported in braces. Bootstrap p-values are
           based on Webb weights and 999 repetitions, where this number was
           chosen following Davidson and MacKinnon (2000) to ensure that the
           significance level times the sum of the number of bootstraps and one is an
           integer.




                                              63
Table A21: Turnout Effects of Strict ID Laws by Race: Asymptotic vs. Wild Bootstrap P-Values

                                                   Outcome: 1(Voted)
                               Outcome Mean                Impact Estimates
                                    (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)                   (5)
                                            Panel A. Whites vs. Non-Whites
    1(Strict ID Law)×White          .458      -.006       -.003                            -.005
                                              [.665]      [.808]                           [.737]
                                             {.711}      {.838}                            {.784}
    1(Strict ID Law)×non-White      .340       .006        .006                             .009
                                              [.654]      [.555]                           [.391]
                                             {.665}      {.569}                            {.400}
     nonwhite        white
    ȕ           -ȕ                                   .013         .009         .007         .014
                                                    [.109]       [.203]       [.355]       [.104]
                                                    {.093}       {.221}       {.406}       {.125}
                                                     Panel B. By Detailed Race
    1(Strict ID Law)×White             .458         -.006       -.003                      -.005
                                                    [.665]      [.809]                     [.737]
                                                    {.711}      {.837}                     {.784}
    1(Strict ID Law)×Hispanic          .295          .025        .022                       .026
                                                    [.091]      [.006]                     [.006]
                                                    {.056}      {.010}                     {.009}
    1(Strict ID Law)×Black             .380         -.009       -.006                      -.004
                                                    [.522]      [.639]                     [.770]
                                                    {.543}      {.641}                     {.802}
    1(Strict ID Law)×Other             .330          .012        .007                       .008
                                                    [.654]      [.750]                     [.713]
                                                    {.786}      {.869}                     {.841}
     hispanic     white
    ȕ           -ȕ                                   .032         .026         .026         .030
                                                    [.007]       [.021]       [.000]       [.016]
                                                    {.010}       {.060}       {.023}       {.075}
     black      white
    ȕ        -ȕ                                     -.003        -.003        -.003         .001
                                                    [.742]       [.679]       [.612]       [.853]
                                                    {.766}       {.693}       {.651}       {.864}
     other      white
    ȕ        -ȕ                                      .019         .010        -.001         .013
                                                    [.238]       [.317]       [.800]       [.209]
                                                    {.351}       {.447}       {.836}       {.298}
    Race-by-Year FEs                                   9            9           9             9
    Race-by-State FEs                                  9            9           9             9
    State & Voter Controls                                          9           9             9
    State-by-Year FEs                                                           9
    Voter FEs                                                                                 9
    Notes: This table reports the same point estimates as Table 3. State-clustered asymptotic p-
    values are reported in brackets. Wild bootstrap state-clustered p-values are reported in braces.
    See notes to Table A19 for details on the bootstrap procedure. Column 1 reports mean turnout
    in the interacting category.
                                                  64
Table A22: Effects of Strict ID Laws on CCES Campaign Contact, Voter Activity, and DIME
Campaign Contributions: Asymptotic vs. Wild Bootstrap P-Values

                                 Was Contacted               Index            Contributions
                                  by Campaign          of Voter Activity ln($1k/100k residents)
                                 (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)         (6)
                                                   Panel A. Average Effect
1(Strict ID Law)                 .015        .012     -.002        -.009     .039        .057
                                [.424]      [.499]    [.893]       [.516]   [.751]      [.617]
                                {.457}      {.554}    {.946}      {.763}    {.761}     {.596}

Year & State FEs                  9           9           9           9           9          9
State & Voter Controls                        9                       9                      9

                                                Panel B. Whites vs. Non-Whites
1(Strict ID Law)×White           .003       .0001      -.005        -.012
                                [.867]     [.9959]     [.776]       [.419]
                                {.880}     {.9920}     {.885}      {.652}
1(Strict ID Law)×non-White       .054        .051        .004       .0004
                                [.006]      [.003]     [.787]      [.9783]
                                {.078}      {.066}     {.821}     {.9880}
 nonwhite    white
ȕ           -ȕ                   .051        .051        .008        .013
                                [.008]      [.004]      [.432]      [.189]
                                {.017}      {.012}      {.430}      {.225}

Race-by-Year FEs                   9           9           9           9           9         9
Race-by-State FEs                  9           9           9           9           9         9
State & Voter Controls                         9                       9                     9
Outcome Mean                      .640        .640        .000        .000       14.548    14.548
N                               221,926    221,926      308,704     308,704       306       306
Notes: This table reports the same point estimates as Table 4. State-clustered asymptotic p-values
are reported in brackets. Wild bootstrap state-clustered p-values are reported in braces. Bootstrap
p-values are based on Webb weights and 999 repetitions, where this number was chosen following
Davidson and MacKinnon (2000) to ensure that the significance level times the sum of the number
of bootstraps and one is an integer.




                                                  65
     Table A23: Effects of Strict ID Laws on Reported and Perceived Frequency of Voter Fraud: Asymptotic vs. Wild Bootstrap P-Values

                                         News21             News21 Preventable              Heritage            Heritage Preventable
                                  Frauds/100k Residents    Frauds/100k Residents     Frauds/100k Residents     Frauds/100k Residents
                                     (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)
          1(Strict ID Law)           .045       .025          .015       .004           .001         -.003        .005        .003
                                    [.673]     [.803]        [.737]     [.938]         [.943]        [.801]      [.577]      [.802]
                                    {.589}     {.709}        {.626}     {.907}         {.944}       {.826}       {.587}      {.809}

          Year and State FEs          9            9           9            9            9             9           9            9
          State Controls                           9                        9                          9                        9
          Outcome Mean               .078         .078        .033         .033         .020          .020        .013         .013
          N                          459          459         459          459          765           765         765          765
                                          SPAE                     SPAE                      SPAE                      SPAE                      ANES




66
                                  Perceived Fraud Index     Voter Impersonation          Multiple Voting         Non-Citizen Voting           Fair Election
                                     (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)           (13)         (14)         (15)        (16)         (17)          (18)
          1(Strict ID Law)           .003         .007       -.004       -.002         -.009        -.013        -.020       -.024          .008          .018
                                    [.917]      [.821]       [.811]      [.882]        [.699]       [.551]       [.418]      [.344]       [.857]         [.637]
                                   {.926}       {.834}      {.830}      {.883}         {.732}       {.614}       {.473}      {.435}       {.888}        {.798}

          Year & State FEs             9            9            9            9            9            9            9            9            9             9
          State & Voter Controls                    9                         9                         9                         9                          9
          Outcome Mean                .000         .000         .210         .210         .209         .209         .275         .275         .698         .698
          N                         42,600       42,385       42,488       42,277        30,534       30,424       30,533       30,423      11,397       11,397
          Notes: This table reports the same point estimates as Table 5. State-clustered asymptotic p-values are reported in brackets. Wild bootstrap state-
          clustered p-values are reported in braces. Bootstrap p-values are based on Webb weights and 999 repetitions, where this number was chosen following
          Davidson and MacKinnon (2000) to ensure that the significance level times the sum of the number of bootstraps and one is an integer.
