NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TEN YEARS AFTER THE FINANCIAL CRISIS:
WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM THE RENAISSANCE IN FISCAL RESEARCH?
Valerie A. Ramey
Working Paper 25531
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25531

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

Prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. I am grateful for helpful comments from
Alberto Alesina, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Martin Eichenbaum, Carlo Favero, Mark Gertler,
Francesco Giavazzi, Gordon Hanson, Daniel Leff Yaffe, Karel Mertens, Maury Obstfeld,
Timothy Taylor, Linda Tesar, Sarah Zubairy, and participants at the July 2018 NBER Conference
“Global Financial Crisis @10.” The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Valerie A. Ramey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Ten Years after the Financial Crisis: What Have We Learned from the Renaissance in Fiscal
Research?
Valerie A. Ramey
NBER Working Paper No. 25531
February 2019
JEL No. E62
ABSTRACT
This paper takes stock of what we have learned from the “Renaissance” in fiscal research in the
ten years since the financial crisis. I first summarize the new innovations in methodology and
discuss the various strengths and weaknesses of the main approaches. Reviewing the estimates, I
come to the surprising conclusion that the bulk of the estimates for average spending and tax
change multipliers lie in a fairly narrow range, 0.6 to 1 for spending multipliers and -2 to -3 for
tax change multipliers. However, I identify economic circumstances in which multipliers lie
outside those ranges. I conclude by reviewing the debate on whether multipliers were higher on
the stimulus spending in the U.S. and the fiscal consolidations in Europe.

Valerie A. Ramey
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
vramey@ucsd.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25531

When the financial crisis hit ten years ago and policy interest rates fell to their near-zero
percent lower bound, policymakers around the world turned to fiscal stimulus packages in order
to prevent their economies from freefalling into another Great Depression. But then, as declining
GDP and tax revenues led to deteriorating government budget deficits and worries about rising
sovereign debt, numerous countries abandoned their fiscal stimulus packages and instead adopted
fiscal consolidation measures. While attempting to forecast the impacts of these various fiscal
programs, policymakers and academics were surprised to learn not only a lack of consensus about
the size of the effects of fiscal policy, but that there had not even been much research on the topic
since the 1960s. A small army of researchers across many countries turned their attention to this
important, but long-neglected, topic.
This paper takes a snapshot of the state of knowledge about the effects of fiscal policy ten
years after the global financial crisis, during which time important progress has been made on
theory, empirical methods, and data. The theoretical innovations include the analysis of the effects
of sticky prices, hand-to-mouth consumers, lower bounds on policy interest rates, currency unions,
the type of financing, and anticipations on the reactions of macroeconomic variables to fiscal
policy. Contributions in empirical methods include new ways to identify exogenous variation in
policy, standardization of methods for computing multipliers, and the incorporation of state
dependence. On the data front, researchers now have newly constructed historical and crosssectional data sets, and are also exploiting the rich new data created by the variety of policymakers’
fiscal responses to the crisis. These advancements offer the potential to estimate the effects of
government spending with more precision and with a better understanding of how the effects
depend on the particular context.

1

In 2011, I surveyed the pre-crisis and early crisis literature in the Journal of Economic
Literature. In that paper, which focused only on temporary, deficit-financed increases in
government purchases, I concluded based on the evidence available from US data at that time that
the multiplier was probably between 0.8 to 1.5, but that the data did not reject a range from 0.5 to
2. The current paper refines those estimates and broadens the inquiry to consider the effects of tax
and transfer policy, as well as the effects of fiscal consolidations, in developed countries.
However, attention is still limited to the short- or medium-run effects, because the methods for
estimating long-run effects are quite different.
My summary of the current state of knowledge about the effects of fiscal policies can be
divided into three categories: government purchases multipliers, tax rate change multipliers, and
multipliers in the wake of the financial crisis.
For multipliers on general government purchases, the evidence from developed countries
suggests that they are positive but less than or equal to unity, meaning that government purchases
raise GDP but do not stimulate additional private activity and may actually crowd it out. The bulk
of the estimates across the leading methods of estimation and samples lie in a surprisingly narrow
range of 0.6 to 1. However, this range widens once one distinguishes country characteristics, such
as the exchange rate regime, and the type of government spending, such as infrastructure spending.
The evidence for higher spending multipliers during recessions or times of high unemployment is
fragile, and the most robust results suggest multipliers of one or below during these periods. The
evidence for higher government spending multipliers during periods in which monetary policy is
very accommodative, such as zero lower bound periods, is somewhat stronger. Recent time series
estimates for the United States and Japan suggest that multipliers could be 1.5 or higher during

2

those times. Estimated and calibrated New Keynesian models for the U.S. and Europe also imply
higher multipliers under certain conditions.
For tax rate change multipliers, the estimates implied by the leading methods do not agree.
Narrative methods for tax rate changes typically yield multiplier estimates that are surprisingly
large and surprisingly uniform across a number of countries. The bulk of the empirical estimates
vary between -2 and -3. In contrast, most calibrated and estimated dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium models imply smaller multipliers, typically below unity for both labor and capital tax
multipliers. Time series evidence, theory, and estimated New Keynesian dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium models all point tax multipliers being greater in magnitude during expansions
than in recessions—that is, these measures suggest that tax multipliers may be procyclical. .
Fiscal multipliers might be different in the wake of a financial crisis. However, the evidence
for larger national multipliers on the 2009 Obama stimulus package is at best weak. Quantitative
New Keynesian models do not find larger multipliers. Multipliers estimated on cross-state data
appear larger at first, but shrink once they are adjusted to be nationally representative. The latest
studies on multipliers during the fiscal consolidations in Europe suggest that they were not higher
than usual, either.
This paper begins by reviewing how theory highlights the dependence of the size of the
multipliers on numerous features of the policy and the economy. The next section summarizes
strengths and weaknesses of the leading empirical approaches to identifying exogenous shifts in
fiscal policy. The paper then highlights the innovations of the last ten years in estimating fiscal
multipliers. One interesting finding is that the wide range of multipliers reported earlier narrows
significantly once methods for calculating multipliers are standardized. The following section
reviews the leading estimates of spending and tax multipliers, including those based on aggregate

3

time series, estimated theoretical models, and subnational units and households. It also discusses
the complexities of drawing aggregate inferences from parameters estimated on household data.
The penultimate section asks what we know about whether multipliers were higher in the wake of
the financial crisis. The final section offers some brief conclusions.

What Does Theory Predict About Fiscal Multipliers?

If we simply want to know how much GDP changes if we increase government spending
by one dollar or reduce tax rates by one percentage point, why do we need theory? Theory tells
us that there is not one government spending or tax multiplier. Rather, the effect of fiscal changes
on output and other variables potentially depends on: 1) the persistence of the change; 2) the type
of spending or taxes that changed; 3) how the policy was financed; 4) whether it was anticipated;
5) how the policy was distributed across potentially heterogeneous agents; 6) how monetary policy
reacted; 7) the state of the economy when the policy took effect; and 8) other features that
characterize the economy such as level of development, exchange rate regime, and openness.
Because policymakers cannot conduct randomized control trials, virtually all multiplier estimates
are based on time series, narrative, or natural experiment identification using samples determined
by historical happenstance. To understand whether a particular estimate of fiscal effects is suitable
for use in predicting the effects of a proposed policy, one must understand how the current
circumstances differ from those present in the sample used to generate that estimate.
Most researchers and policymakers had their first exposure to the theoretical effects of
fiscal policy in the Keynesian cross model of undergraduate textbooks, which assumes that GDP
is demand-determined. This model further assumes that the government spending multiplier is the

4

inverse of one minus the marginal propensity to consume: thus, a marginal propensity to consume
of 0.5 yields a multiplier of two. Because taxes enter the multiplier only through their effect on
disposable income in this model, the tax multipliers are smaller than the spending multipliers.
Expansion of the model to consider the marginal propensity to import, tax rates, and monetary
policy reduces those simple multipliers.
Neoclassical models with variable labor supply and capital stock also predict positive
spending multipliers and negative (distortionary) tax multipliers, but the mechanism is completely
different from the one at the heart of the traditional Keynesian model. In these models, an increase
in government spending has a negative wealth effect, because the government is extracting
resources from the private sector. This negative wealth effect raises GDP because it causes
households to work more. Distortionary tax rate changes can have potentially large effects in these
models, but contrary to the simple Keynesian model, they work through “supply side” channels.
The New Keynesian dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models meld the
insights from the traditional Keynesian and neoclassical approaches in a rigorous way. The
standard representative-agent sticky-price New Keynesian model with no financial frictions tends
to produce multipliers below one for government spending. Models that add sticky wages and
workers who are “off their labor supply curves” generate larger multipliers. In the last decade,
representative agent models have been expanded to include heterogeneous agents and financial
market frictions. In these models, either “rule-of-thumb” behavior or wealth held in illiquid assets
leads agents to have much higher marginal propensities to consume than predicted by the
permanent income hypothesis. These features can lead to spending multipliers above one when
spending is deficit financed (e.g. Auclert, Rognlie, and Straub (2018), Table 3). Alternatively, the
models have explored the effects of fiscal policy when monetary policy deviates from the standard

5

Taylor rule (higher interest rates when

inflation is high and lower interest rates when

unemployment is high) because interest rates are constrained by the zero lower bound. Both of
these extensions result in higher multipliers, often above unity.
Clearly, when one is trying to estimate the effects of a specific fiscal policy, one must be
aware of which macroeconomic model is being used, along with other factors like persistence of
a path of government spending, how it is financed, and many other characteristics such as the
exchange rate regime.

A Summary of Leading Empirical Approaches

Numerous empirical approaches have been used to estimate the effects of fiscal policies. I
group these approaches into three broad categories: 1) aggregate country-level time series or panel
estimates; 2) estimated or calibrated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models; and
3) subnational geographic cross-section or panel estimates.
The first two categories--time series evidence at the national level and estimated/calibrated
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models—share the advantage that the estimates produced
are directly informative about the national-level multipliers that are the focus of most
policymakers. The time series approach has the advantage of not being tied to a particular
structural model. On the other hand, the DSGE model approach can be used to perform
counterfactuals because it seeks to estimate structural parameters.

6

However, these two approaches share some of the same weaknesses. Identification of
macroeconomic parameters is always difficult and the estimation of the aggregate effects of fiscal
policy is no exception. The time series approach requires exogenous variation in policy. The
leading approaches to identifying this exogenous variation are structural vector autoregressions
and natural experiment methods, combined with narrative methods that use historical documents
to create new data series of exogenous changes. Too often, though, the variations that turn out to
be exogenous yield instruments that are not very relevant—that is, they have low correlation with
the fiscal variable they are trying to explain—and the variations that are relevant are not always
exogenous or are anticipated in advance.
Although many papers using estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models
never mention the word identification, identification is as crucial to this approach as it is to any
other approach seeking to estimate a causal relationship. The DSGE approach identifies the effects
of fiscal policy by using strong assumptions about the theoretical model structure and the time
series processes driving the unobserved shocks. But such estimated DSGE models are not immune
to weak identification (for discussion, see Canova and Sala 2009).
The third approach of estimating across subnational units, such as states or provinces, is
more similar to applied microeconomics approaches. These approaches typically seek
identification using a natural experiment approach or Bartik-style instrumental variables (which
are based on interacting the distribution of industry shares across locations with national industry
growth rates). 1 These analyses at lower levels of aggregation tend to have much stronger
identification, in the sense that the necessary identifying assumptions are typically more plausible
and the instruments are relevant. Moreover, these approaches can be used on a variety of datasets.

1

See Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2018) for a description and critical analysis of Bartik instruments.

7

However, this approach does not lead directly macroeconomic estimates. Why? Any crosssectional estimating equation includes a constant term, which means that the macroeconomic
effects have been netted out and the parameters estimated are only relative effects. Such
parameters answer the question: if State A is awarded $1 more in defense prime contracts than the
average state, by how much does its employment change relative to the average state? In order to
infer the implied national-level effects from such microeconomic estimates, researchers must then
return to macroeconomic DSGE models, which, as discussed above, incorporate their own
additional identifying assumptions. There is no “applied micro free lunch” for macroeconomists:
identification of macroeconomic effects must always depend on macroeconomic identification
assumptions.
To summarize, there are several approaches to estimating the effects of fiscal policy. Each
has its strengths and weaknesses. Moreover, some of the estimates are more appropriate for
forecasting the effects of specific policies under certain conditions than others. For these reasons,
it is useful to consider estimates across a range of different approaches.

Research Innovations and Lessons Learned During the Last Ten Years

Before the financial crisis, only a few isolated researchers studied the macroeconomic
effects of fiscal policy and few conferences brought these researchers together. As a result,
different researchers chose different methods and there was no agreed upon set of best practices.
The situation has changed dramatically since the financial crisis, with many conferences devoted
to the study of fiscal policies and much more interaction among researchers studying fiscal policy.
As a result, the diffusion of knowledge among researchers has been much faster and the literature

8

has progressed at a very fast pace. In this section, I will highlight some of the new innovations
and the lessons learned from this literature.

Calculating Multipliers in a Dynamic Environment
One often sees references to the “wide range” of multiplier estimates. The literature has
come to realize that differences in reported multiplier estimates are often due not so much to
differences in identification methods or samples, but to the methods used to construct multiplier
from the raw estimates. In fact, what some researchers call “multipliers” have little to do with the
multipliers of interest to policymakers. This section begins with some insights gained over the last
decade regarding the computation of multipliers. I begin with spending multipliers and then
address a further complication involved with tax multipliers.
Fiscal policy has dynamic effects on output and government budgets. A typical fiscal plan
will set into motion a path of spending or taxes over time, and then GDP will respond dynamically
to that path. The multiplier must take into account both the multi-year effects of the fiscal plan on
the government budget, in order to count the costs fully, as well as the multi-year effects on GDP,
in order to count the benefits fully.
Computation of multipliers was not a focus of the research in the decades before the
financial crisis.

Indeed, two decades ago in Ramey and Shapiro (1998) on the effects of

government spending, we did not even mention the word “multiplier.” When describing the
patterns of the responses of GDP to spending and tax shocks, Blanchard and Perotti (2002) used
the word “multiplier,” but the quantities they calculated were not true dynamic multipliers; instead,
Blanchard and Perotti calculated multipliers as the ratio of the output response at a particular
horizon, or at its peak, to the impact effect of the shock on government spending. Many subsequent

9

papers adopted their method, despite the fact that it did not take into account the multi-year path
of spending or taxes. Mountford and Uhlig (2009) moved the literature forward by introducing
the policy-relevant multipliers, calculated as the present discounted value of the output response
over time divided by the present discounted value of the government spending response over time
to the shock. In most applications, the interest rate used for this present discounted value—
including the use of a zero discount rate—gives nearly identical multipliers because the timing of
the government spending and output responses is very similar. These multipliers are often known
as present value or cumulative multipliers.
How much do multiplier estimates differ across these various methods of calculating
multipliers? It depends importantly on how much government spending rises after the initial
impact. Here is one illustration of a situation in which it makes a big difference. I estimate a
structural vector autoregression (SVAR) model of the Blanchard and Perotti (2002) type over the
period 1939:1 – 2015:4 using Ramey and Zubairy’s (2018) data set. The model contains five
endogenous macroeconomic variables: government spending, GDP, and federal tax receipts (with
all three deflated by the GDP deflator, divided by population, and in logs), along with the threemonth Treasury bill interest rate and inflation (measured as the log change in the GDP deflator).
Four lags are included in order to model the dynamics. The exogenous shock to government
spending is identified using Blanchard and Perotti’s (2002) method, which assumes that any part
of government spending not forecasted by lags of any of the variables included in the model is an
exogenous shock to government spending.
Figure 1 shows the estimated impulse responses of the log of the government spending
variable and the log of the GDP variable (notice that the vertical scales are not the same). The
shaded area shows the 95-percent confidence bands. As the graph illustrates, a positive shock to

10

government spending leads both government spending and GDP to jump up on impact, but then
to continue to rise, peaking after about a year. Because the variables are in log form, the impulse
responses show elasticities, not the dollar changes required by multipliers, so multipliers cannot
be read directly from the graphs. The standard practice until recently had been to use an ad hoc
conversion factor. That is, researchers who specified models using logarithms converted the
elasticity estimates, i.e. 𝛥𝛥𝛥𝛥𝛥𝛥(𝑌𝑌)/𝛥𝛥𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙(𝐺𝐺), to multipliers, 𝛥𝛥𝛥𝛥/𝛥𝛥𝛥𝛥, by multiplying the elasticity
estimates by the average of the ratio of GDP to total government spending, 𝑌𝑌/𝐺𝐺, over the sample.
This ratio is 4.78 for the sample in this illustration. I will critique the use of these conversion
factors shortly.
Figure 2 shows the multipliers calculated three different ways. The highest multiplier is
given by Blanchard-Perotti’s (2002) method for calculating a multiplier, which I will call a quasimultiplier. 2 It is calculated as the ratio of the impulse response of output at horizon h to the initial
jump in government spending at horizon 0 (multiplied by the average 𝑌𝑌/𝐺𝐺). Their method, shown

by the dashed line, essentially traces out a renormalized version of the impulse response of output.
In this case, it yields multipliers that peak at 2.2 at quarter 6. The Mountford and Uhlig (2009)
present value cumulative multiplier, shown by the solid line, uses the ratio of the present value of
the integral of impulse response of output to the present value of the integral of the impulse
response of government spending up to each horizon h (again multiplied by the average Y/G
factor). This multiplier varies between 0.7 and 1, depending on the horizon. The discounting uses
the average three-month Treasury bill rate over the sample, 3.6 percent on an annual basis, but
because the timing of the shift the simple cumulative version is almost identical.

2

Note that the Blanchard-Perotti identification method is distinct from the Blanchard-Perotti method for calculating
multipliers; their method for calculating multipliers could be applied to estimates using any identification method.

11

Now let us return to the issues raised by the practice of converting elasticities with the ad
hoc conversion factor, the average of 𝑌𝑌/𝐺𝐺 over the sample. Owyang, Ramey, and Zubairy (2013)

discovered biases that could arise from this practice. In their historical sample, Y/G varied
significantly, from 2 to 24, with a mean of 8. Sims and Wolff (2018a, b) also discovered that this
practice tends to bias multipliers differentially, making them seem much higher during recessions.
The intuition is straightforward: because GDP is cyclical but government spending is not, the
movement of 𝑌𝑌𝑡𝑡 /𝐺𝐺𝑡𝑡 is procylical. However, the practice of using a sample average of 𝑌𝑌/𝐺𝐺 to

convert elasticities to multipliers makes the multipliers appear more countercyclical than they
really are. Owyang Ramey, and Zubairy avoided this problem by using the transformations
employed by Hall (2010) and Barro and Redlick (2011): both the change in government spending

and the change in GDP are divided by lagged GDP. Another transformation that overcomes the
problem is Gordon and Krenn’s (2010) transformation, which divides both government spending
and GDP by a measure of potential GDP.
To illustrate the effect of moving from a specification in logarithms that requires the ad
hoc conversion factor to one that does not, I re-estimate the model from Figures 1 and 2 using
Gordon and Krenn’s (2010) transformation for government spending, GDP, and taxes, employing
Ramey and Zubairy’s (2018) polynomial trend estimate of potential GDP. The general shape of
the estimated impulse responses (not shown) is very similar to those from the log specification,
but the directly estimated multipliers are different. The solid line with diamonds in Figure 2 shows
the cumulative multiplier estimates based on the impulse responses from this alternative

12

specification. These directly-estimated multipliers, which do not rely on a conversion factor, are
lower and range from 0.8 on impact down to 0.6. 3
Thus, deceptively small changes in the method of calculation can make a very big
difference in the resulting multipliers. For this application, using Blanchard and Perotti’s (2002)
quasi-multiplier for government spending on estimated elasticities requiring an ad hoc conversion
factor produces a multiplier as high as 2.2. That multiplier falls below 0.8 when the fully dynamic
Mountford and Uhlig (2009) cumulative multiplier is used on estimates based on data using the
Gordon and Krenn (2010) transformation.

Clearly, such differences could have important

consequences for the decisions of policymakers.
In addition, even the cumulative multipliers do not fully reflect the consequences for the
government budget. If an increase in government spending raises GDP, then we would expect a
rise in tax revenues. Thus, even without an exogenous increase in tax rates, we would expect the
government budget deficit to rise less than the total amount of government spending. This insight
raises a complication when applying these same principles to the computation of tax multipliers,
with one additional complication. While there is strong feedback from GDP to tax revenue, there
is little feedback from GDP to government spending. As a result, the negative effect of a tax cut
on tax revenue is tempered by the feedback from the expansionary effect on output. Indeed,
Mertens and Ravn (2013) were not able to compute a multiplier for corporate tax cuts because
their large positive impact on GDP resulted in no net effect on tax revenues. Because of the
presence of these “top of the Laffer curve” effects in some applications, most papers report
multipliers using the tax changes measured as the legislative forecasts of the expected cumulative

3

This bias also affects the multipliers I reported in Ramey (2011a). The cumulative multipliers based on the
elasticity estimates and conversion factor were 1.2. However, in Ramey (2013), I found evidence that private
spending fell, which is inconsistent with a multiplier above 1.

13

effect on tax revenues, not accounting for dynamic feedback from any potential induced GDP
changes.

The Importance of Fiscal Foresight
An important innovation in the fiscal literature in the last decade is the recognition that
many changes in government spending and taxes are announced in advance. In Ramey (2011a), I
showed the importance of anticipations for estimating the effects of government spending shocks,
particularly those involving military spending. For example, the responses of key variables such
as consumption could change signs if researchers ignored the fact that many changes in
government spending are anticipated by at least several quarters. A number of papers also show
that “shocks” identified in standard ways are predicted by professional forecasts of government
spending. On the tax front, House and Shapiro (2006) and Mertens and Ravn (2012) demonstrated
the importance of distinguishing between changes in taxes implemented soon after legislation and
changes in taxes implemented with a lag after legislation or phased in slowly. Both papers showed
that while unanticipated tax cuts have expansionary effects on output, phased-in tax cuts depress
output during the phase-in period because firms and consumers delay their activity until tax rates
are lower. Leeper, Walker, and Yang (2013) derived the econometric biases that arise when there
is this type of fiscal foresight. As a result of this work, most of the literature tries to address
anticipation whenever feasible, either by constructing measures of news (from narratives or bond
spreads) or by including professional forecasts of government spending to mitigate the problem.

Improvements in Fiscal Shock Identification

14

Any analysis that seeks to measure a causal effect must confront identification issues. An
example of the problem that arises here is that if governments increase spending in response to a
recession, then the simple correlation between government spending and GDP will confound the
positive causal effect of government spending on GDP with the negative causal effect of GDP on
government spending. In the past, the standard macro approach used to tease out the exogenous
rise in government spending was a structural vector autoregression (SVAR). In most applications,
this approach is based on the assumption that the exogenous part of government spending was the
part of government spending not forecasted by lagged values of spending, GDP, and taxes.
Alternatively, to identify exogenous movements in taxes, Blanchard and Perotti (2002) used
external estimates of the tax revenue elasticity to income, which allowed identification of the
component of taxes that was not induced by movements in GDP. Several papers have highlighted
potential problems with these widely-used methods. First as discussed above, failing to account
for fiscal foresight could lead to biased estimates. Second, the tax multiplier estimates were very
sensitive to the value of the external tax elasticity estimate used (for example, Mertens and Ravn
2014; Caldara and Kamps 2017). These concerns led to the development of other identification
methods using natural experiments and narrative methods. As a result, the standard SVAR
identification approach is no longer the first resort in the literature on fiscal multipliers.
In fact, long before structural vector autoregression methods were used, Hall (1980) and
Barro (1981) used natural experiment methods to assess the effects of exogenous increases in
government spending. Arguing that changes in US defense spending are typically driven by wars
rather than the current state of the economy, they used war-induced government spending to
estimate causal effects of government spending in US historical data. Ramey and Shapiro (1998)
and numerous other follow-up papers built on treating wars as a natural experiment. This method

15

that works well for US data, but it does not export well to other countries. Most countries either
do not have the substantial fluctuations in defense spending experienced by the United States or
they have large variations that are accompanied by war-related destruction of the capital stock,
which leads to confounding effects.
Other examples of recent fiscal research that use natural experiment methods abound. For
example, Acconcia, Corsetti, and Simonelli (2014) used the central government response to Mafia
infiltration as an exogenous change in government spending in Italian provinces. Many of the
analyses of the Obama stimulus allocation of funds across states used natural experiment methods.
Two analysis of marginal propensities to spend out of the temporary rebates of 2001 and 2008
exploited the randomized timing of the mailing of checks to households (Johnson, Parker, and
Souleles 2006; Parker, Souleles, Johnson, and McClelland’s 2013). The application of these
methods has shed significant light on the effects of fiscal policy, particularly at the local and
household level.
Romer and Romer (2010) pioneered the use of narrative methods to identify tax changes
that are exogenous to the state of the economy. For the post-World War II US economy, they read
legislative records to identify whether tax changes were due either to inherited deficits or to beliefs
about their ability to promote long-term growth. Their method is easily exported to other countries
and it has now become the standard method for assessing the effects of tax changes across a wide
range of countries (for example, Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori 2014). Mertens and Ravn (2012)
improved their measure by splitting their series into anticipated and unanticipated tax changes, so
that the effects of fiscal foresight could be addressed. Alesina, Favero, and Giavazzi (forthcoming)
has added to the narrative analysis of fiscal consolidations by creating narrative series of fiscal

16

plans. As they emphasize, most fiscal consolidations involve multi-year plans and those effects
should be studied as a whole rather than as independent year-by-year isolated changes.
An additional innovation in the identification of fiscal shocks has been the recognition of
the importance of instrument “relevance”—that is, whether the proposed instrument is actually
correlated with the variable it is supposed to instrument.

While early alarms about weak

instruments were raised for macro studies by Nelson and Startz (1990) and for microeconomic
studies by Bound, Baker, and Jaeger (1995), most macroeconomists began to pay attention to the
issue only in the last five to ten years. The structural vector autoregression methodology hid the
fact that the estimation of multipliers was actually an instrumental variables estimation. Ramey
(2016) and Ramey and Zubairy (2018) showed that cumulative multipliers could be estimated in
a one-step instrumental variables method based on local projects: cumulative GDP up to horizon
h is regressed on cumulative government spending up to horizon h, using an SVAR shock or a
narrative variable as an instrument. However, that recognition highlighted a widespread problem:
many of the exogenous measures of fiscal policy are not very relevant instruments, at all or in
some subsamples. For example, the military news variable I first introduced in Ramey (2011a) is
a weak instrument for the post-1954 period, as are the alternative measures of defense news of
Fisher and Peters (2010) and Ben Zeev and Pappa (2017). In contrast, the Blanchard and Perotti
(2002) shock is a strong instrument by its nature, particularly at short horizons, since it is simply
the one-step ahead forecast error of government spending.

In sum, research on the effects of fiscal policy has made significant strides in methodology.
The literature now exploits many new datasets. It has imported some innovations from the applied
microeconomics literature, and has extended them in important ways that account for anticipations

17

and dynamics. Moreover, those estimates are now converted to multipliers defined in a way that
is relevant for policymakers.

A Summary of Estimates of Spending and Tax Multipliers

This section summarizes the actual estimates of fiscal multipliers obtained from the
leading methods. I begin with estimates based on aggregate data. I first review the estimated
multipliers on government purchases, initially averages and then by state-dependence, and then
move on to the effects of tax changes and transfer payments. I then discuss estimates of the effects
of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and the fiscal consolidations in Europe.

Government Spending Multipliers Based on Aggregate Data
Table 1 shows a sampling of estimates of government spending multipliers, grouped by
method. Panel A shows estimates based on a variety of time series implementations and for a
number of countries. Virtually all estimates shown are based on present value or undiscounted
cumulative multipliers; in some cases, I updated the original estimates to apply best practices. As
shown in Figure 2, the cumulative multipliers usually do not vary greatly across horizons up to
five years, so there is little difference between average or peak multipliers. Panel B shows
estimates based on New Keynesian dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models. On balance,
the estimated multipliers are not very different across the two leading methods for identifying
government spending shocks in time series, nor for estimated New Keynesian dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium models. The estimates show that for a variety of samples, identification
methods, and countries, most of the estimates are around one or below. A few estimates are

18

noticeably above one, such as the Ben Zeev and Pappa (2017) estimate, but they tend to be less
precise and are not statistically different from one. 4
Not shown in the table are numerous multiplier estimates based on key features of a
country. For example, Iltzetzki, Mendoza, Vegh (2010) estimate how multipliers change across
various important features, such as whether an economy has fixed or flexible exchange rates. They
find multipliers that vary between 0.1 on impact to 1.4 long-run (with a 90-percent confidence
interval from around 0.75 to 2.1) for fixed exchange rates and from 0.1 to -0.7 for flexible exchange
rates. Thus, the range of estimated multipliers may become much wider when one begins to
distinguish by key country characteristics.
The results shown in Table 1 are for total government spending or government
consumption. Earlier work by Aschauer (1989), Pereira and Flores de Frutos (1999), and others
found high returns to public investment. There is surprisingly little recent aggregate evidence on
multipliers for public investment. As one example, Iltzetzki, Mendoza, Vegh (2010) found
multipliers for public investment that ranged between 0.4 in the short-run to 1.6 in the long-run in
their panel of countries.
Even if government spending multipliers are probably one or below on average, might they
be higher during bad economic times? The key states studied by recent papers are the size of fiscal
multipliers during recessions or periods of excess slack (typically measured by unemployment
rates), constraints on the monetary policy accommodation (such as the zero lower bound), and the
ratio of public debt to GDP.
Consider first multipliers during recessions or periods of slack.

Auerbach and

Gorodnichenko (2012), who conducted the pioneering study on this question, used a nonlinear

4

These estimates are based on Ramey’s (2016) analysis using Ben Zeev and Pappa’s estimated news series.

19

time series model in which the parameters changed across expansions and recessions. They
reported a multiplier of 2.2 in recessions and -0.3 in expansions (based on some simplifying
assumptions about the state of the economy not changing after the shock). Various other studies
have found high multipliers during recessions (for example, Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2013;
Fazzari, Morley, and Panovski 2015; Caggiano et al. 2015). However, subsequent research has
found many of the state dependent results to be very fragile to small changes in specification or to
improvements in the methods for computing the multipliers from the basic estimates (Alloza 2017;
Owyang et al. 2013; Ramey and Zubairy 2018, and associated online appendix). The more robust
methods generally fail to produce multipliers above one during recessions or times of slack.
Perhaps these empirical results should not be surprising, given some other results of theory
and quantitative models. The only theoretical models that predict countercyclical markups are
ones that include significant frictions. For example, Michaillat (2014) presents a stylized model
with labor market frictions and finds that the aggregate employment effect of government hiring
is countercyclical. However, the multipliers are always below one. Canzoneri et al. (2016) present
a model with financial frictions that does generate sizeable, though fleeting, multipliers during
recessions. They find significantly higher impact multipliers during recessions, near two, but the
cumulative multipliers fall below one after only a few quarters. Standard new Keynesian models
do not predict higher multipliers during recessions. Indeed, Sims and Wolff (2018a) employ a
medium-scale New Keynesian DSGE model with high-order terms in the approximations and find
that this otherwise standard model implies mildly procyclical multipliers.
The situation is different with respect to periods when interest rates are near the zero lower
bound or when monetary policy accommodates government spending increases (such as during
World War II in the United States) Numerous New Keynesian dynamic stochastic general

20

equilibrium models show that multipliers can be higher than one when monetary policy is
constrained by the zero lower bound on interest rates. At the zero lower bound, an increase in
government spending provides extra stimulus through by increasing expected inflation, which
lowers the real interest rate (Farhi and Werning 2016). Calibrated models such as the ones
analyzed by Christiano et al. (2011) and Coenen et al. (2012) can produce multipliers that range
between 2 and 3 when the period of monetary accommodation is sufficiently long. Some recent
empirical work has found some evidence of higher multipliers, ranging from 1.5 to 2.5 at the zero
lower bound for Japan (Miyamoto et al. 2018) and around 1.5 for historical samples in the U.S.
(Ramey and Zubairy 2018).
Finally, there is evidence that government spending multipliers may be negatively related
to the public debt-to-GDP ratio. For example, Iltzetzki et al. (2013) find that countries with a
government debt-to-GDP ratio above 60 percent have an impact multiplier of 0 and a long-run
multiplier of -3 (estimated less precisely but still statistically below 0).
In summary, most estimates of government spending multipliers for general categories of
government spending for averages over samples are in the range of 0.6 to 0.8, or perhaps up to 1.
The evidence for multipliers above one during recessions or times of slack is typically not robust.
However, some initial explorations suggest that government spending multipliers could be higher
at times when monetary policy accommodates fiscal policy, such as during periods at the zero
lower bound of interest rates or wartime.

Tax and Transfer Multipliers based on Aggregate Data
I now to turn to the leading estimates of tax and transfer multipliers at the aggregate level.
Table 2 shows the estimates from time series and dynamic stochastic models general equilibrium

21

estimates for tax rate changes. In contrast to government spending multipliers which vary only a
small amount across horizons, many estimates of tax multipliers start out low on impact but then
build. Thus, I report the cumulative multipliers for the horizon where they peak. I should also
note that most of the multipliers are calculated without allowing feedback from induced output
changes to revenue but several (noted in the table) allow for the dynamic feedback.
Most of the time series estimates based on narrative methods of identification are quite
high, generally between -2 and -3. These narrative-based estimates are striking not only for their
magnitudes, but also for their uniformity across countries and even across various methods of
estimation. These estimates are much higher (in absolute value) than the tax multipliers reported
by Blanchard and Perotti (2002). As discussed above, those estimates were based both on their
assumed elasticity of tax revenue to output and on their unusual way of computing multipliers.
Barro and Redlick (2011) estimate multipliers around -1.1. It may be that their use of various
approximations and constraints on dynamics account for their smaller estimate. On the other hand,
Mountford and Uhlig’s (2009) estimates using sign restrictions are -5.
In contrast, the quantitative model estimates are much lower. Panel B of Table 2 shows
that most quantitative model estimates yield multipliers that are below 1 in absolute value. Thus,
there is a conflict between the time series estimates and the New Keynesian estimates.
There is a small literature on whether tax multipliers differ by the state of the economy. So
far, this literature offers fairly uniform answers. Eskandari (2015) and Demirel (2016) find, using
the Romer and Romer (2010) narrative tax shocks, that tax multipliers are greater during times of
low unemployment than times of high unemployment. Alesina, Azzalini, Favero, Giavazzi, and
Miano (2018) also find higher multipliers in expansions using their narrative of fiscal plans across
OECD countries. These results are consistent with the one New Keynesian analysis of this issue

22

using the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium approach. Sims and Wolff (2018b) obtain
estimates of tax multipliers that are procyclical: tor example, their capital tax multiplier is 1 in
recessions and almost 2 in expansions.

There has been very little work on the aggregate effects of transfers. Romer and Romer
(2016) used changes in Social Security benefit increases to study the effects on macroeconomic
variables.

They found that permanent increases in benefits led to a roughly equal rise in

consumption in the short-run, but the effect dissipated quickly. Temporary increases in benefits
had no significant effect on aggregate consumption. Coenen et al. (2012) studied general transfers
and directed transfers across the various New Keynesian dynamic stochastic general equillibirum
models used at policy institutions. They found that general transfers had multipliers between 0.2
and 0.6, with the higher ones occurring with monetary accommodation. In contrast, targeted
transfers (to households that were financially constrained) yielded multipliers as high as 2 in some
models when there was monetary accommodation.
In sum, most time series estimates of tax rate change multipliers indicate that they are very
large, at least -2 to -3. This contrasts with the results from estimated New Keynesian dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium, where the multipliers are typically below 1 and never higher than
1.5. There is not much aggregate time series evidence for sizeable multipliers for temporary
transfers, though calibrated New Keynesian models suggest they can be high if they are targeted
and if monetary policy is accommodative.

23

Multiplier Estimates based on Subnational Data
One of the important innovations in the fiscal multiplier literature, as discussed earlier in
this paper, has been the application of applied microeconomics-type identification methods to the
estimation of parameters of use for macroeconomics. These include studies of panels or crosssections of US states or provinces in other countries, as well as household-level estimates of
marginal propensities to spend out of temporary transfers.
Chodorow-Reich (forthcoming) summarizes the panel and cross-section multipliers from
individual studies, so I refer the reader to his tables. Many of the subnational multipliers for
government purchases, temporary tax rebates, and transfers lie between 1.5 to 2. Thus, they tend
to be higher than the aggregate-level estimates of multipliers.
As noted earlier, subnational multipliers are not the same as aggregate multipliers. The
relationship between subnational multipliers and aggregate multipliers depends on many features,
including how the spending is financed, whether there are spillovers across regions, whether there
is a currency union, and whether the aggregate economy is at the zero lower bound. For discussion
of a number of the theoretical considerations issues involved in drawing implications from
subnational multiplier estimates to aggregate estimates, see Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), Farhi
and Werning (2016), and Chodorow-Reich (forthcoming). In some instances, the subnational
multipliers are expected to be higher than the aggregate multipliers, whereas in other instances the
they are expected to be lower. There is no general rule. Dupor and Guerrero (2017) conduct an
empirical investigation in which they directly compare estimates based on a state-level panel to
those obtained when the state data are aggregated to the national level. They obtain similar
multiplier estimates across the two data sets, though quite low, between 0 and 0.5.

24

Multipliers in the Wake of the Financial Crisis
A number of researchers and commentators have argued that the effects of the stimulus
from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, and the subsequent fiscal
consolidations in European countries were much larger than indicated by multipliers during
average times. A common theme is that the high unemployment rates and lower bound on interest
rates combined to raise the multipliers. But as shown in the previous sections, there is no robust
evidence of higher multipliers during recessions or times of slack, for either spending or taxes. In
fact, all studies of state dependence for tax multipliers find higher multipliers during expansions.
However, there is evidence from historical periods in the United States and from Japan, as well as
from New Keynesian models, that multipliers can be higher than one during periods of monetary
accommodation such as the zero lower bound on interest rates. Thus, it is possible that multipliers
could have been higher after the financial crisis.
Consider first the fiscal consolidations in Europe. Blanchard and Leigh (2013, 2014)
presented evidence that countries that implemented bigger fiscal consolidations grew more slowly
than forecasted by the IMF and other organizations. They concluded that the models used by
forecasters assumed values of multipliers that were too small. Górnicka et al. (2018) gathered data
on the forecasters’ assumed values of multipliers and found that they were very low, around 0.25.
They then calculated that the “true” multipliers were higher, though they never exceeded one.
The conclusions of Górnicka et al. (2018) are consistent with some other analyses of the
size of multipliers in the European fiscal consolidations. For example, Alesina, Favero, and
Giavazzi (forthcoming) use their narrative data set of fiscal consolidation plans across OECD
countries to study whether fiscal multipliers were greater in the immediate post-financial crisis

25

years. They find no evidence that multipliers were greater. At this point, the evidence does not
suggest that multipliers were larger than normal for the fiscal consolidations in Europe.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009 was the leading stimulus
program in the US economy. This program was a mix of spending and transfers to states and
individuals. As Table 3 shows, none of the New Keynesian DSGE models finds multipliers above
1 for this program, with the exception of one experiment by Coenen et al. (2012) that included two
years of monetary accommodation. While interest rates were indeed at the zero lower bound
during those years, Swanson and Williams (2014) present evidence that yields on one-year and
two-year treasury bills were unconstrained from 2008 to 2010, “suggesting that monetary policy
and fiscal policy were about as effective as usual during this period.”
In contrast, the cross-state estimates of the effects of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act are typically much higher.

Chodorow-Reich (forthcoming) presents an

extremely valuable standardization and synthesis of the leading estimates of the effects of the
stimulus act on job creation across US states. This literature emphasizes employment effects,
mainly because the employment data have less measurement error than gross state product. These
estimates are based on strong applied microeconomic methods. His cross-state natural experiment
estimates indicate multipliers from 1.7 to 2 for gross state product and $50,000 per job-year
created. Building on Farhi and Werning’s (2016) theoretical analysis, Chodorow-Reich
(forthcoming) argues that these subnational multipliers are lower bounds on the national
multipliers during a liquidity trap. Thus, he argues that the multiplier from the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act was at least 2.
But there is reason to suspect that the state-level estimates of the effects of the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act presented by Chodorow-Reich (forthcoming) are probably

26

overestimates for the national-level multipliers. His cross-state estimates answer one question:
“How much extra employment was induced in the average state by each $1 of ARRA spending by
the federal government?” But the question relevant for the aggregate effects is a different one:
“How much extra aggregate employment was generated by each $1 of government spending
induced by ARRA spending by the federal government?” Chodorow-Reich uses per capita values
of spending and employment, so his cross-state estimates give equal weight to North Dakota and
California, which is fine for answering the first cross-state question. But if there is heterogeneity
in the treatment effects, however, the estimates will not give estimates that are nationally
representative. 5 Thus, the data need to be weighted by population or in some other way to obtain
nationally representative results. A second issue is that Chodorow-Reich’s measure of spending
is federal ARRA spending, which again is appropriate for measuring the first cross-state question.
However, ARRA spending stimulated state and local spending more than dollar for dollar (Leduc
and Wilson 2017)

Thus, multipliers that use only the ARRA transfers to the states will

overestimate the multiplier per dollar spent across all levels of government.
Table 4 shows the effects of adjusting the employment response estimates to make them
more suitable for answering the question about aggregate effects of federal government spending.
The first row shows Chodorow-Reich’s (forthcoming) preferred estimates, which use all three of
the leading American Recovery and Reinvestment Act instruments.6 The estimates are for jobyears created for each $100,000 of ARRA spending. The estimate of 2.01 implies that each
$100,000 of ARRA spending creates two job-years of employment. The second row of Table 4

5
Most of the literature using cross-sectional estimates has used per capita estimates and has not weighted the
estimates. However, Dupor and Mehkari (2016) started weighting the estimates and discovered that weighted
estimates of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 are much lower than unweighted estimates.
6
These three instruments are based on either Medicaid formulas alone, Department of Transportation formulas
alone, or a combination of multiple agency formulas.

27

shows the results of my re-estimating Chodorow-Reich’s model (using his replication files) but
weighting by initial state population (in December 2008) to make them representative of national
data. The point estimate falls to 1.15 and the standard error is higher at 0.72. The third row of
Table 4 shows the estimates when spending across the levels of government are substituted for the
ARRA spending. Here, I use the Chodorow-Reich combination of instruments and I weight by
initial state population. The jobs multiplier estimate is now 0.89 with a standard error of 0.45.
Chodorow-Reich’s method for converting jobs multipliers to output multipliers is nearly one-forone, so the 0.89 estimate also implies an output multiplier around 0.9. Thus, once the cross-state
estimates are made nationally representative and include all spending, they look very much like
the aggregate estimates and lie below unity.
Two important caveats about these adjusted estimates are in order. First, reweighting by
population gives very large influence to just a few of the 50 states. Second, the great instrument
relevance in Chodorow-Reich’s analysis disappears once I add state and local spending to
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act spending. In other words, the instruments that are so
good at explaining ARRA spending are not very good at explaining total government spending in
the state. Thus, it appears that the natural experiments exploited by the ARRA literature are rich
enough to answer questions about the effects of ARRA spending on a cross-state basis, but not to
answer questions about the aggregate effects of government spending induced by the ARRA.
In sum, a number of commentators and researchers have argued that multipliers may have
been higher than usual after the financial crisis. I interpret most of the evidence at this point as
suggesingt that they were not higher than usual.

Conclusion

28

The fiscal literature has made tremendous progress in the ten years since the start of the
global financial crisis. The range of estimates for average multipliers has been reduced
considerably, particularly for government purchases.

On average, government purchases

multipliers are likely to be between 0.6 and 1. Narrative-based times series estimates point to tax
rate change multipliers between -2 and -3, though these are significantly greater in magnitude than
those predicted by DSGE models. However, there is still ongoing debate about specific contexts,
such as the size of multipliers during “bad” times and the effects of other characteristics, such as
exchange rate regimes.
Across industrialized countries, most of the temporary stimulus packages enacted from
2007 to 2009 in response to the global financial crisis took the form of transfer payments or lumpsum tax rebates (Oh and Reis (2012)). Policymakers were “flying blind” in that they had little
research to guide them at that time. Had they known then some the results now emerging from
the literature, they might have fashioned the stimulus packages differently, perhaps relying more
on tax rate cuts and less on expenditures.
I believe the literature would benefit from progress in three main areas. First, the literature
needs to catch up to the current policy discussions by focusing more on the short-run and long-run
effects of infrastructure investment.

The few studies at the aggregate and subnational levels

suggest that these multipliers can be very large in some contexts (e.g. Leduc and Wilson (2013)).
Second, researchers need to be careful about their implementation decisions. Seemingly small
changes, such as how multipliers are actually calculated, can make a big difference. Finally,
researchers should continue to innovate along the lines they have pursued in the last ten years,
exploiting new data sets, extending theoretical models, and improving estimation techniques. As

29

part of this innovation, researchers need to think more about the link between micro estimates and
aggregate effects.

30

References
Acconcia, Antonio, Giancarlo Corsetti, and Saverio Simonelli. 2014. "Mafia and Public Spending:
Evidence on the Fiscal Multiplier from a Quasi-Experiment." American Economic Review
104 (7): 2185-2209.
Alesina, Alberto, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi. Forthcoming Austerity: When It Works
and When It Does Not. Princeton University Press.
Alesina, Alberto, Gualtiero Azzalini, Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, and Armando Miano.
2018. "Is it the “How” or the “When” that Matters in Fiscal Adjustments?" IMF Economic
Review 66 (1): 144-188.
Alloza, Mario. 2017. “Is Fiscal Policy More Effective in Uncertain Times or During Recessions?”
Banco de España Working Paper No. 1730.
Aschauer, David Alan. 1989. "Is Public Expenditure Productive?" Journal of Monetary Economics
23(2): 177-200.
Auclert, Adrien, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub, “The Intertemporal Keynesian Cross,”
Northwestern manuscript.
Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
Policy.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2): 1-27.
Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2013. “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and
Expansion.” In Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis, eds. Alberto Alesina and
Francesco Giavazzi, 63-98. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Barro, Robert J. 1981. “Output Effects of Government Purchases.” The Journal of Political
Economy 89 (6): 1086-1121.
Barro, Robert J., and Charles J. Redlick. 2011. "Macroeconomic Effects from Government
Purchases and Taxes." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1): 51-102.
Baxter, Marianne, and Robert G. King. 1993. “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium.” American
Economic Review 83(3): 315–334.
Ben Zeev, Nadav, and Evi Pappa. 2017. "Chronicle of a War Foretold: The Macroeconomic
Effects of Anticipated Defence Spending Shocks." The Economic Journal 127 (603): 15681597.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Daniel Leigh. 2013. "Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers."
American Economic Review 103 (3): 117-20.

31

Blanchard, Olivier J., and Daniel Leigh. 2014. "Learning about Fiscal Multipliers from Growth
Forecast Errors." IMF Economic Review 62 (2): 179-212.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti. 2002. “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic
Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (4): 1329-1368.
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker. 1995. "Problems with Instrumental Variables
Estimation When the Correlation between the Instruments and the Endogenous
Explanatory Variable is Weak." Journal of the American Statistical Association 90 (430):
443-450.
Caggiano, Giovanni, Efrem Castelnuovo, Valentina Colombo, and Gabriela Nodari. 2015.
Economics Journal 125 (584): 746-776.
Caldara, Dario, and Christophe Kamps. 2017. "The Analytics of SVARs: A Unified Framework
to Measure Fiscal Multipliers." The Review of Economic Studies 84 (3): 1015-1040.
Canova, Fabio, and Luca Sala. 2009. "Back to Square One: Identification Issues in DSGE Models."
Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (4): 431-449.
Canzoneri, Matthew, Fabrice Collard, Harris Dellas, and Behzad Diba. 2016. “Fiscal Multipliers
in Recessions.” Economic Journal 126 (590): 75-108.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. Forthcoming. “Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Spending
Multipliers: What Have We Learned?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Cloyne, James. 2013. “Discretionary Tax Changes and the Macroeconomy: New Narrative
Evidence from the United Kingdom.” The American Economic Review 103(4): 1507-1528.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “When is the Government
Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy 119 (1): 78-121.
Coenen, Günter, Christopher J. Erceg, Charles Freedman, Davide Furceri, Michael Kumhof, René
Lalonde, Douglas Laxton et al. 2012. "Effects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models."
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1): 22-68.
Cogan, John F., Tobias Cwik, John B. Taylor, and Volker Wieland. 2010. "New Keynesian versus
Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers." Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control 34 (3): 281-295.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Andre Meier, and Gernot J. Müller. 2012. "What Determines Government
Spending Multipliers?" Economic Policy 27 (72): 521-565.

32

Crafts, Nicholas, and Terence C. Mills. 2013. "Rearmament to the Rescue? New Estimates of the
Impact of “Keynesian” Policies in 1930s' Britain." The Journal of Economic History 73
(4): 1077-1104.
Demirel, Ufuk Devrim. 2016. “The Short-Term Effects of Tax Changes—Evidence for State
Dependence.” Congressional Budget Office Working Paper 2016-03.
Drautzburg, Thorsten, and Harald Uhlig. 2015. “Fiscal Stimulus and Distortionary Taxation.”
Review of Economic Dynamics 18 (4): 894-920.
Dupor, Bill and Rodrigo Guerrero. 2017. “Local and Aggregate Fiscal Multipliers.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 92 (December): 16-30.
Dupor, Bill and M. Saif Mehkari. 2016. "The 2009 Recovery Act: Stimulus at the Extensive and
Intensive Labor Margins." European Economic Review 85: 208-228.
Eskandari, Ruhollah. 2015. “State-Dependent Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates
Based on Narrative Records in the US” in Three Essays on Tax Policy, Macroeconomics,
and Corporate Policies. University of Milan dissertation.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2016. "Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency
Unions." In Handbook of Macroeconomics, eds. John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig. Vol. 2,
2417-2492. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Fazzari, Steven M., James Morley, and Irina Panovska. 2015. “State-Dependent Effects of Fiscal
Policy.” Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics and Econometrics 19 (3): 285-315.
Fisher, Jonas D.M., and Ryan Peters. 2010. “Using Stock Returns to Identify Government
Spending Shocks.” The Economic Journal 120 (544): 414-436.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift. 2018. “Bartik Instruments: What,
When, Why, and How.” NBER Working Paper 24408, revised July 2018.
Gordon, Robert J., and Robert Krenn. 2010. "The End of the Great Depression: VAR Insight on
the Roles of Monetary and Fiscal Policy." NBER Working Paper 16380.
Górnicka, Lucyna, Christophe Kamps, Gerrit Koster, and Nadine Leiner-Killinger. 2018.
“Learning about Fiscal Multipliers during the European Sovereign Debt Crisis: Evidence
from a Quasi-Natural Experiment.” European Central Bank working paper no. 2154, May.
Guajardo, Jaime, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori. 2014. "Expansionary Austerity?
International Evidence." Journal of the European Economic Association 12 (4): 949-968.
Hall, Robert E. 1980 “Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 12: 7-33.

33

Hall, Robert E. 2010. "By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More Output?"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009(2):183-231.
Hayo, Bernd, and Matthias Uhl. 2013. "The Macroeconomic Effects of Legislated Tax Changes
in Germany." Oxford Economic Papers 66 (2): 397-418.
House, Christopher L., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2006. "Phased in Tax Cuts and Economic
Activity." American Economic Review 96 (5): 1835-1849.
House, Christopher L., Christian Proebsting, and Linda L. Tesar. 2017. “Austerity in the
Aftermath of the Great Recession.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper, No. W23147.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Carlos A. Végh. 2013. "How Big (Small?) are Fiscal
Multipliers?" Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (2): 239-254.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2006. "Household Expenditure
and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001." American Economic Review 96 (5): 1589-1610.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections.”
American Economic Review 95 (1): 161-82.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. "A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
Stimulus Payments." Econometrica 82 (4): 1199-1239.
Leduc, Sylvain and Daniel Wilson. 2013. "Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory
and Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment.” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 27 (1): 89-142.
Leduc, Sylvain, and Daniel Wilson. "Are State Governments Roadblocks to Federal Stimulus?
Evidence on the Flypaper Effect of Highway Grants in the 2009 Recovery Act." American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (2): 253-92.
Leeper, Eric M., Nora Traum, and Todd B. Walker. 2017. "Clearing up the Fiscal Multiplier
Morass." American Economic Review 107 (8): 2409-54.
Leeper, Eric M., Todd B. Walker, and Shu‐Chun Susan Yang. "Fiscal Foresight and Information
Flows." Econometrica 81 (3): 1115-1145.
Leigh, Daniel, Pete Devries, Charles Freedman, Jaime Guajardo, Douglas Laxton, and Andrea
Pescatori. 2010. "Will it Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation." IMF
World Economic Outlook (October), Ch. 3: 93-124.
Mertens, Karel and Jose Montiel-Olea. 2018. “Marginal Tax Rates and Income: New Time Series
Evidence”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (issue no. and page numbers
forthcoming).

34

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2012. "Empirical evidence on the aggregate effects of
anticipated and unanticipated US tax policy shocks." American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 4 (2): 145-81.
Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2013. "The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate
Income Tax Changes in the United States." American Economic Review, 103(4): 1212-47.
Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2014. “A Reconciliation of SVAR and Narrative Estimates
of Tax Multipliers,” Journal of Monetary Economics 68 (December Supplement): S1-S19.
Michaillat, Pascal. 2014. “A Theory of Countercyclical Multiplier.” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 6 (1): 190-217.
Miyamoto, Wataru, Nguyen, Thuy Lan, and Dmitriy Sergeyev. 2018. “Government Spending
Multipliers Under the Zero Lower Bound.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
10 (3): 247-277.
Mountford, Andrew, and Harald Uhlig. 2009. "What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?."
Journal of Applied Econometrics 24 (6): 960-992.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson. 2014. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from
U.S. Regions.” American Economic Review 104 (3): 753-792.
Nelson, Charles R., and Richard Startz. 1990. "Some Further Results on the Exact Small Sample
Properties of the Instrumental Variable Estimator." Econometrica: Journal of the
Econometric Society 58 (4): 967-976.
Oh, Hyunseung, and Ricardo Reis. 2012. "Targeted Transfers and the Fiscal Response to the Great
Recession." Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (Supplement): S50-S64.
Owyang, Michael T., Valerie A. Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy. 2013. "Are Government Spending
Multipliers Greater during Periods of Slack? Evidence from Twentieth-Century Historical
Data." The American Economic Review 103 (3): 129-134.
Parker, Jonathan A, Nicolas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, Robert McClelland. 2013. “Consumer
Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008.” The American Economic Review
103 (6): 2530-2553.
Pereira, Alfredo M., and Rafael Flores De Frutos. 1999. "Public Capital Accumulation and Private
Sector Performance." Journal of Urban Economics 46 (2): 300-322.
Ramey, Valerie A. and Matthew Shapiro. 1998. “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects of
Government Spending.” Carnegie Rochester Conference on Public Policy 38 (1): 145-194.

35

Ramey, Valerie A. 2011a. "Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It's All in the Timing." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1): 1-50.
Ramey, Valerie A. 2011B. "Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?" Journal of
Economic Literature 49 (3): 673-85.
Ramey, Valerie A. "Government Spending and Private Activity." 2013. Fiscal Policy after the
Financial Crisis, edited by Alberto Alesian and Francesco Giavazzi, pp. 19–55. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Ramey, Valerie A. 2016. "Macroeconomic Shocks and their Propagation." In Handbook of
Macroeconomics, eds. John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig. Vol. 2, 71-162. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Ramey, Valerie A., and Sarah Zubairy. 2018. "Government spending multipliers in good times
and in bad: evidence from US historical data." Journal of Political Economy 126 (2): 850901.
Ramey, Valerie A. Forthcoming. “Fiscal Policy: Tax and Spending Multipliers in the United
States,” in Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy IV, Peterson Institute for International
Economics (PIIE), MIT Press.
Riera-Crichton, Daniel, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin. 2016. “Tax Multipliers: Pitfalls
in Measurement and Identification.” Journal of Monetary Economics 79 (May): 30-48.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” American Economic Review 100
(3): 763-801.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2016. "Transfer Payments and the Macroeconomy:
The Effects of Social Security Benefit Increases, 1952-1991." American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (4): 1-42.
Sahm, Claudia R., Matthew D. Shapiro, Joel Slemrod. 2012. “Check in the Mail or More in the
Paycheck: Does the Effectiveness of Fiscal Stimulus Depend on How it is Delivered?”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4 (3): 216-250.
Sims, Eric and Jonathan Wolff. 2018a. “The Output and Welfare Effects of Government Spending
Shocks over the Business Cycle.” International Economic Review 59 (3): 1403-1435.
Sims, Eric and Jonathan Wolff. 2018b. “The State-Dependent Effects of Tax Shocks.” European
Economic Review 107: 57-85.
Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams. 2014. "Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound
on Medium-and Longer-Term Interest Rates." American Economic Review 104 (10): 315485.

36

Zubairy, Sarah. 2014. "On Fiscal Multipliers: Estimates from a Medium Scale DSGE Model."
International Economic Review 55 (1): 169-195.

37

Table 1
Estimates of Government Spending Multipliers using Aggregate Data, No State
Dependence
Method/Sample

Multipliers

Comments
Cumulative multipliers, typically
over horizons between 0 to 20
quarters
A. Time series analysis
Updated implementation of
The tax response is positive for the
Blanchard-Perotti (2002) identified
1939q1-2015q4 period, but is
SVAR
essentially 0 for the later periods.
0.6 to 0.8
1939q1 – 2015q4
0.6 to 0.7
1947q1 – 2015q4
Military news shocks, local
Tax response is positive for
projections
1939q1-2015q4 period.
Ramey-Zubairy (2018) military news
0.6 to 0.8
S.E. from 0.04 to 0.06
1889q1–2015q4
0.7 to 0.8
S.E. from 0.05 to 0.1
1939q1 – 2015q4
0.5 to 0.7
S.E. from 0.15 to 0.2
1947q1 – 2015q4
Ben Zeev-Pappa (2017) news,
1.1 to 2
S.E. from 0.6 to 1.
1947q1-2007q4
Hall (2010), Barro and Redlick (2011)
The Barro-Redlick analysis nets
– based on regressions using annual
0.6 to 0.7
out effects of changes in tax rates.
defense spending.
Mountford and Uhlig (2009), SVAR
Deficit-financed increase in
with sign restrictions
0.65
government spending.
Iltzetzki, Mendoza, Vegh (2013), BP
identification in SVAR, quarterly data,
1960-2007,44 countries
High income countries
0.3 to 0.7
Corsetti, Meier, and Mueller (2012)
0.7
Based on unconditional model
results reported in their Figure 1.
Leigh et al. (2010), Guajardo, Leigh
and Pescatori (2014), 17 OECD
countries, 1978 – 2009, narrative
method identification of spendingbased fiscal consolidations
0.3
Alesina, Favero, and Giavazzi
(forthcoming). Narrative analysis of
austerity plans, 16 OECD economies
0.3
from 1978 - 2014.

38

B. Estimated New Keynesian DSGE models
Cogan et al. (2010), estimated SmetsBased on my visual inspection of
Wouters DSGE model on U.S. data
0.6 to 0.7
Figures 2, 3, and 4.
Coenen et al. (2012), large-scale
Based on the two year cumulative
macro models used by central banks
multipliers shown in the upper left
and IMF, U.S. and Europe
0.7 to 1
graph in their Figure 6.
Zubairy (2014), estimated medium
scale DSGE model estimated on U.S.
Deficit financed, model features
data.
0.7 to 1.05
deep habits.
Leeper, Traum, and Walker (2017),
estimated DSGE model on U.S. data
0.7 to 1.36
Active monetary policy, Table 7
Sims and Wolff (2018a)
1.07
The multiplier above 1 is due to
estimated complementarity of
government spending with private
consumption.

39

Table 2
Estimates of Tax Change Multipliers using Aggregate Data, No State Dependence
† denotes multipliers computed using the cumulative actual response of tax revenues or deficits
in the denominator.
Method/Sample
Largest
Comments
cumulative
multipliers
within first 5
years.
A. Time Series Methods
Mountford and Uhlig (2009), SVAR with sign
restrictions, U.S. data
-5†
Romer and Romer (2010), narrative series of tax
The output effects take
changes unrelated to current economy, U.S. data,
time to build.
1950 to 2007, dynamic single equation model or
VAR
-2.5 to -3
Barro and Redlick (2011), historical annual U.S.
data, tax rate shocks.
-1.1
Mertens and Ravn (2013, 2014), refinement of
The peak output effects
Romer and Romer series used in a proxy SVAR
occurs in the first 18
-2.5 to -3†
months.
Cloyne (2013), narrative, U.K.
-2.5
Hayo-Uhl (2013), narrative, Germany
-2.4
Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori. (2014), 17
OECD countries, 1978 – 2009, narrative taxedbased consolidations
-3
Riera-Crichton, Vegh, and Vuletin (2016) –
narrative analysis of fiscal consolidations in 15
industrialized countries from 1980 – 2009, with
focus on VAT rate changes
-3.5
Alesina, Azzalini, Favero, Giavazzi, Miano
(2018) Narrative analysis of austerity plans, 16
OECD economies from 1978 – 2014, taxed based
consolidations
Based on static primary surplus
Based on actual response of primary surplus

-1 to -1.6
-2.3 to -3.7†

40

B. Estimated New Keynesian DSGE models
Coenen et al. (2012), large-scale macro models
used by central banks and IMF, U.S. and Europe.
Two-year cuts in tax, no monetary
accommodation
-0.2 to -0.4
Consumption tax
-0.2 to -0.4
Labor tax
0 to -0.15
Corporate income tax
Zubairy (2014)
Labor tax
-0.7 to -1
Capital tax
-0.2
Sims-Wolff (2018b) – medium scale New
Keynesian DSGE model that allows for higher
order terms.
Steady-state multipliers
Consumption tax
-0.6
Labor tax
-1
Capital tax
-1.5

41

Table 3
Multipliers for the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
Method/Sample

Peak cumulative multipliers Comments
within first 5 years.

Cogan et al. (2010)
0.6 to 0.7
Coenen et al. (2012), largescale macro models used by
central banks and IMF, U.S.
and Europe

From Figure 7. These are the
peak instantaneous
multipliers.

No monetary accommodation
1 year monetary accomm.
2 years monetary accomm.
Drautzburg and Uhlig (2015),
medium scale New Keynesian
DSGE model, with ZLB,
credit constraints
Chodorow-Reich
(forthcoming), based on
cross-state estimates and
theoretical arguments about
the relationship between
subnational and national
multipliers at the ZLB.

0.3 to 0.5
0.4 to 0.6
0.5 to 1.8

GSP multiplier
Cost per job year

1.7 to 2
2 job-years per $100K

Multipliers become negative
in the long-run because of the
necessary increase in
taxation.

0.5

42

Table 4. Conversion of Chodorow-Reich Estimates to Nationally Representative Estimates
Cumulative Employment Multiplier Estimates
– Number of Job Years Created per $100K of
ARRA
Chodorow-Reich headline estimates (his
Table 1, column 4)

2.01
(0.59)

Weighted estimates (using Dec. 2008
population of state)
Weighted estimates

1.15
(0.72)

Estimates based on total spending, including
induced spending by states

0.89
(0.45)

Notes. Estimates presented in the last two rows are the author’s estimates, based on ChodorowReich’s programs and data. See the text and online appendix for more detail and programs.

43

Figure 1
Estimated Impulse Response Functions for a Shock to Government Purchases
Log GDP

-.02

-.005

0

0

.02

.005

.04

.01

.06

.015

.08

Log Government Spending

0

5

10
quarter

15

0

20

5

10
quarter

15

20

Source: Author.
Note: Estimated impulse responses based on SVAR estimates using quarterly data from 1939:1 –
2015:4. The shaded area shows the 95-percent confidence bands. See the text and online appendix
for more detail.

44

Figure 2
Alternative Definitions of Multipliers

0

.5

1

1.5

2

Multipliers by Horizon

0

5

10
quarter

Quasi multiplier, log var.
PV cumulative multiplier, Gordon-Krenn variables

15

20

PV cumulative multiplier, log var.

Source: Author.
Note: The dotted and solid lines show multipliers calculated based on the log impulse responses
shown in Figure 1. The line with diamonds shows the multiplier using the Gordon-Krenn
transformation. See the text and online appendix for more details

45

