                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME IN THE US AND ADVANCED COUNTRIES

                                       Hilary W. Hoynes
                                        Jesse Rothstein

                                      Working Paper 25538
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25538


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2019




This paper was invited for a Symposium on Universal Basic Income in Annual Review of
Economics. We thank James Hawkins, Krista Ruffini, and Rachel Young for excellent research
assistance, and Marianne Bitler, Lauren Burns-Coady, Angus Deaton, Bill Gale, Irv Garfinkel,
Robert Moffitt, Austin Nichols, Paul Niehaus, and Diane Schanzenbach for helpful comments
and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Hilary W. Hoynes and Jesse Rothstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Universal Basic Income in the US and Advanced Countries
Hilary W. Hoynes and Jesse Rothstein
NBER Working Paper No. 25538
February 2019
JEL No. H24,I3,I38

                                         ABSTRACT

We discuss the potential role of Universal Basic Incomes (UBIs) in advanced countries. A feature
of advanced economies that distinguishes them from developing countries is the existence of well
developed, if often incomplete, safety nets. We develop a framework for describing transfer
programs, flexible enough to encompass most existing programs as well as UBIs, and use this
framework to compare various UBIs to the existing constellation of programs in the United
States. A UBI would direct much larger shares of transfers to childless, non-elderly, non-disabled
households than existing programs, and much more to middle-income rather than poor
households. A UBI large enough to increase transfers to low-income families would be
enormously expensive. We review the labor supply literature for evidence on the likely impacts
of a UBI. We argue that the ongoing UBI pilot studies will do little to resolve the major
outstanding questions.


Hilary W. Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu

Jesse Rothstein
Goldman School of Public Policy and Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue #7320
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
rothstein@berkeley.edu
I.      Introduction

Universal Basic Income (UBI) proposals are getting a lot of attention in the high-income
countries. A wide range of proponents, from Charles Murray, a political scientist and scholar at
the American Enterprise Institute, to Andy Stern, former president of the Service Employees
International Union, have backed the idea. We count six recent, high-profile trade books –
including those by Murray and Stern –arguing for various forms of UBI as solutions to problems
facing first-world economies (Murray 2016; Stern 2016, Lowrey 2018, Yang 2018, Hughes 2018,
Van Parijs and Vanderborght 2017). Using a metric of mentions in New York Times articles,
“universal basic income” appears 30 times in 2017, and nearly as many in the first six months of
2018. The term never appeared before 2014; even the more expansive search term of “basic
income” averaged only two uses per year from 1945 to 2014 (Figure 1).1

Attention may be running ahead of actual policy development: there is little agreement or
definition what exactly a UBI is. And basic questions remain unresolved: about what specific
problems the program is meant to solve; about how the program relates and compares to other
existing transfer programs; and about the key research questions that need to be answered.

Our paper attempts to fill this gap. We comprehensively examine the potential role of UBIs in
advanced countries.2 We take three features to define a UBI:
    a) it provides a sufficiently generous cash benefit to live on, without other earnings;
    b) it does not phase out or phases out only slowly as earnings rise; and
    c) it is available to a large proportion of the population, rather than being targeted to a
        particular subset (e.g., to single mothers).
As we discuss below, many proposals and programs that use the name UBI depart from this
canonical structure in important ways. Indeed, some authors would disagree with our definition
– for example, Van Parijs and Vanderborght (2017) and Banerjee, Niehaus, and Suri (2018)
would include small transfers that meet criteria (b) and (c) but not (a) as UBIs.

We begin, in Section II, by discussing a range of problems for which a UBI might be seen as a
solution. One commonly cited reason to adopt a UBI is the combination of labor-displacing
technological change – journalist Annie Lowrey calls this “the robot apocalypse” (Lowrey 2018)
– and rising inequality and wage stagnation. Alternatively, a UBI might be seen as a response to
perceived inadequacies -- ineffectiveness, inefficiencies, unfairness, contingency, or
insufficiency -- of the current social safety net. These are quite different motivations, with



1
  The recent interest recalls discussions in the 1960s and 1970s about proposals for demogrants, negative income
taxes, social dividends, and other UBI-like programs (see, e.g., Friedman 1962; Moffitt 2003a; Garfinkel, Huang., &
Naidich 2005; and Sloman 2016). These discussions are reviewed in part by Nichols and Rothstein (2016) and
Ventry (2000). We discuss negative income taxes extensively below.
2
  There is also an active discussion about UBIs in poor countries, where the issues and existing infrastructure are
quite different. See Banerjee et al. (2018) and Hanna and Olken (2018) for discussions of UBIs in that context.

                                                         1
important implications for the prospects of a program that could represent a substantial
increase in the generosity (and cost) of transfer payments relative to existing programs.

In Section III we develop a framework for comparing a wide range of transfer programs, and use
this to place the UBI within the context of the canonical income support programs routinely
provided by advanced countries. Our framework is simple but general, using six parameters to
nest a wide range of transfer programs including cash welfare, in-work tax based assistance,
child allowances, social security retirement, negative income taxes, and UBIs. We use this
framework to discuss several possible interpretations of the words “universal” and “basic
income.” We also discuss the various UBIs in proposal or pilot form and how they compare to a
canonical UBI.

In Section IV, we discuss the distributional implications of a UBI. Focusing on the U.S., we
explore the distribution of transfers received under current law. A large share of current
transfer spending goes to specific populations, particularly families with children, the elderly,
and the disabled, and eligibility is often heavily means tested. A UBI would substantially smooth
out the currently uneven distribution, with dramatic distributional effects. If a UBI of the scale
often contemplated were introduced on top of the existing transfer system, it would represent
a very large downward redistribution of income. In contrast, a UBI that replaced, rather than
supplemented, current programs would be less targeted, providing much less assistance to the
lowest income families. Compared to the existing combination of transfer programs, a
canonical UBI would also direct a much larger share of funds to younger, non-disabled workers
and to families without children (and smaller shares going to the elderly, disabled, and families
with children).

In section IV, and throughout the paper, we embed our discussion in the U.S. program
ecosystem. While it is necessary to adopt a particular setting to provide the needed
quantitative analysis, the main conclusions of the paper are qualitative and will apply in all
advanced countries. It is worth pointing out, however, that the U.S. provides much less
generous income transfers, with much more of a focus on work, than do most other developed
countries. A UBI would thus be a larger change, both philosophically and in terms of the
distribution of funds, in the U.S. than elsewhere.

Section IV also discusses the cost of a UBI, again in the U.S. context. A truly universal UBI would
be enormously expensive. The kinds of UBIs often discussed would cost nearly double current
total spending on the “big three” programs (Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid).
Moreover, each of these programs would likely be necessary even if a UBI were in place, as
each addresses needs that would not be well served by a uniform cash transfer. Expenditures
on other existing programs sum up to only a small fraction of the cost of a meaningful UBI. This
suggests that a full-scale UBI would require substantial increases in government revenue. The
impacts of whatever taxes are imposed to generate this revenue are likely of first-order
importance in evaluating the impact of a UBI.3 This consideration suggests that a UBI is less

3
    This point is also made by Hanna and Olken (2018).

                                                         2
novel than it initially appears, and is closely related both to the negative income tax (Friedman
1962) and to the longstanding literature on optimal income taxes (Mirrlees 1971, Saez 2002).

In Section V, we return to our transfer program framework and use it to discuss the incentive
effects of the UBI. We discuss the incentives around labor supply, human capital accumulation,
and entrepreneurship as well as potential impacts on family and child wellbeing, health and life
satisfaction. UBIs would represent a substantial reversal of the pro-work goals of recent U.S.
income support policy. We also discuss how UBIs might affect “stigma,” a prominent (and
arguably intended; see Moffitt 1983) feature of many existing transfer programs, as well as the
potential general equilibrium effects of the program.

Finally, in Section VI, we consider the UBI research agenda. We discuss what we know from
research on the Earned Income Tax Credit, the 1970s Income Maintenance Experiments, and
cash welfare programs, as well as from studies of UBI-like policies such as the Alaska Permanent
Fund and Indian tribe payments. Finally, we consider elasticities from the broader literature on
labor supply. We argue that all of these are useful for evaluating the potential impact of a UBI,
and that estimates of the key parameters from the literature may be more useful than impact
estimates from UBI experiments for predicting the effects of an implemented UBI program.
Nevertheless, there are clear limits of the existing evidence and we conclude by outlining this
UBI research agenda.

II.      Define the problem: What problem is the UBI trying to solve?

One motivation commonly offered for adopting a UBI is that the labor market is not delivering,
or is not expected to deliver, adequate growth of wages and earnings for the lower portion of
the income distribution. This is sometimes presented as the “The Robots Are Coming!”
argument – we can expect, the story goes, for robots to gradually take over a large share of the
jobs currently done by people, leaving severe job shortages and declining wages in the jobs that
remain. In principle, the robots should increase productivity and thus dramatically increase
global real incomes (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018). But the concern is that an increasing share
of income will go to a small elite (e.g., the owners of the robot patents), leaving everyone else
impoverished. Thus, in the automated world, the primary economic problem will be figuring out
income (re-)distribution schemes that enable the vast group of displaced workers to maintain
their quality of life and subsistence (and also perhaps engage in education, training and other
activities to promote re-entry into the workforce).

Poor labor market outcomes for workers at the median and below are not a futuristic
phenomenon. Wages and earnings of lower skilled workers, particularly men, have stagnated
over several decades (Autor 2014). Wage inequality within education groups has also grown.
Women’s real wages did not decline as dramatically, but also show evident disparities in
earnings growth across education level.4

4
  In the five years following 2012, inflation-adjusted wages have started to increase, showing real gains for the
lowest quintile of workers (Shambaugh et al., 2017).

                                                          3
The lack of real growth in wages has translated to earnings and income stagnation through
much of the distribution. Real median money income in the U.S. increased less than 1 percent
between 2000 and 2016 (Semega et al 2017). Based on a much broader measure of national
income, pretax income of the bottom half of the distribution grew by only 1 percent between
1980 and 2014 compared to 42 percent in the next four deciles (P50-P90) and 121 percent in
the top decile (Piketty, Saez and Zucman forthcoming). The share of post-tax national income
going to the bottom half of the population fell from a little over 25 percent in 1980 to less than
20 percent in 2014.

Job opportunities have also declined, particularly since 2000 when employment growth began
to slow. Between 2000 and 2016, the fraction of individuals ages 25 to 54 working or looking for
work fell more than 5 percentage points for men and 3 percentage points for women. This
decline represents a continuation of trends in male labor force participation since the 1960s,
though the decline for women is more recent (Black and Schanzenbach 2018), and stands in
stark contrast to the increases in female participation across most other developed countries
(Economic Report of the President 2015).

A large literature explores the causes of these trends in inequality and wage stagnation.
Technological change is one common explanation (e.g., Acemoglu and Autor 2011), but others
include trade and globalization (e.g., Autor 2014; Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2016), changes in
labor market institutions (e.g., a fall in the real value of the minimum wage, Lee 1999), declines
in worker mobility – both geographic and job-to-job mobility (Molloy et al. 2016) – and rising
monopsony power (Azar et al. 2017).

Regardless of the root cause, it is clear that less-skilled workers are experiencing stagnation in
wages and job opportunities. In that sense, the robot apocalypse scenario is already here. A UBI
can be seen as a response. It would transfer a portion of national income from capital owners
to workers (and non-workers), allowing them to live better lives than low market wages can
support, and could even support market equilibria with higher wages.

A distinct argument for a UBI is that it could replace the current patchwork of transfer
programs in the United States, thereby avoiding the high cumulative marginal tax rates implicit
in many existing poverty programs, such as cash welfare (Murray 2016). These high rates are
claimed to create “welfare traps,” keeping people on welfare who would be better off in paid
jobs.5 A UBI, to some, would radically simplify the transfer system, reducing perverse incentives
while still ensuring a minimum level of income for those who are truly unable to work.

This argument stands in contrast to the “robot apocalypse” argument: If a UBI is intended to
address the disappearance of jobs due to technological change, the labor supply effects are not

5
 In practice, with large negative tax rates through the EITC, and with the decline in cash welfare and the rationing
of housing benefits, cumulative marginal tax rates are actually negative at low incomes and positive but modest in
magnitude in program phase-out ranges (Kosar and Moffitt 2017).

                                                         4
first order, and indeed one might hope for declines in labor supply as workers are freed to
choose non-employment over poorly compensated work. But a UBI intended to avoid welfare
traps has an explicit goal of increasing labor supply. We return to this below.

A third set of arguments for a UBI is, like the second, grounded in inadequacies of our current
safety net, but comes more from concern with insufficient benefits. There are many holes in
our current welfare system, particularly since the 1990s welfare reform, with many low-income
families (particularly but not exclusively those without children) receiving no benefits at all or
only very minimal benefits. For some advocates, a UBI represents a more comprehensive and
politically defensible safety net, one that reaches all of the needy and not just a
demographically targeted subset.6 They argue that a more universalist approach would also
reduce the stigma of program participation, reduce cumbersome application processes, and
possibly move the conversation away from assessments of the deservingness of the poor.

More philosophically inclined advocates (e.g., Van Parijs and Vanderborght 2017) emphasize
the related value of a UBI in increasing human freedom, a difficult concept to express in terms
of budget constraints but nevertheless an important goal. A UBI could conceivably relieve the
web of stigma (Moffitt 1983), ordeals (Nichols and Zeckhauser 1982), and other costly and
demeaning aspects of low-income life (Mullainathan and Shafir 2013, Morduch and Schneider
2017) in developed countries, allowing freer decisions (e.g., about careers) that feel like choices
rather than necessities.

III.    What is a Universal Basic Income?

A number of different transfers, with quite different characteristics, have been described as
UBIs. There are two important terms to define: “universal” and “basic income.”

We begin with the second. Generally, a “basic income” is large enough to meet a family’s basic
needs all on its own, without earnings or other sources of income.7 This is often operationalized
as providing assistance to ensure family income is at or above the poverty level. Some also
interpret “basic” to indicate a base that might be supplemented by other income, implying that
the transfer is not reduced as earnings rise, at least over some range.

The first term, “universal,” is more ambiguous. In our reading, universal refers to three distinct
design features:
   - Available to everyone, without targeting based on family structure, presence of
        children, age, or disability status.
   - Paid to those without earned income, and even without any effort to find work.

6
  A related argument, more relevant in developing than in developed countries, is that existing transfers are poorly
targeted due to the lack of adequate proxies for family need (Hanna and Olken 2018). Our distributional analyses,
below, incorporate improvements due to poor targeting of existing programs.
7
  Van Parijs and Vanderborght (2017) would call even a small amount a basic income. Sometimes an amount high
enough to live on is called a “full basic income,” with smaller amounts called “partial basic incomes”
(https://basicincome.org/basic-income/).

                                                         5
    -  Paid to those with relatively high earned income, so not simply a program for those in
       deep poverty.
An idealized UBI might have all three of these universality features, but many proposals do not.

A fully implemented program with these universal and basic income elements would be
extremely expensive. A universal payment of $12,000 per year to each adult U.S. resident over
age 18 would cost roughly $3 trillion per year.8 This is about 75 percent of current total federal
expenditures, including all on- and off-budget items, in 2017. (If those over 65 were excluded,
the cost would fall by about one-fifth.) Thus, implementing this UBI without cuts to other
programs would require nearly doubling federal tax revenue; even eliminating all existing
transfer programs – about half of federal expenditures – would make only a dent in the cost. To
bring this cost down, most UBI proposals and pilots in the developed world fail to meet the
conditions of the canonical program in some way, either by reducing the payment below a
subsistence level or by limiting eligibility based on income or other family characteristics.

        A.       A Framework for Comparing Transfers

To understand the potential impact of a UBI, it is helpful to explore how it would compare to
existing transfer programs. Some of these programs have UBI-like characteristics, while others
quite clearly contrast with a UBI in their goals and design.

We propose a simple framework to capture many of the design differences among existing and
proposed transfer programs. Most transfer programs in advanced countries can be
approximated as:
                 ! ", $ = & " ∗ min(, + .$, /, max(/ − 3 $ − 4 , 0))
where B is the transfer (or benefit) for a family with characteristics X and earnings or income Y,
and the parameters are:
   - G (for “guarantee”): the transfer to a family with zero earnings.
   - S (for “subsidy rate”): The rate at which the transfer grows as earnings rise above zero.
   - M (for “maximum transfer”): The maximum transfer, reached at earnings of (M-G)/S.
   - P (for beginning of “phase out” of the transfer): The highest earnings a family could have
       and still receive M.
   - T (for “tax rate”): The rate at which the transfer is reduced for earnings above P, until it
       reaches zero when earnings equal P+M/T.
   - E (for “eligibility”): A definition of which individuals or families are eligible (based on
       factors other than earnings/income) for the program. This is often referred to as
       “categorical eligibility.” We can think of it as a function E(X) mapping (non-earnings)
       characteristics X to an indicator for eligibility.



8
 This would bring a non-elderly adult living alone nearly to the poverty line ($12,752 in 2017). The combined
payments to married couples would put them somewhat above the poverty line, while single parent families
would remain below it.

                                                         6
Figure 2 shows a generic transfer program in which all of the first five parameters are non-
trivial (G, S, M, and T are non-zero, and P is finite). Here, a family with zero earnings receives a
benefit (G). The benefit then increases with earnings at subsidy rate S until reaching the
maximum benefit M. There is a flat portion with constant benefit M, followed by a phase out
for income above P at rate T.

No single program in the U.S. has a schedule like this (though Dube (2018) proposes one).
However, the basic features of most existing programs, including traditional cash welfare, in-
work tax benefits, retirement programs, and child allowances, can be captured by varying the
six parameters. (Of course, our piecewise linear framework cannot duplicate a more nonlinear
schedule, but it can be seen as an approximation to it.) This framework, which can also capture
both Negative Income Taxes and UBIs, clarifies what is “new” about the UBI that is not already
part of a typical developed country’s social safety net.

       B.      Existing Transfer Programs

Below, we use our framework to characterize six types of transfer programs. Parameters for
several illustrative programs are presented in Table 1. (We present a more comprehensive list
of programs in Table 3, below.) We follow that with a discussion of how the canonical UBI
compares to other income transfers and how proposed UBIs compare to the program in its
purest form.

1. In-work programs: In-work programs, the best known of which is the U.S. Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC), are designed to transfer resources to lower income individuals while encouraging
work. Typically these programs are phased in, reach a maximum, and then are phased out.
Thus, the parameters M, S, P and T are non-zero; G=0, as non-workers are not eligible for the
transfer.

Under the EITC, eligibility (E) is close to universal among families with children (although the
generosity [S and M in particular] varies by marital status and number of children). Childless
workers are eligible for a very small credit, with eligibility limited to those between 25 and 64
years old. In 2017, for a family with two children, the subsidy rate is substantial, S=40%; the
maximum benefit M is over $5,500/year; the phase-out point P is quite high, close to $20,000 in
annual earnings; and the tax rate on earnings above that point is about T=21%. As a result, two-
child families with earnings as high as $45,000 (or $55,000 for married couple families) can get
positive EITC transfers. As we will see, this is a much higher break-even point than under even
the most generous welfare programs.

The Child Tax Credit (CTC) is an in-work credit with a similar aggregate cost to the EITC but with
much less income targeting (see the discussion in Hoynes and Rothstein 2017): S=15% (and this
only applies to earnings above $3,000), M=$1,000 per child, P=$75,000 ($110,000 for married
couples), and T=5%. As with the EITC, for the CTC, G=0. The 2017 tax reform bill raised M to
$2,000 per child and P to $200,000 ($400,000 for married couples).


                                                  7
2. Cash welfare: Cash welfare programs provide an income floor (G>0, S=0, and M=G). It is
common to have zero or low earnings disregards (P) and high tax rates (T) that ensure that
benefits fully phase out at relatively low earnings levels. In the U.S. (though not in all European
countries), cash welfare programs have tightly restricted eligibility, and are mainly limited to
single mothers, the disabled, and the elderly.

As an example of a canonical cash welfare program, Table 1 includes the parameters for the
U.S. Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program, which was in place until 1996.
The benefits were targeted on households with children headed by single parents (E). The
guaranteed income G varied by state, and for a family of three ranged from $190 per month in
Mississippi to $1,100 in Suffolk County NY (in 2017 dollars); the median state set G=$600, or
about 36 percent of the federal poverty line at the time (Committee on Ways and Means 1996).
Families could only earn a small amount (P=$190/month was a typical figure) before benefits
were phased out.9 Finally, the tax rate T was very large, at least 66% with T=100% for most of
the program history. The combination of the low G and P and very high T implies complete
phase out of transfers at very low earnings levels – around $8,600 per year for a family of three
in the median state (2017 dollars).

In 1996, following federal welfare reform legislation, AFDC was replaced by Temporary
Assistance to Needy Families (TANF). All states were required to impose strict work
requirements and lifetime time limits for program receipt (Moffitt 2003b). In our framework,
this corresponds to further tightening of E. States were also given flexibility regarding the other
parameters. They varied in how much they tightened E, and some states attempted to make it
possible to combine work with TANF, at least temporarily, via increased P and reduced T.

Other similarly structured programs include General Assistance (GA) programs, small payments
for indigent, non-disabled adults without children, and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP or food stamps). GA programs have very low M. SNAP phases out relatively
slowly (T=30%) and eligibility extends to 130% of poverty.

3. Cash welfare for individuals unable to work: Most countries have separate cash welfare
programs for those deemed medically unable to work, such as the disabled or low-income
elderly. These programs provide an income floor and typically do not attempt to encourage
work, so set G>0, S=0, and M=G. Many explicitly limit benefits to those who don’t work (P=0, T
is infinite), while others phase out rapidly.

In the U.S., Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI)
provide cash welfare to the disabled (and, for SSI, the elderly). SSI is more generous than
AFDC/TANF: in 2017 the federal guarantee was G=$735/month for single individuals or
$1,103/month for married couples. The program accommodates some earned income with
T=50% on earned income above P=$85/month. SSDI is based on past earnings and restricted to

9
 P varied depending on how many months the individual had earned income. This figure applied apply after 8
consecutive months of earnings.

                                                      8
those deemed medically unable to work, so G>0, S=0, M=G, P=0, and T is infinite (though a
“trial work” period allows for short-term work with P=$850/month). Average benefits are
$1,063/month.

4. Public retirement benefits: Public retirement programs can also be presented in this
framework. Eligibility (E) for Social Security retirement benefits is achieved by satisfying rules
for required years of work and reaching age 62. Benefits are available regardless of work status
(G>0), and in the most flexible form, have no phase in (S=0, M=G) and no phase out (P infinite,
T=0). As with SSDI, benefit levels (G) depend on earnings history; they average about $1,368 per
month.

5. Child Allowance (CA): A child allowance provides an income floor (G>0, S=0, M=G) that is
typically phased out at higher incomes and more slowly than traditional cash welfare. By
design, eligibility is limited to families with children.

In 2016, Canada implemented a generous CA called the “Canada Child Benefit.” The guarantee
is G=$4,800/year (all figures in PPP-adjusted 2017 US dollars) per child aged 0-6 and
G=$4,050/year per child aged 6-17. Phase out begins at P=$22,500 with T=7% for one-child
families and 13.5% for two-child families; the rates increase at incomes above about $50,000.
Thus, a family with one child age 3 and another age 7 would have a G=$8,850/year that would
be phased out between annual incomes of $22,500 and $75,000. Recently, Shaefer et al (2018)
and Bitler et al (2018) proposed child allowances for the U.S., with no phase-out.

6. Negative Income Tax (NIT): An NIT in its pure form is advanced as a single unified transfer
and tax system. In its simplest form, an NIT with a linear tax schedule provides for an income
floor (G>0, S=0, M=G) that is taxed away at a rate T with any positive earnings (P=0). The
marginal tax rate remains T even after income rises to the point where the benefit is entirely
taxed away (at Y=P+M/T); individuals with incomes above that point are net taxpayers, and help
to fund transfers to lower-income recipients. This NIT is equivalent, in an accounting sense, to a
UBI with a flat tax (Atkinson 1995).

Milton Friedman (1962) famously supported an NIT in the U.S. (see also Friedman and Friedman
1980; Lampman 1965, 1968; Tobin, Pechman, and Mieszkowski, 1967; Moffitt 2003a).
However, the payment of benefits to non-workers was highly controversial. The outcome of the
debate was instead the introduction of the EITC, with G=0 (see the discussion in Nichols and
Rothstein 2016). Current transfer programs have more, rather than fewer, work requirements
than the pre-NIT-debate policies.




       C.      The Universal Basic Income as a Transfer Program

We defined a UBI above as a transfer that pays a sufficient benefit to meet basic needs without
earned income, has broad eligibility, and is available both to non-workers and to those with
                                                9
relatively high earned income. In our framework, this corresponds to G>0, S=0 and M=G, a high
(or even infinite) P, low T, and minimal restrictions on eligibility (E).

Figure 3 compares the schedules for a canonical UBI, the EITC, and cash welfare (treating each
in isolation, and portraying each roughly to scale).10 It shows two of the distinguishing features
of the UBI: a high income floor (G), and universal income coverage (P is infinite, T=0). (The third,
broad eligibility, is not shown here.) Among the policies listed above, social security comes
closest to this ideal, though only for the elderly. The child allowance is also very similar in
structure to a UBI, though interestingly the supporters of these two types of proposals in
practice exhibit little overlap.

One can also draw comparisons to other programs. The UBI is similar to the EITC and CTC in
their relatively high reach in the income distribution and near-universality, but differs in paying
benefits even to non-workers and, in its pure form, in reaching even the highest-income
families. Figure 3 also shows a modified UBI that phases out at high incomes, as do the EITC and
CTC (at very different points). The phased-out UBI is qualitatively but not quantitatively similar
to cash welfare. Given general hostility to welfare recipients in the U.S., and in particular to the
idea that transfers should go to those who neither work nor undertake other worthy activities
(e.g., job search, education), it is difficult to imagine a welfare program being scaled up in this
way.

Table 2 lists several UBI pilots and proposals, with their associated parameters. Most do not
meet the canonical UBI structure, forsaking some combination of high G, broad E and/or high
phase out to reduce costs. For example, Murray (2016) proposes a phase out at incomes above
P=$25,000, using a tax rate of T=20%. (Murray would allow only half of the benefit to phase
out; the remainder would be paid regardless of income.) The Silicon Valley company
YCombinator Research’s UBI experiment (discussed at greater length below) limits eligibility to
those between ages 21 and 40, and to households with incomes below their county’s median
income.

Our framework considers only payments from the government to individuals, not revenues
needed to finance them. Given the first order issue of cost, a full understanding of the UBI’s
distributional effects must include the taxes needed to pay for it. A simple assumption is that
the UBI might be paid for by a linear income tax on income above some threshold. The
combined program of a UBI with the linear tax would involve a binding phase-out point P, a
positive tax rate T above that, and the continuation of that tax rate even after the transfer has
gone to zero (at pre-transfer income P+M/T). The net effect would therefore be negative for




10
  Figure 3 is not drawn to represent any specific proposal, but instead to highlight the differences across the
different types of transfers. Below we present distributional estimates using current policies and the Current
Population Survey.

                                                         10
high income families.11 Among the transfers described above, only the NIT has this tax feature
built in.

A linear tax is of course a simplification. Given rising inequality and the motivation of offsetting
increasing income shares of capital owners, one might prefer to finance a UBI through a more
progressive tax. This would lift the effective break-even point, with higher taxes at the highest
incomes.

It is not clear, however, whether one should think of the combined program, or of the separate
impacts of the transfer and the tax components. Separating the two may carry political
benefits, by allowing even high-income taxpayers to believe that they are benefitting from the
UBI, and by making the benefits portion universal, thereby promoting a sense of social
inclusion. Nevertheless, insofar as labor supply or other economic impacts are an important
objective of the policy, it is presumably the effects of the combined transfer and tax changes
that matter, not those of the transfer alone.

IV.     Distributional and Cost Comparisons of UBI to Current Programs

Here, we discuss the distributional implications of a UBI relative to the existing U.S. transfer
system. To illustrate the demographic and income targeting in the current transfer system, we
present comparisons across family types and across deciles of the income and earnings
distribution.

Our distributional calculations use data from the 2017 Current Population Survey (CPS) Annual
Social and Economic Supplement, representing the civilian non-institutionalized U.S.
population. The CPS includes measures of individual-level 2016 receipt and amounts of most
major transfer programs.12 We group programs into four aggregates: Means tested (welfare)
programs, encompassing TANF and SNAP; disability programs (SSI and SSDI); Social Security
retirement; and in-work tax credits (EITC and CTC). Within the welfare category, the bulk of
spending (see Table 3, below) comes from SNAP; within the tax credits, the EITC and CTC are
roughly equal in size. Importantly, we exclude all in-kind programs other than SNAP, most
notably public health insurance. We return to this later.

To account for economies of scale in housing and other costs, we sum income from each
program across all members of the household, then divide by the OECD equivalence scale
(which counts additional household members older and younger than 14 as costing 50% and
30% as much, respectively, as does the first adult). We refer to the result as “equivalized
transfers per person.”

11
   See, for example, Rhodes (2017), who notes that “Although a universal basic income would be distributed to
everyone regardless of income level, the benefit received by higher-income individuals would be paid back in taxes
in order to fund the program” (p. 13).
12
   We simulate the EITC and CTC using NBER TAXSIM, but rely on CPS responses for other transfers. In the CPS, the
aggregate amount of transfer income that households report receiving is significantly less than administrative
totals (Wheaton, 2008; Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan, 2009). We do not adjust for underreporting.

                                                       11
We divide households into four mutually exclusive demographic groups. The first is households
with children, including any household with at least one person under 18. Next, if there is
anyone 62 or older, but no one under 18, we assign the household to “Households with
elderly.”13 Finally, households without children or elderly are separated into those with and
without disabled individuals.

Figure 4 shows average transfers across the four family type groups along with the population
counts represented by each group. The figure shows tremendous variation in the amount of
(non-health) government transfers across groups with the average elderly household receiving
$12,600 per equivalized person, disabled households receiving $8,000, and non-elderly, non-
disabled households with and without children receiving $2,200 and $500, respectively.

To illustrate the distribution of benefits across the income distribution, we consider two income
classifications. First, we use after tax and transfer (ATT) income.14 Second, because ATT income
is in part a function of the transfer system, we alternatively use pre-tax earned income. Earned
income is a more useful proxy for family resources for non-elderly, non-disabled households, so
we focus on them in our analysis of this measure. We use the equivalence scale discussed
above to compare ATT income and earnings per equivalized person across households of
different sizes.

Figure 5 has four panels, one for each of our demographic groups. In each panel, households
are divided into deciles by equivalized ATT income per person, and we show mean transfers
(per person, equivalized) by program within income decile.15 Because mean transfers are much
higher for elderly and disabled households than for others, we use different y-axis scales for
these groups. Transfers to the elderly and disabled are not tightly concentrated in the lower
deciles, reflecting broader income eligibility for social security and disability.16 Transfers to
families with children are lower and more targeted, though tax credit payments (the CTC, in
particular) reach high into the distribution. Families without children, elderly or disabled receive
very little in benefits, even at low incomes.

Figure 6 provides similar calculations, dividing households into deciles by earnings rather than
ATT income and including an 11th category for those without earnings. Among families with
children, transfers to those without earnings are smaller than those to those with low but
positive earnings, reflecting the decline of cash welfare caseloads (Floyd et al. 2017) and the
growth of in-work tax credits. EITC benefits are a large share of the transfers to positive-

13
   We use age 62 because many claim Social Security retirement benefits as soon as permitted rather than waiting
until the so-called normal retirement age.
14
   ATT income equals total money income plus near-cash transfers (SNAP, school meals) less taxes owed (which
may be negative for families receiving the EITC).
15
   Appendix Figure 1 shows the distribution of families of each type across deciles.
16
   Note that households containing disabled individuals but no one over age 62 seem to receive non-trivial
amounts of Social Security retirement income. This may reflect respondent mis-reporting of disability payments as
retirement income.

                                                       12
earnings households. In zero-earnings households, there is a bit more welfare income, but the
bigger replacement on average is social security benefits (largely for grandparents in the
household). For both, the average is very low, around $4,500 per equivalized person per year,
indicating that most families with zero or low earnings are living in deep poverty.

When we examine families without children, in the right panel, the absence of welfare benefits
along with the very small childless EITC dramatically reduces the income transfer at low earning
deciles. The average family without earnings receives only about $2,000 in annual transfers per
person, again largely from Social Security, while low-earnings families average less than half of
that.

Figures 4-6 collectively show the demographic and income targeting in our current social safety
net, with higher transfers to the elderly and disabled, higher transfers for those with children
compared to those without children, and higher transfers for those with low earnings. This
implies that were we to eliminate current income support programs and apply the funds
towards a pure UBI, there would be a relative redistribution from low-earners to zero earners,
but the first-order effects would be a massive distribution up the earnings distribution, along
with a redistribution from the elderly and disabled towards those who are neither, primarily but
not exclusively those without children.

One aspect of current transfers that is not illustrated clearly in Figures 4-6 is the substantial
variation within demographic and income groups. Figure 7 shows the distribution of transfers
within earnings decile (plus the zero-earnings group). This reveals wide disparities, even at the
lowest incomes. For every group with children, median transfers total less than $3,850 per
equivalized person per year, and less than $250 for those without children, elderly, or disabled
members, though there are a very small number of low- and zero-earnings households with
children who receive more than $10,000 per year.

Table 3 shows aggregate costs and total caseloads for the major income transfer programs (see
Committee on Ways and Means 2016 for an overview of many of these programs). We include
here some programs not included in the figures, most notably the two public health insurance
programs, Medicare (for the elderly) and Medicaid (for the poor). Total expenditures across all
of the listed programs are around $2.3 trillion per year, with just under one-third of this due to
Social Security retirement benefits and a bit less than half due to Medicare and Medicaid.

Table 3 also shows the aggregate cost of a canonical UBI that pays $12,000 to each adult
resident, without eligibility restrictions or phase-out.17 We estimate that this would cost about
$3.0 trillion per year. Cost is a first-order concern for any UBI program that might expand
beyond a pilot.18
17
   One might want to incorporate family size adjustments, as in the family size equivalized calculations above.
However, as in the U.S. federal income tax system, this would create marriage penalties. We are not aware of
serious design efforts for UBIs that incorporate such complexities.
18
   Others have pointed out the high costs of a canonical UBI – for example Greenstein (2017) discusses cost as well
as the tradeoffs of universal versus means tested programs.

                                                        13
In the final rows of Table 3, we present two potential not-quite-universal basic income policies.
One limits transfers to adults under 65, while the other is limited to adults with below median
incomes. (This can be seen as an approximation to a program that phases out gradually around
the median.) These reduce the cost somewhat, but each would still cost several multiples of the
entire existing non-retirement, non-health insurance safety net.

Figures 4-7 indicate that replacing all existing transfers including the big three (social security
retirement, Medicare, and Medicaid) with a UBI19 would be a dramatic change, especially for
seniors. The average household with a member over 65 receives $17,400 in Social Security
benefits, and health care benefits through Medicaid and Medicare with an actuarial value of
$12,900, much higher than proposed UBIs. Even assuming that we could create a health
insurance marketplace for seniors – a large share of whom have preexisting conditions – that
priced insurance at close to its actuarial cost, the average senior would see a more than one-
third decline in his or her transfer income.

But while Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid could not easily be replaced by a UBI, there
are some other programs that would become redundant. In particular, a sufficiently generous
UBI would reduce the need for the EITC, CTC, TANF, SNAP, and perhaps disability and
unemployment insurance. But this would not be remotely budget neutral. If Social Security,
Medicare, and Medicaid are preserved, the remaining programs in Table 3 together would
cover only about one-fifth of the cost of the canonical UBI. The remainder would need to be
funded through cuts to non-transfer government expenditures or through tax increases.
Alternatively, a very small, possibly non-universal UBI could be funded, but this would not come
close to making up for the loss of the existing transfers to the disabled or to low-income
families with children.

In sum, a UBI would have quite substantial distributional and cost effects. A smaller proportion
of UBI dollars would go to the bottom of the income distribution than under the current
system, though a generous UBI, with needed revenue funded by a progressive tax, would
increase the absolute size of transfers to the bottom and thus would represent a (potentially
very large) downward redistribution of income. Similarly, a canonical UBI would give a larger
share of transfers to the non-elderly and non-disabled than the existing programs, so any
proposal to finance it through cuts in health and retirement programs – the largest sources of
funds in the existing U.S. transfer system – would need to address the large declines in living
standards that the elderly and disabled would experience.

V.      Economic issues around a Universal Basic Income


19
  Murray argues that this could be roughly cost-neutral, though our estimates do not support that. The
discrepancy reflects (a) his inclusion of a large number of other programs to be eliminated – including as examples
federal student loans, child care and adoption programs, public hospitals, and agricultural price supports; (b)
somewhat different estimates of program costs; and (c) his use of a smaller UBI that phases out and excludes those
under 21.

                                                        14
Adopting a UBI would have a range of consequences. We review here some of the likely effects,
focusing on labor supply, human capital, and children. We first discuss qualitative predictions,
then review the empirical evidence in Section VI.

         A.       Static Labor Supply

We begin with labor supply, as this effect dominates discussions of the economics of means-
tested transfer programs. Traditional welfare programs, with low phase-out points P and high
tax rates T, unambiguously lead to reductions in labor supply through negative income and
substitution effects. By contrast, the EITC, which has effectively replaced traditional cash
welfare as the main income assistance program for families with children, has no transfer for
non-workers (G=0) and a high phase-in rate (S), so creates strong incentives to enter work. (For
those with positive earnings, the EITC creates both a negative income effect and, in the phase-
out range, a negative substitution effect, so is expected to reduce hours.)

Existing program structures, the shift from AFDC to TANF, and the EITC reflect a general trend in
recent decades in the U.S. toward programs that attempt to minimize labor supply
disincentives. These take two forms. First, historically U.S. means tested programs have used
“tagging,” (Akerlof, 1978), limiting eligibility to those in exogenously defined groups who have
low potential to work (or expectation to work). Second, current policies are increasingly
designed to avoid punitive tax rates (lower T) and increase earnings disregards (higher P). This
can also, as in the case of the EITC, include programs that use a positive S and no income floor
(G=0) to create incentives toward increased labor supply (Nichols and Rothstein, 2016).

UBI proposals move policy in the opposite direction, and in general can be expected to reduce
labor supply relative either to a no-transfer hypothetical baseline or to the status quo. First, the
canonical UBI generates a pure income effect which would reduce work on the extensive and
intensive margins. Second, many UBI proposals impose phase-outs and the added P>0 and T>0
lead to a further work disincentive through negative substitution effects.20 Third, the high G in a
UBI relative to existing cash welfare programs likely leads to larger labor supply reductions
(though the higher P and lower T would arguably work in the opposite direction). Fourth, the
absence of tagging means that vastly more people are exposed to these work disincentives than
in our current patchwork system.

It is not clear whether negative effects on labor supply are a drawback. At least some UBI
advocates support a UBI because it would eliminate the need to work for some low-skill
workers who are expected to be displaced by technological change or who are otherwise
occupied in unpaid care work. In that case, reductions in work are a desired impact, not an
unintended consequence. But there may not be political will to sustain large transfers to those
who choose not to work.

20
  Further, any paid-for program will necessarily require high tax rates. These, too, will create negative substitution
effects. (They may also create positive income effects, but these would be concentrated among high-income
workers and we expect they would be quite small.)

                                                         15
A related potential impact of a UBI, much emphasized by its backers (e.g., Van Parijs and
Vanderborght 2017), is to shift labor supply from unpleasant/precarious jobs to jobs that
combine low pay with high amenities, jobs with opportunities for human capital accumulation,
or simply jobs more aligned with individual tastes (e.g., in the arts). This can be seen as a
manifestation of the income effect. One might also get shifts toward jobs offering training if
credit constraints currently prevent workers from taking these jobs. We discuss this below,
under the heading of human capital effects.

A related incentive concerns entrepreneurship. It is possible that a UBI, by providing a
predictable and permanent income floor, will encourage recipients to explore risky ventures.
This again is best seen as reflecting an income effect and/or credit constraints.

In sum, any UBI would be expected to lead to lower labor supply, at least in the short run.
Below, we explore other potentially offsetting channels that could produce a positive effect in
the longer run, or at least offset the negative direct effect.

           B.       Pre-Tax Wages, Human Capital, and Labor Supply in the Longer Run

There are three potential channels for UBI impacts on wages. First, all other things equal, the
reductions in labor supply outlined above will increase wages for those who remain in work, as
a downward labor supply shift moves the equilibrium up the labor demand curve (Rothstein
2010).21

Second, a UBI may lead to increased human capital investments, by both young people and
adults. There is extensive evidence that credit constraints are binding on many students and
lead to reduced educational attainment (Lochner and Monge-Naranjo 2012). A UBI would
loosen these constraints, allowing more educational investment, including on-the-job training.
Effects might be particularly strong for mid-career workers who see value in retraining but
cannot forgo earnings to do so. Any impact on human capital accumulation would naturally
translate into higher wages in the medium to longer run.

Third, a UBI could have positive effects on child development. Transfer programs that increase
families’ resources when children are young have been found to have long-run effects on the
children’s development, health, and human capital attainment (discussed below). Impacts on
early child development may translate into improved human capital accumulation and
eventually higher wages. Insofar as dynamic complementarities are an important part of the
child development process (Cunha and Heckman, 2007), these “two generation” effects may be
an important component of the social welfare impacts of a UBI.

Human capital effects have follow-on implications for labor supply in the longer run. Higher-
skilled individuals tend to work more. Thus, UBI impacts on skill imply positive impacts on long

21
     This point was also discussed as part of the debate on the Negative Income Tax, for example by Moffitt (1979).

                                                          16
run labor supply. These may offset, to some extent, the negative short-run impacts on labor
supply.

Of course, labor supply is not the only metric by which to evaluate the UBI. The UBI is expected
to increase after tax income in the lower portion of the income distribution. Prior work shows
that increases in government transfers that generate net increases in resources lead to
improvements in health (e.g. see review by Almond et al., forthcoming). More generally, life
satisfaction is the ultimate measure of welfare consequences, but is hard to measure in a useful
way.

       C.      Universality, Take-up and Stigma

There may be political value in the universal aspect of a UBI, as a way of maintaining
widespread support for the program (e.g. as with universal programs such as social security and
Medicare) and as a way of signaling social inclusion and that everyone is valued (Lowrey 2018).
If this argument has merit, it has implications for program design and the taxes needed to pay
for it. A tax on non-UBI income effectively becomes a program phase-out. But separating out
the program, and maintaining universality, from the taxes needed to pay for it, may be
advantageous even if irrelevant from an accounting perspective.

Another implication of universality, related to potential impacts on social inclusion, is a lack of
stigma for UBI recipients. In highly means tested and eligibility-restricted programs,
participation reveals information that many consider private, and thus may be stigmatized. This
reduces program take-up and the potential reach and benefits of programs (Currie 2006),
though may also help target the programs, maximizing impact by reaching those who stand to
benefit the most. Take-up rates in AFDC were quite low (about 50%) with stigma cited as one of
the reasons (Moffitt 1983). Interestingly, the EITC has fairly high take-up rates (80% or more,
see Scholz 1994, Plueger 2009), and ethnographic research has found low stigma with
recipients viewing the credit as “my work bonus” rather than a handout (Halpern-Meekin, Edin,
Tach and Sykes 2015). How much this derives from the “in work” nature of the credit (G=0) or
its high P relative to other U.S. means-tested programs is not known. The UBI could lead to
similar results given a universal structure.


VI.    What do we know from the research?

UBIs meeting the definition we laid out above – large enough to live on, without phase-out or
other eligibility restrictions – have never been implemented in a rich country on a large scale or
even in a pilot experiment. What we know about the likely effects of a UBI comes from analyses
of policies that are similar in some way to UBIs, though different in others, and from the
broader labor supply literature.




                                                17
           A.       Universal but not basic income

We know of only two examples of universal programs without strict eligibility requirements,
though in each case the transfers are too small to qualify as a basic income as we define it.

The Alaska Permanent Fund is a demogrant22 (with varying yearly payments), financed by the
state’s oil revenues. Payments in recent years range from $1,000 to $2,000 per year. Jones and
Marinescu (2018) use a synthetic control design to evaluate the program and find that the
dividend had no effect on employment. They attribute this to a positive general equilibrium
effect - the additional income leads to higher consumption, boosting labor demand – that
offsets the negative income effect.

The Eastern Cherokee Native American tribe provides a demogrant to its adult members,
financed out of revenues from tribal casinos. Payments, around $4,000 per person per year, do
not depend on employment status, income, or residence on reservation. Several studies
identify effects of the payments using difference-in-differences designs, comparing Native
American children from families receiving the transfers to non-Native children from the same
geographic area in North Carolina, before and after the transfers began. The payments had
positive impacts on children’s educational attainment and criminal arrests (Akee et al, 2010)
and on children’s emotional and behavioral health (Akee et al. 2018), though they increased
children’s body mass indices (Akee et al. 2013). Akee et al. (2010) find no impact on labor force
participation, even though the payment recipients were not a large share of the local labor
force so general equilibrium effects were unlikely.

There is no reason to expect that families would have felt stigmatized for receiving payments
under either the Alaska or the Eastern Cherokee programs. However, in each case the
payments were relatively small. It is possible that a larger payment would have had more
transformative effects on labor supply. What evidence we have comes from studies of lottery
winners, which do not find variation in income elasticities with payout size (Cesarini et al 2017).

           B.       Programs with guaranteed income and low phase-out points

There is a larger body of evidence on programs that provide government income transfers to
non-workers, with phase-outs that begin at low earnings levels.

One set of evidence comes from evaluations of AFDC and TANF. The literature shows that AFDC
reduced labor supply among single mothers by 10-50% relative to what would be seen without
the program (see reviews by Danziger, Haveman and Plotnick 1981; Moffitt 1992, 2003b; and
Hoynes 1997). Labor supply for non-AFDC recipients was fairly low (averaging 20 hours / week
including nonworkers), however, so the magnitude of the reduction in hours was not very large.



22
     Children and non-citizen permanent residents and refugees are eligible, but new residents of the state are not.

                                                           18
AFDC eligibility was largely limited to single parents, and participation was heavily stigmatized.
Those who participated were likely people who highly valued the benefit (e.g., because they
were truly unable to work). This suggests that the impact on labor supply was likely smaller
than it would have been with a more universal program.

NITs share the basic features of cash welfare programs, but typical proposals have higher G,
lower phase-out rates T and in many cases broader eligibility E. No country has implemented an
NIT, but there is significant evidence from pilot programs. In the mid-1970s U.S. Income
Maintenance Experiments (IMEs), low-income households in four locations were randomly
assigned to various combinations of base transfers (G) and tax rates (T), in programs that
phased out with the first dollar of earnings (P=0). For example, in the Seattle-Denver
experiment, G ranged from $23,000 to $34,000 per year (2017 dollars), while T ranged from 50-
80%.

Robins (1985; see also Burtless 1987) uses the various treatment arms to separately identify
income and substitution elasticities. He finds substitution elasticities around 0.1-0.2 (at the low
end for husbands, a bit higher for single women, and higher for married women), and income
elasticities around -0.1. The IMEs lasted for just a few years, so some of the labor supply
response may have reflected intertemporal substitution. Because intertemporal labor supply
elasticities are generally found to be larger than responses to permanent price changes, the
estimated responses may overstate the effect of a permanent program.

Around the same time as the U.S. experiments, the Canadian province of Manitoba
implemented the Manitoba Basic Annual Income Experiment (“Mincome”). Despite its name,
this tested an NIT: G was set to around 50% of median household income, but the transfer
phased out (at a tax rate T that ranged between 35% and 75%) with the first dollar of earnings
(P=0). Estimated effects on labor supply were negative but small and statistically insignificant
(Hum and Simpson 1993). However, a recent non-experimental study based on the Mincome
“saturation site,” a rural town where all residents were eligible for payments, finds much larger
negative effects on labor supply, a result that the authors attribute to community context
effects (Calnitsky and Latner, 2017).

Additionally, more recent evidence comes from the transition from AFDC to its successor
program TANF. Prior to the federal reform, there were a number of experiments based on state
waivers to the AFDC restrictions. Studies of these waiver experiments and nonexperimental
evidence on the national transition found increases in labor supply, reductions in welfare
participation payments, and either reductions in or little change in income (Moffitt 2003b, Ziliak
2016). The findings suggest TANF increased labor supply through limiting benefits for non-
workers, an aspect of the program that is at odds with the original intent of a guaranteed
income program. Welfare waivers that increased work disregards (particularly those that did so
without time limits and stringent work requirements) caused increases in labor supply and
family income.



                                                19
       C.      In-work tax credits (EITC)

An extensive literature uses variation generated from expansions in the federal EITC as well as
the introduction and expansion of state EITCs and focuses on impacts on single parents, who
receive about three quarters of total EITC credits. The research finds that the credit leads to
increases in employment of single mothers with little evidence of reductions in earnings for
those in the labor market (Hotz and Scholz 2003; Eissa and Hoynes 2006; Nichols and Rothstein
2016).

The gains in earnings combine with the credit to increase family after-tax income and reduce
poverty. For example, Hoynes and Patel (2018) find that among single mothers with less than a
college degree, a $1,000 increase in EITC benefits leads to a 7.4 percentage point increase in
employment and an 8.4 percentage point reduction in poverty. Hoynes and Patel find that half
the poverty reduction comes from increases in earnings. Additionally, there is evidence that the
EITC leads to positive effects on maternal mental and general health (Evans and Garthwaite
2014).

       D.      Labor supply response estimates from other settings

The above discussion focuses on specific programs. Another way to gain insight into the effects
of a UBI is to identify the underlying parameters that are needed to evaluate its impact. The
most important parameter for understanding the impact of a pure UBI on static labor supply is
the income elasticity. This has been estimated in a wide range of settings, using a range of
methodologies. Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) provide a comprehensive review of the literature
and conclude the income elasticity of labor supply averages about -0.05 for men and -0.20 for
married women.

The income elasticity is a sufficient statistic for the impacts of a pure UBI, without a phase-out.
The impacts of a UBI that includes a phase-out depends on the substitution elasticity as well.
Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) find the median compensated substitution elasticity is 0.08 for
men and 0.78 for married women.

We can use these estimates, which are generally consistent with the experimental and quasi-
experimental literature, to provide guidance on estimated impacts of a UBI. A $12,000 per adult
UBI, without a phase-out, would lead to a 33% increase in income at the mean among single
adult families or a 25% increase among married couple families. Income elasticities in the range
of -0.05 to -0.10 would lead to 1.6% - 3.3% reductions in hours worked.

Now consider a UBI that phases out gradually between the 50th and 75th percentiles of the
family income distribution. This creates an average implicit tax rate of about 27 percent for




                                                20
single adult families and 55 percent for married couple families over this range. With a
substitution elasticity of 0.3, aggregate labor supply would fall by approximately 3%.23

These calculations assume that both income and substitution elasticities are constant. It is
possible that responses to large transfers, like the UBI, are not proportionate to responses to
the smaller shocks used to identify these elasticities. In particular, the participation response to
an income shock might be larger when G is large enough to survive on without work. As noted
above the evidence on this is scant, but studies of lottery winners show income elasticities are
quite stable with the payout size (Cesarini et al 2017).

         E.       Longer-run effects

The discussion in Section V suggests that the longer-run effect of the UBI may differ from that
seen in the short run. One channel for the longer run labor supply effects operates through
child health and development. Welfare waiver studies found positive impacts on achievement
among young children, but only for policies that increased maternal employment and family
income (Morris et al 2009). SNAP and the EITC improve health at birth (Almond, Hoynes and
Schanzenbach 2011, Hoynes, Miller and Simon 2015, Strully et al 2010) and children have fewer
school absences when they have greater access or larger purchasing power of SNAP (Bronchetti
et al 2018; East 2017). The EITC also leads to increases in children’s achievement (Dahl and
Lochner 2012, Chetty et al 2011) and educational attainment (Bastian and Michelmore 2018;
Manoli and Turner 2018). It is not clear whether the EITC effects reflect the value of additional
financial resources – which could operate through greater consumption or through improved
parenting behavior due to reduced stress (Mullainathan and Shafir 2013) – or the impact of
increased maternal employment. The former would likely generalize to a UBI, but the latter
would work in the opposite direction in the UBI (at least in the short run) so would not
generalize.

In the longer run, access to cash welfare in childhood leads to increases in health, educational
attainment, and age at death (Aizer et al 2016). SNAP in early childhood leads to improvements
in adult health and, for men, economic outcomes (Hoynes et al 2016). These effects more
clearly reflect the impact of additional resources, so generalize more readily to a UBI. While we
have much more to learn, the work to date shows that “two-generation” benefits may be an
important and until recently largely overlooked part of the benefits of these transfer programs
(Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2018).24

VII.     Ongoing UBI pilots and the research agenda going forward

23
   Among those with incomes in the third quartile, labor supply is predicted to decline by 9 percent for single
parents and 17 percent for married couples. Nonlinear tax models suggest that families with incomes just above
                                                                                                                th
the median will reduce supply by less than this, to just the median, while families with incomes above the 75
percentile might reduce their supply to below it. These effects offset, and are not likely to be quantitatively
important on net relative to our simple calculation.
24
   Price (2018) finds long-run negative impacts of the Negative Income Tax experimental treatments on adult
participants’ labor supply, but no long-run impacts on the labor supply of children in treated households.

                                                         21
As we’ve seen, we have a good deal of evidence from a range of settings that substitution
effects on short-run labor supply are moderate and income effects are small. There is also clear
evidence that additional family resources improve children’s outcomes, including health and
school achievement.

The major open questions about UBIs, in our view, relate to longer-run effects, which are much
harder to study using randomized and natural experiments. We do know that more resources in
childhood have long-run effects on child development and health. But do more resources in
adolescence and early adulthood lead to greater human capital investment, translating into
increased labor supply later? Does greater income in periods of joblessness lead to training or
other investments that improve outcomes in the longer run? Does financial stability affect
willingness to take risks or long-term planning? We know little about these.25

Second, do large transfers have qualitatively different impacts than smaller transfers? The
available evidence comes from studies of lottery winners and it is unclear whether this applies
to a UBI.

Third, we know little about the role of universality. Does a universal program meaningfully
reduce stigma and increase social inclusion, communicating that recipients are valued by
society? Are there important general equilibrium effects, operating either through changes in
wages due to supply shifts or to the additional demand created by consumers with more
money to spend? We have very few studies of universal programs that use credible research
designs, so we know little about this.

Finally, as our discussion in Section IV indicates, a crucial part of the design of any UBI policy is
the need to finance it. As we have emphasized throughout this review, funding a program that
is both universal and provides a basic income will require raising enormous new revenues. The
financing mechanism is, therefore, likely to have quite important effects on its own, both in
terms of labor supply impacts of new taxes as well as the political economy aspects of this
change. The existing labor supply literature provides useful evidence for understanding the
labor supply effects. But the political economy effects are harder to predict. A crucial question
is whether the (perceived) benefits of universality can be maintained in the presence of
substantial new taxes levied on a small share of the population.

The renewed interest in UBIs in recent years has led to an explosion of policy development and
research effort. In particular, there are several ongoing pilots and experimental studies, and
others in the planning stage, that will test programs billed as UBIs.

The highest profile study is one being financed by the Silicon Valley firm Y Combinator
Research, with a commitment of $100 million in funding. A pilot study is providing payments to

25
     See Widerquist (2018) for an extended discussion of the challenges in conducting experiments of UBIs.


                                                          22
a few dozen families, and a larger, randomized study is planned in which 1,000 people will
receive a UBI of $1,000 per month for three or five years. As currently planned (see Rhodes
2017), eligibility will be based on age (21-40), and pre-enrollment income less than the county
median. Planning documents indicate that this is meant to be informative about a more
universal program, and that the researchers expect program effects to be larger for low-income
families. Researchers plan to negotiate waivers from eligibility requirements for other means-
tested programs, enabling the UBI payments to supplement rather than replace existing
transfers. As discussed above, any large-scale UBI would probably be financed in part by
eliminating most other means-tested transfers, so it is not clear whether the effect of a UBI
supplement is the parameter of interest.

Key research questions for the Y Combinator study concern the effects of the UBI on time use
(including but not limited to labor supply), objective health and subjective well-being, financial
health, risk and time preferences, political and social attitudes, and crime, as well as spillovers
to recipients’ families and social networks.

A second high-profile study is in planning stages in Stockton, California. This study, led by the
Economic Security Project, will provide payments of $500 per month to approximately 100
families, for 18 months (Martin-West et al., 2018). Eligibility will be limited only by age (18 and
over) and census tract income (below Stockton’s median income). The study will focus on
impacts on financial well-being and physical and psychological health.

We are also aware of early-stage conversations about similar pilots in a number of other U.S.
locations.

In Europe, discussions seem to center around using UBIs as replacements for existing transfer
programs, which compared to those in the U.S. tend to be more generous, with wider eligibility,
and create larger disincentives to work. UBIs are seen as attractive because they make it
feasible to return to work. Only one study has come to fruition to our knowledge, however, in
Finland. There, the program was restricted to people aged 25-58 already receiving a labor
market subsidy or unemployment allowance. 2,000 were randomly selected to receive a basic
income payment of 560 Euros per month; there was no option not to participate. Recipients
remain eligible for other programs, but the basic income is deducted so that participants get
the maximum of the basic income or what they would otherwise receive. Payments began in
2017 and are scheduled to continue through the end of 2018. The study will focus on labor
supply as an outcome. In April 2018 the government declined to fund an extension of the
experiment to the broader population.

A final pilot study enrolled participants in April 2018 in three sites in Ontario, Canada. Only low-
income (under $34,000 CAN for singles or $48,000 CAN for couples) people were eligible, and
participants were randomly selected from among applicants within these sites. (In one site, the
study is testing community-level outcomes, so there is no comparison group.) The payment is
structured as an NIT: A guarantee of G=$16,989 CAN for a single person or G=$24,027 CAN for a
married couple that begins phasing out immediately with earnings (P=0) at a T=50% rate. The

                                                 23
program does not displace child benefits, but it does replace employment insurance, pension,
welfare, and disability program payments.

These pilot studies will provide valuable proofs-of-concept about the administration of UBIs,
and about labor supply. However, we do not anticipate that they will dramatically add to our
knowledge about the key unresolved questions that we outline above. This is in part because
the samples are quite small, a function of the high cost of providing a UBI (and a cautionary tale
about the feasibility of implementing a UBI at a large scale). But even with larger samples, the
designs are quite similar to those of earlier studies. They will generate estimates of short-run
income elasticities on labor supply, exactly the parameter that is well identified by the NIT
experiments and many other studies in the literature. They will allow tests of the extrapolation
from smaller programs that we used above to assess UBI labor supply effects based on the
existing literature (though statistical power is a major concern). But they will shed little or no
light on any long-term effects, such as those operating through human capital accumulation, or
on the psychological and political effects of universality.

VIII.   Conclusion

Interest in universal basic income is on the rise in the U.S. and other advanced countries.
Decades of wage stagnation and concerns about automation, robots, and job destruction, as
well as discontent with the current social safety net, provide the foundation for interest in this
area. Support for UBIs has led to several pilot programs and policy proposals in the U.S.,
Canada, Finland and Switzerland. Despite all of this, there is a lack of clarity on what makes a
UBI, what problem it is meant to solve, whether the social safety net can or is providing these
benefits, and what (if anything) can be learned from the pilot programs that we don’t already
know from the decades of existing research on individual and household responses to the social
safety net, and wages and income opportunities more broadly. Our paper seeks to fill this gap.

A “pure” UBI (providing a set benefit to all regardless of income, age, etc.) funded to meet basic
needs for a household without earnings would be extremely expensive, about twice the cost of
all existing transfers in the U.S. Funding this would require substantial new revenue. The source
of the new funds is a first order issue, and will have substantial impacts on the distributional
effects of the policy and its ability to target those most in need of assistance. In particular,
replacing existing anti-poverty programs with a UBI would be highly regressive, unless
substantial additional funds were put in.

Much about the effects of a UBI on labor supply, income and family wellbeing can be gleaned
from the existing research, which we briefly review here. We identify a few outstanding
questions, such as the impact of a truly universal program (presumably without stigma) as well
as the effects on human capital and, hence, labor supply in the longer run. Unfortunately, the
planned and ongoing pilots are not well suited to answer these questions. Experimentation
aimed at identifying parameters and mechanisms (Deaton and Cartwright 2018; Ludwig, Kling,
and Mullianathan 2011; Rothstein and von Wachter 2017) would be more useful than
evaluations of small UBI pilots.

                                               24
References

Acemoglu D, Autor D. 2011. Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment and
earnings. In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4, ed. O Ashenfelter, D Card, pp. 1043-1171.
Elsevier.

Acemoglu D, Restrepo P. 2018. Artificial intelligence, automation and work. Working Paper
24196, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Aizer A, Eli S, Ferrie J, Lleras-Muney A. 2016. The long-run impact of cash transfers to poor
families. American Economic Review 106(4): 935–71.

Akee R, Copeland W, Costello EJ, Simeonova E. 2018. How does household income affect child
personality traits and behaviors? American Economic Review 108(3): 775-827.

Akee RK, Copeland WE, Keeler G, Angold A, Costello EJ. 2010. Parents' incomes and children's
outcomes: a quasi-experiment using transfer payments from casino profits. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 2(1): 86-115.

Akee R, Simeonova E, Copeland W, Angold A, Costello EJ. 2013. Young adult obesity and
household income: effects of unconditional cash transfers. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 5(2): 1-28.

Akerlof G. 1978. The economics of "tagging" as applied to the optimal income tax, welfare
programs, and manpower planning. American Economic Review 68(1): 8-19.

Almond D, Currie J, Duque V. Forthcoming. Childhood circumstances and adult outcomes: act II.
Journal of Economic Literature.

Almond D, Hoynes HW, Schanzenbach DW. 2011. Inside the war on poverty: the impact of food
stamps on birth outcomes. Review of Economics and Statistics 93(2): 387–403.

Atkinson AB. 1995. Public economics in action: the basic income/flat tax proposal. Oxford
University Press.

Autor D. 2014. Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the ‘other 99
percent.’ Science 344(6186): 843–51.

Autor DH, Dorn D, Hanson GH. 2016. The China shock: learning from labor-market adjustment
to large changes in trade. Annual Review of Economics 8: 205-40.

Azar J, Marinescu I, Steinbaum MI. 2017. Labor market concentration. Working Paper 24147,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.


                                                25
Banerjee, A, Niehaus P, Suri, T. 2018. Universal basic income in the developing world. Working
paper, August 16.

Bastian J, Michelmore K. 2018. The long-term impact of the earned income tax credit on
children’s education and employment outcomes. Journal of Labor Economics 36(4).

Bitler M, Hines A, Page M. 2018. Cash for Kids, RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the
Social Sciences 4(2): 43-73.

Black S, Schanzenbach D, Breitwieser A. 2017. The Recent Decline in Women’s Labor Force
Participation. In The 51%: Driving Growth through Women’s Economic Participation, ed. D
Schanzenbach, pp. 5-17. The Hamilton Project

Blundell R, MaCurdy T. 1999. Labor supply: a review of alternative approaches. In Handbook of
Labor Economics, Vol. 3, Part A, ed. OC Ashenfelter, D Card, pp. 1559-695. Elsevier

Bronchetti E, Christensen G, Hoynes H. 2018. The real value of SNAP benefits and health
outcomes. Working Paper 24762, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Calnitsky D, Latner JP. 2017. Basic income in a small town: understanding the elusive effects on
work. Social Problems 64(3): 373-97.

Cesarini D, Lindqvist E, Notowidigdo M, Östling R. 2017. The effect of wealth on individual and
household labor supply: evidence from Swedish lotteries. American Economic Review 107(2):
3917-46.

Chetty R, Saez E, Rockoff J. 2011. New evidence on the long-term impacts of tax credits. U.S.
Internal Revenue Service, Washington, DC.

Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives. 1996. Green book. US GPO,
Washington, DC.

Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives. 2016. Green book. US GPO,
Washington, DC.

Cunha F, Heckman J. 2007. The technology of skill formation. American Economic Review 97(2):
31-47.

Currie J. 2006. The take-up of social benefits. In Poverty, The Distribution of Income, and Public
Policy, ed. A Auerbach, D Card, J Quigley, pp.80-148. New York: Russell Sage

Dahl GB, Lochner L. 2012. The impact of family income on child achievement: evidence from
the earned income tax credit. American Economic Review 102(5):1927–56.


                                                  26
Danziger S, Haveman R, and Plotnick R. 1981. How income transfer programs affect work,
savings, and the income distribution: a critical review. Journal of Economic Literature 19 (3):
975-1028.

Deaton, A, and Cartwright, N. 2018. Understanding and misunderstanding randomized
controlled trials. Social Science & Medicine, 210, 2-21.

Dube A. 2018. An antipoverty tool with better bipartisan support can be made even better, The
Hill, 10/24/18.

East CN. Forthcoming. The effect of food stamps on children’s health: evidence from
immigrants’ changing eligibility. The Journal of Human Resources.

Economic Report of the President. 2015. US GPO, Washington, DC.

Eissa N, Hoynes H. 2006. Behavioral responses to taxes: lessons from the EITC and labor supply.
In Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 20, ed. J Poterba, pp. 73-110. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press

Evans WN, Garthwaite CL. 2014. Giving mom a break: the impact of higher
EITC payments on maternal health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(2):
258–90.

Floyd I, Pavetti L, Schott L. 2017. TANF reaching few poor families. Center for Budget and Policy
Priorities.

Friedman M 1962. Capitalism and Freedom, University of Chicago Press.

Friedman M, Friedman R. 1990. Free to choose: A personal statement. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt.

Garfinkel I, Huang CC, Naidich W. 2003. The effects of a basic income guarantee on poverty and
income distribution. Redesigning Distribution, 117.

Greenstein R. 2017. Commentary: Universal Basic Income May Sound Attractive But, If It
Occurred, Would Likelier Increase Poverty Than Reduce It, Center for Budget and Policy
Priorities 9/17/17.

Hanna R, Olken B. 2018. “Universal Basic Incomes versus Targeted Transfers: Anti-Poverty
Programs in Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol 32(4) pp. 201-26.

Halpern-Meekin S, Edin K, Tach L, Sykes J. 2015. It's Not Like I'm Poor: How Working Families
Make Ends Meet in a Post-Welfare World, University of California Press


                                                27
Hotz VJ, Scholz JK. 2003. The earned income tax credit. In Means-Tested Transfer Programs in
the United States, ed. R Moffitt, pp. 141–97. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press

Hoynes HW. 1997. Work, welfare, and family structure: what have we learned? In Fiscal
Policy: Lessons from Economic Research, ed. A Auerbach, pp. 101-46. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press

Hoynes H, Miller DL, Simon D. 2015. Income, the earned income tax credit, and infant health.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(1):172–211.

Hoynes H, Patel A. 2018. Effective policy for reducing poverty and inequality? The earned
income tax credit and the distribution of income. Journal of Human Resources. 53:859-890.

Hoynes H, Rothstein J. 2017. Tax policy toward low-income families. In The Economics of Tax
Policy, ed. A Auerbach, K Smetters. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Hoynes H, Schanzenbach D. 2018. Safety net investments in children. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity. Fall 2018.

Hoynes H, Schanzenbach DW, Almond D. 2016. Long-run impacts of childhood access to the
safety net. American Economic Review 106(4): 903–34.

Hughes C. 2018. Fair Shot: Rethinking Inequality and How We Earn. St. Martin’s Press

Hum D, Simpson W. 1993. Economic response to a guaranteed annual income: experience from
Canada and the United States. Journal of Labor Economics 11(1, Part 2): S263-S296.

Jones D, Marinescu I. 2018. The labor market impacts of universal and permanent cash
transfers: evidence from the Alaska Permanent Fund. Working Paper 24312, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Gizem K, Moffitt RA. 2017. Trends in cumulative marginal tax rates facing low-income families,
1997–2007. Tax Policy and the Economy 31(1): 43-70.

Lampman RJ. 1965. Approaches to the reduction of poverty. The American Economic Review,
55(1/2), 521-529.

Lampman RJ. 1968. Expanding the American system of transfers to do more for the Poor. U.S.
Congress Senate Committee Hearings, Joint Economic Committee, 90th Congress, Vol. 1915.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Lee DS. 1999. Wage inequality in the United States during the 1980s: rising dispersion or falling
minimum wage? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3): 977-1023.


                                               28
Lochner L, Monge-Naranjo A. 2011. The nature of credit constraints and human capital.
American Economic Review 101(6): 2487-529.

Lowrey, A. (2018). Give People Money: How A Universal Basic Income Would End Poverty,
Revolutionize Work, and Remake the World, Crown Publishing

Ludwig J, Kling JR, Mullainathan S. 2011. Mechanism experiments and policy evaluations.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 17-38.

Manoli D, Turner N. 2018. Cash on hand and college enrollment. evidence from population tax
data and policy nonlinearities. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10(2): 242–71.

Martin-West S, Castro Baker A, Balakrishnan S, Rao K, Tan GY. 2018. Pre-Analysis Plan: Stockton
Economic Empowerment Demonstration. December.
https://www.stocktondemonstration.org/pap.

Meyer BD, Mok WK, Sullivan JX. 2009. The under-reporting of transfers in household surveys: its
nature and consequences. Working Paper 15181, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.

Mirrlees J 1971. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation.” The Review of
Economic Studies 38, no. 2 (April): 175-208.

Moffitt R. 1979. ““The Labor-Market Replacement Effect of a Negative Income Tax” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 33, No. 1 (Oct., 1979), pp. 85-94.

Moffitt R. 1983. An economic model of welfare stigma. American Economic Review 73(5): 1023-
35.

Moffitt R. 1992. Incentive effects of the U.S. welfare system: a review. Journal of Economic
Literature 30(1): 1-61.

Moffitt RA. 2003a. The Negative Income Tax and the evolution of U.S. welfare policy. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 17 (3): 119-140.

Moffitt R. 2003b. The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program. In Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States, ed. R Moffitt, pp. 141–97. Chicago, IL: The University of
Chicago Press

Molloy R, Trezzi R, Smith CL, Wozniak A. 2016. Understanding declining fluidity in the US labor
market. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2016(1), 183-259.

Morris P, Gennetian L, Duncan G, Huston A. 2009. How welfare policies affect child and
adolescent school performance: investigating pathways of influence with experimental data. In

                                               29
Welfare Reform and its Long-Term Consequences for America’s Poor, ed. JP Ziliak, pp. 255-89.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press

Mullainathan S, Shafir E. 2013. Scarcity: Why Having Too Little Means So Much. New York:
Henry Holt and Company

Morduch J, Schneider R. 2017. The Financial Diaries, Princeton University Press.

Murray C. 2016. In Our Hands: A Plan to Replace the Welfare State. American Enterprise
Institute.

Nichols A, Rothstein J. 2016. The earned income tax credit. In Economics of Means-Tested
Programs in the United States, Vol. I, ed. R Moffitt. National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference Report. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press

Nichols AL, Zeckhauser RJ. 1982. Targeting transfers through restrictions on recipients. The
American Economic Review, 72(2), 372-377.

Piketty T, Saez E, Zucman G. Forthcoming. Distributional national accounts: methods and
estimates for the United States. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Plueger D. 2009. Earned income tax credit participation rate for tax year 2005. U.S. Internal
Revenue Service, Washington, DC.

Price D. 2018. The long-term effects of cash assistance, working paper.

Rhodes E. 2017. Basic Income Project Proposal: Overview for Comments and Feedback. Y
Combinator Research. http://basicincome.ycr.org/our-plan.

Robins PK. 1985. A comparison of the labor supply findings from the four negative income tax
experiments. Journal of Human Resources 20(4): 567-82.

Rothstein J. 2010. Is the EITC as good as an NIT? Conditional cash transfers and tax incidence.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(1): 177-208.

Rothstein J, von Wachter T. 2017. Social experiments in the labor market. In Handbook of
Economic Field Experiments (Vol. 2, pp. 555-637). North-Holland.

Saez E. 2002. Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive Labor Supply
Responses. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 3 (August): 1039-73.

Semega JL, Fontenot KR, Kollar MA. 2017. Income and poverty in the United States: 2016.
Current Population Reports, U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, DC.


                                               30
Scholz JK. 1994. The earned income credit: participation, compliance, and antipoverty
effectiveness. National Tax Journal 47(1): 63-87.

Shaefer HL, Collyer S, Duncan G, Edin K, Garfinkel I, et al. 2018. A universal child allowance: a
plan to reduce poverty and income instability among children in the United States. RSF: The
Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 4(2): 22-42.

Shambaugh J, Nunn R, Liu P, Nantz G. 2017. Thirteen facts about wage growth. The Hamilton
Project.

Sloman P. 2016. Beveridge’s rival: Juliet Rhys-Williams and the campaign for basic income,
1942–55. Contemporary British History, 30(2), 203-223.

Stern A. 2016. Raising the Floor: How a Universal Basic Income can Renew our Economy and
Rebuild the American Dream. Public Affairs.

Strully KW, Rehkopf DH, Xuan Z. 2010. Effects of prenatal poverty on infant health: state earned
income tax credits and birth weight. American Sociological
Review 75(4): 534–62.

Tobin J, Pechman JA, Mieszkowski PM. 1967. Is a negative income tax practical?. The Yale Law
Journal, 77(1), 1-27.

U.S. Census Bureau 2017. Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement.

Wheaton L. 2008. Underreporting of means-tested transfer programs in the CPS and SIPP.
Urban Institute.

Van Parijs P, Vanderborght Y. 2017. Basic Income: A Radical Proposal for a Free Society and a
Sane Economy, Harvard University Press

Ventry Jr DJ. 2000. The collision of tax and welfare politics: The political history of the Earned
Income Tax Credit, 1969–99. National Tax Journal, 983-1026.

Widerquist, K. 2018. A Critical Analysis of Basic Income Experiments for Researchers,
Policymakers, and Citizens, Palgrave Macmillian.

Yang A. 2018. The War on Normal People: The Truth About America’s Disappearing Jobs and
Why Universal Basic Income Is Our Future. Hachette Books.

Ziliak J. 2016. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. In Economics of Means Tested Transfer
Programs in the United States, Vol. II, ed. R Moffitt. University of Chicago Press.



                                                 31
Figure 1. Growing interest in Universal Basic Incomes is evidenced in newspaper usage




Note: Figure shows annual uses of the terms “Universal Basic Income” and “Basic Income” in
the New York Times.


Figure 2. An illustrative, hypothetical transfer program
Figure 3. Comparing a UBI to other existing programs




Figure 4. Average household transfers, by family type and program




Source: Authors’ tabulations of the 2017 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement.
Figure 5. Average household transfers, by family type, and decile of after-tax and transfer
income




Source: Authors’ tabulations of the 2017 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement.
Figure 6. Average household transfers, by family type, and earnings decile




Source: Authors’ tabulations of the 2017 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement.
Figure 7. Distribution of household transfers, by family type, and earnings decile




Source: Authors’ tabulations of 2017 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement.
Table 1. Parameters of selected transfer programs


                               Program                    In-work       Disability                        Child
                                         Cash welfare                                 Retirement                       NIT           UBI
                                 Type                     benefits      benefits                       allowance
                               Example                                                           Shaefer et al   Ex of               Ex of
                                             AFDC           EITC           SSI       Social Security
                               Program                                                              (2016)     Canonical          Canonical
Guarantee (G)                              $7,285/yr           $0      $8,820/yr      $16,392/yr $3,000/yr     $5000/yr           $12,000/yr
Subsidy rate (S)                              0%             40%          0%             0%           0%          0%                  0%
Maximum transfer (M)                       $7,285/yr     $5,616/yr     $8,820/yr      $16,392/yr $3,000/yr     $5000/yr           $12,000/yr
Beginning of phase-out of transfer (P)      $90/mo       $18,340/yr     $85/mo            $0          $0          $0                infinite
Tax rate in phase-out (T)                    100%            21%          50%            0%           0%         50%                  0%
                                                        Must be 25-
                                                           64; and
                                                        there is only
                                                                                  Over 62 with All families
                                             Single         a small   Documented
Eligibility restrictions (E)                                                       sufficient      with            All families   All adults
                                            parents       credit for   disability
                                                                                  work history  children
                                                            those
                                                           without
                                                           children

Notes: Several programs have additional eligibility criteria (e.g., asset limits) not shown here. AFDC benefits are based on the 1996
schedule for a single parent with two children in the median state, and are in 2017 dollars. P and T reflect the policy after 12 months of
work; earlier, P is higher and T is lower. EITC benefits are for an unmarried parent with two children in 2017, and reflect only the federal
credit. SSI amount is for an individual without dependents in 2017. Social Security parameters are for the average retirement amount in
2018, and ignore the earnings test, which reduces current benefits but recycles them into higher later benefits.
Table 2. UBI proposals and pilots


                                         Proposals                          Pilots

                                         Murray      Stern
                                                                Switzerland Stockton Finland            Ontario       Y Combinator
                                         (2016)      (2016)
Guarentee (G)                            $10,000     $12,000    $31,938     $6,000     $6,000           $9,848        $12,000
Subsidy rate (S)                         0%          0%         0%          0%         0%               0%            0%
Maximum transfer (M)                     $10,000     $12,000    $31,938     $6,000     $6,000           $9,848        $12,000
Beginning of phase-out of transfer (P)   $25,000     infinite   infinite    infinite   infinite         $0            Area median
                                                                                                                      income
Tax rate in phase-out (T)                20%         0%         0%          0%         0%               50%           Infinite
Eligibility restrictions (E)             U.S.        Age 18+.   None        None       Age 25-58.       Age 18-64     Ages 21-40
                                         citizen,                                      Receipt of       with low
                                         age 21+                                       unemployment     income
                                                                                       payments prior   <$48,000/yr
                                                                                       to pilot         for couples


Notes: Table does not reflect all complexities of proposals and pilots. For example, under the Murray proposal, the transfer would
phase out only to $5,000 per adult per year. Under the Stern proposal, the program differs for seniors. Swiss proposal parameters
are based on suggestions advanced by supporters of the referendum, and apply to a family with two adults and one child. Ontario
parameters are for a couple. Non-U.S. programs are converted to U.S. dollars using purchasing power parity.
Table 3. Number of recipients and total expenditures from selected transfer programs and
potential UBIs


                                                                                Total      Number of
                                                                            expenditures   recipients
Program                         Eligibility [E]                               (billions)    (millions)
Cash welfare
   TANF                         Single parent, work requirements                7.4            2.8
   SSI /Elderly                 65+                                             5.4            1.2
   SSI children                 under age 18, blind or disabled                 9.3            1.2
In-kind, near-cash welfare
   SNAP                         near universal                                  63.6          42.1
   School Lunch                 K-12 children                                   12.3          22.0
   School Breakfast             K-12 children                                    4.5          12.5
   WIC                          pregnant, postnatal women & children<5           5.6           7.3
   Section 8 & Public Housing   universal, but rationed                         26.9           9.4
In-work tax credits
   EITC                         Earners 25-64 for childless                     69.8          69.7
   CTC                          Families with children with earned income       52.8         105.9
Disability programs
   SSDI                         Documented work limiting disability            142.7          10.4
   SSI/Disability               Documented work limiting disability             39.6           5.9
Social Insurance
   Social Security retirement   Retirement age, with work history              680.2          45.5
   Social Security survivors                                                   118.3           6.0
   Unemployment insurance       Work history, actively looking for work         29.9           5.7
Health insurance
   Medicare                     65+, Disabled                                  689.0          57.0
   Medicaid                     Low income                                     368.0          82.2
   CHIP                         Children                                        14.3           9.2

TOTAL COST                      ALL PROGRAMS                                   $2,340
                                EXCLUDE HEALTH                                 $1,268
                                EXCLUDE HEALTH & SS RETIREMENT                  $588
Potential UBIs
   Canonical                    Ages 18+                                       $3,025        252.1
   Phased out around median Y   Ages 18+                                       $1,512        126.0
   Age-limited                  Ages 18-64                                     $2,414        201.2
Sources: TANF recipients and expenditures from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration
for Children and Families program reports for 2016; SSI information from the Social Security Administration’s (SSA)
2017 Annual Report of the Supplemental Security Income Program; SNAP and WIC receipt and expenditure, and school
meal receipt, data from the USDA Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) program reports for 2017; school meal enrollment
data from the FNS Congressional Justification for 2018; EITC and CTC enrollment and expenditure data from the
Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income 2016 preliminary data release; Social Security enrollment and
expenditures from the SSA beneficiary statistics and payment summary tables for 2017; Medicare enrollment data
from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for 2016, and expenditure data from the Congressional Budget
Office’s (CBO) June 2017 baseline; Medicaid and CHIP enrollment from MACPAC’s Medicaid and CHIP Data Book for
2016; Medicaid expenditure data (both federal and state shares) from Kaiser Family Foundation; and CHIP expenditure
from CBO’s 2017 baseline.
Appendix figure 1: Distribution of families across after-tax and transfer income deciles, by
family type




Source: Authors’ tabulations of 2017 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement.
Appendix figure 2: Distribution of families across earnings deciles, by family type




Source: Authors’ tabulations of 2017 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement.
