                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE CONSEQUENCES OF INVENTION SECRECY:
   EVIDENCE FROM THE USPTO PATENT SECRECY PROGRAM IN WORLD WAR II

                                            Daniel P. Gross

                                        Working Paper 25545
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25545


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2019




I thank Ashish Arora, Pierre Azoulay, Wes Cohen, Alberto Galasso, Shane Greenstein, Deepak Hegde,
Jeff Kuhn, Hong Luo, Fabian Waldinger, Martin Watzinger; audiences at Duke Fuqua, ETH Zurich,
Florida State University, Harvard Business School, NYU Stern, and the University of Luxembourg,
and participants at the NBER Productivity Lunch, the 2018 LSE Conference on the Economics of
Innovation, the 2019 Searle Center Conference on Innovation Economics, and the 2019 NBER Summer
Institute (Innovation) for helpful comments. I am grateful to Alessandro Iaria, Carlo Schwarz, and
Fabian Waldinger for sharing code from Iaria et al. (2018), and to Jeff Kuhn for discussing the mechanics
of semantic analysis. I also thank Hayley Pallan, Greg Saldutte, and Senan Hogan-Hennessy for outstanding
research assistance, and the Harvard Business School Division of Research and Faculty Development
and NBER Innovation Policy grant (2016) for financial support. All errors are my own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Daniel P. Gross. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Consequences of Invention Secrecy: Evidence from the USPTO Patent Secrecy Program
in World War II
Daniel P. Gross
NBER Working Paper No. 25545
February 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. N42,N72,O31,O32,O34,O38

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effects of the USPTO's patent secrecy program in World War II, under which
over 11,000 U.S. patent applications were issued secrecy orders which halted examination and prohibited
inventors from disclosing their inventions or filing in foreign countries. Secrecy orders were issued
most heavily in high-tech areas important to the war effort - such as radar, electronics, and synthetic
materials { and nearly all rescinded at the end of the war. I find that compulsory invention secrecy
reduced follow-on invention and restricted commercialization, but as part of the security policies in
place during the war it appears to have been effective at keeping sensitive technology out of the public
view. The results shed light on the consequences of invention secrecy, which is widely used by inventors
to protect and appropriate the returns to innovation, and yield lessons for ongoing debate over potential
measures to protect U.S. inventors against the growing incidence of foreign IP theft today.


Daniel P. Gross
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dgross@hbs.edu
Scientific espionage, in the form of research theft and misappropriation of intellectual property by
foreign adversaries, is an increasingly serious problem for U.S. firms, universities, and government
agencies, and according to the FBI is “the most severe counterintelligence threat facing [the U.S.]
today” (Priestap 2018).1 As federal agencies scramble to develop a response, one of their first moves
appears to be tightening information access (New York Times 2019). The policy goal is clear, as
a matter of economic security. But these policies also cut against basic principles of scientific
openness and communication and have prompted concerns about the effects of such restrictions on
scientific progress. The increasing risk of intellectual property theft may also be increasing firms’
already-strong preference for trade secrecy as a strategy for appropriating returns to innovation
(Levin et al. 1987, Cohen et al. 2000). Despite the growing hunger for secrecy as a competitive and
regulatory strategy, the potential consequences are poorly understood and woefully understudied,
for the simple fact that secrecy is – by definition – hard to observe.

History, however, provides an opening in the form of a compulsory secrecy policy in World War
II, which I study in this paper. In 1940, with war raging in Europe, the U.S. Congress authorized
government agencies to issue compulsory secrecy orders to inventions in U.S. patent applications
whose disclosure it deemed a potential security risk. Secrecy orders were issued widely during the
war – to over 11,000 patent applications, covering inventions as diverse as radar, cryptography,
and synthetic materials – prohibiting disclosure by any means and withholding the granting of any
intellectual property rights. The vast majority of these secrecy orders were then abruptly rescinded
at the end of the war. The scope and scale of the policy, and its abrupt conclusion, creates a rare
opportunity to systematically study the effects of invention secrecy.

I show that although patents with secrecy orders were positively selected, those with longer secrecy
terms were less likely to be cited by future patents, suggesting a reduction in closely-related follow-
on invention – this being particularly true for patents of filers which were not government R&D
contractors during the war. The effects extend to the product market, where terms from chemical
patents with a secrecy order are less likely to appear in chemical company product catalogs. Yet
new terms in secret patents also see limited mention in the public record until after the war ends,
such that the repercussions must be evaluated against the seeming effectiveness of the policy in
keeping sensitive technological content out of the public domain.

Information about new invention plays an multifaceted role in technological progress, allowing
1
    Media outlets have reported on both U.S. citizens and foreign nationals in the U.S. being prosecuted for illegally
    sharing proprietary research with foreign firms or governments (e.g., Wall Street Journal 2018, 2019), including by
    academic scientists participating in peer review of grant applications, sparking far-reaching investigations by the FBI
    and fanning fears that foreign governments are “exploiting the relative openness of the American scientific system
    to engage in wholesale economic espionage” (New York Times 2019).


                                                              1
inventors to build on prior art, delineating property rights, and enabling others to produce and sell
the invention when intellectual property rights expire. For these reasons, invention disclosure has
been a policy objective in the U.S. since the Patent Act of 1790, which required inventors filing for
a patent to include a replicable specification of their invention so that “the public may have [its] full
benefit.” U.S. science policy agencies are likewise tasked with promoting scientific communication
for similar reasons. U.S. invention secrecy policy defies these goals and has roots in a law enacted in
October 1917, near the end of World War I, which authorized the USPTO to order that inventions
in patent applications be kept secret, and withhold the grant of a patent, whenever its “publication
or disclosure” may “endanger the successful prosecution of the war.”

In 1940, in anticipation of entry into the war, the U.S. Congress renewed this legislation, and from
July 1940 to August 1945, the USPTO ordered thousands of patent applications into secrecy. I
combine several sources of data to study the effects of this program, beginning with the universe of
patents granted between 1920 and 1979 and the network of patent citations among them. Using the
archival records of government agencies which reviewed patent applications and advised the USPTO
on the issuance of secrecy orders, I identify the serial numbers of roughly 8,500 patent applications
issued secrecy orders during World War II, and an additional 20,000 which were formally evaluated
for secrecy but disapproved, which in turn link to 6,352 granted patents with secrecy orders, and
13,151 more which were reviewed but not ordered secret. The technology areas in which secrecy
orders were heavily issued reflected the priorities of the war effort, and at the height of the war,
more than half of all new patents in these classes were “going dark”.

The first question this paper tackles is whether secrecy impeded follow-on. However, because secrecy
is a selected condition, a simple comparison between secret and non-secret patents is problematic.
I instead estimate the effects of secrecy off of the intensive margin (duration), comparing forward
citations of secret and non-secret patents filed earlier versus later in the war, which experienced
longer or shorter secrecy terms (respectively) as a result of the mass rescindment in late 1945. I
show that patents with shorter secrecy are subsequently more likely to be cited than patents with
longer secrecy, particularly patents filed by firms and individuals who were not contracting with
the government to provide R&D for the war effort. In robustness checks, I show that these patterns
are (i) a result of secrecy itself, as there are no differences for patents which were evaluated for
secrecy but not ordered secret; (ii) unlikely to be a result of differential selection into secrecy over
time; and (iii) driven by non-self citations, with no effects for self-citations – collectively suggesting
causality. The point estimates indicate that a secret patent filed in 1945 on average has a 15%
higher probability of being cited than a secret patent filed in 1940.


                                                    2
Although patent citations are the traditional measure of follow-on invention used with patent data
(e.g., Jaffe et al. 1993) – most literally, inventions closely-related enough to be compared during
patent examination – they also have important limitations (e.g., Alcacer et al. 2009, Bryan et al.
2018). The most important limitation (for this paper) is that the public citation record only begins
in 1947, which is when the USPTO began requiring that the patent document include references
to prior art. As an alternative, I develop a content-based measure of follow-on proposed by Iaria
et al. (2018): I identify word stems which first appeared in the title of patents filed between 1940
and 1945, as a proxy for new ideas which entered the patent record in this period, and treat the
use of these words in future patents as an alternate measure of “citations” not subject to the 1947
constraint, comprising a smaller sample but yielding similar results.

Compulsory secrecy may have also impeded commercialization by forcing firms to keep inventions
out of the product market when the product risks disclosure. This constraint would be particularly
binding in industries where an invention often is the product, such as the chemical industry. To
evaluate this question, I identify new words and stems in chemical patents filed 1940-1945 and look
for these words in DuPont chemical product catalogs before, during, and after the war. The evidence
suggests that secrecy indeed interfered with commercialization: words which first appeared in secret
patents were significantly less likely to be included in the product catalog during and immediately
after the war (most were not), but the effects vanish by 1949.

The final test of the paper is whether secrecy orders were ultimately effective at keeping invention
secret. I return to word stems from titles of war-era patents and look for the use of these words in
the Google Books corpus around the time of the war, using Google’s N-grams data, which provide
an approximate measure of the public discourse. Words which first entered the patent record in
secret versus non-secret patents were not used at differential rates prior to 1945, but after the war,
use of words from secret patents discretely, permanently jumps.

Collectively, these results yield lessons on the consequences of invention secrecy. Previous research
in this area has focused primarily on inventors’ choice between patenting and trade secrecy, with
a mix of theoretical papers, surveys, and empirical analysis studying the characteristics of – and
conditions under which – inventors opt for patents versus trade secrecy to protect IP.2 With the
exception of recent work on the effects of changes in the strength of trade secrecy laws on publicly-
listed firms’ R&D (Png 2017a) and the intensity of patenting in process versus product innovation
(Ganglmair and Reimers 2019), there is little research on the impacts of invention secrecy beyond
2
    See Hall et al. (2014) for a review. The theoretical literature includes Anton and Yao (2004), Kultti et al. (2007);
    surveys: Levin et al. (1987), Cohen et al. (2000), Arundel and Kabla (1998), Arundel (2001); empirical analysis:
    Moser (2005, 2012), Fontana et al. (2013), Png (2017b), Ganglmair and Reimers (2019).


                                                            3
the private returns to the inventor choosing its IP strategy.

This paper also connects to a growing literature on patents’ disclosure function, which has examined
the effects of increasing access to patent publications through the USPTO’s Patent and Trademark
Depository Library network (Furman et al. 2018) and of recent policy changes which accelerated
the publication of U.S. patent applications (e.g., Hegde et al. 2018, Hegde and Luo 2017). Although
these papers detect positive effects on local patenting, patent citations, and licensing, these results
are in tension with skepticism from legal scholars (e.g., Roin 2005, Fromer 2009, Devlin 2010),
who point out that much of the information in patents is available through other sources, and that
inventors and applicants are incentivized not only to obscure the specification of inventions in the
patent, but also to avoid reading patents at all. Contemporary evidence from the 1940s is thin, but
two later reports from the National Science Foundation and National Academy of Sciences (NSF
1958, NAS 1969) suggest that patent documents were not in and of themselves a major source
of technical information at that time.3 Moreover, because the invention secrecy policy studied in
this paper is broader than the suppression of patent publication alone, extending to all channels of
communication, these concerns are less relevant to this paper.

The two World Wars have served as laboratories for many other questions about innovation (e.g.,
Moser and Voena 2012, Biasi and Moser 2018). Iaria et al. (2018) is perhaps the most closely
related work, as they study the effect of a disruption in scientific communication in the form of a
boycott of Central powers’ scientists during and after World War I, and show that this boycott led
to a reduction in citations of foreign publications, the similarity of paper titles, and the production
of basic science. This paper adds a new dimension to this literature, focusing on the consequences
of a sweeping patent secrecy program affecting firms in inventive sector.

The historical setting bears implications for the present. Secrecy orders continue to be issued today
under the Invention Secrecy Act of 1951, albeit at lower frequency than in the 1940s, and Freedom
of Information Act (FOIA) requests by the Federation of American Scientists (FAS) have revealed
5,792 secrecy orders in effect as of 2018 (FAS 2018). Although rare, the impact of a secrecy order
on filers can be severe (AUECO 2019). Moreover, with U.S. firms, policymakers, and law enforce-
ment agencies increasingly alarmed at intellectual property (IP) theft by foreign competitors and
governments, interest in both regulatory action and voluntary trade secrecy is only intensifying.4
3
  These sources do document that many R&D-intensive firms had technical libraries with books, journals, conference
  proceedings, and patents and weekly editions of USPTO Official Gazette, so in many cases, patents were available
  to be read (or ordered) as needed. However, according to NAS (1969), “of the communication that is used by each
  researcher as an inspiration and as a data flow that makes his own work possible, some 80 percent [comes] from other
  researchers at a stage before formal communication, through informal channels of the grapevine, the conference, the
  seminar, the preprint, and the other tentacles of... the Invisible College.”
4
  Anecdotally, R&D-intensive firms such as SpaceX have publicly discussed their avoidance of patenting because


                                                          4
Thus far, the effort to combat industrial espionage has mostly been limited to law enforcement
(criminal prosecution), and the question remains of how regulators are going to get ahead of the
problem. Further restrictions on information access, and even an expansion of compulsory secrecy,
are options that have entered policy debates (USPTO 2012, NIH 2019).

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 describes the wartime patent secrecy policy, the context
in which it arose, and its legacy today. Section 2 introduces the data, and Section 3 summarizes
the empirical characteristics of the secrecy order program. Section 4 estimates the effects of secrecy
orders on follow-on invention, using both citation- and content-based measures, and discusses two
channels that might explain these results. Section 5 studies the effects of secrecy orders on commer-
cialization of invention. Section 6 then asks whether the program was ultimately effective. Section
7 concludes by discussing alternative views on the importance of these findings and remaining
questions for research on modern invention secrecy strategies.



1        Historical Background

Although the U.S. did not enter World War II until December 1941, preparations for war began
in 1940. Among them was legislation enacted by the U.S. Congress to renew an invention secrecy
policy established near the end of World War I, which had empowered the USPTO to issue secrecy
orders on patent applications with content deemed sensitive for national security, but which had
lapsed with cessation of hostilities. The decision to revive this policy was shrewd, if not clairvoyant,
as the outcome of World War II later hinged on relative advantages in technology, powered by a
massive, domestic applied research effort (Gross and Sampat 2019), and keeping U.S. technology
out of enemy hands was crucial to the success of the U.S. war effort.

Public Law 700 of the 76th Congress (henceforth P.L. 700), enacted July 1, 1940, authorized the
USPTO to order that inventions in patent applications be kept secret, and withhold the granting
of a patent, for as long as needed if its disclosure might be “detrimental to the public safety or
defense.” Recipients of secrecy orders were, however, permitted to “tender” their inventions to
the U.S. government for its use, and later sue for compensation after the patent is granted if
the invention was used.5 Violations were initially punishable by abandonment of the application

    “Chinese competitors would just use [SpaceX patents] as a recipe book” (Business Insider 2012).
5
    The importance of the statute’s provision for the tender of inventions lay in the fact that patent applications at the
    USPTO were treated as private property and could not be disclosed to other parties, including government agencies,
    without the consent of the filer. Even technical experts evaluating patent applications for secrecy on behalf of the
    War Department and other agencies were sworn to not divulge any information they may acquire in doing so. As a
    result, without tender, “it was possible that an invention of importance would rest in the Patent Office unexploited


                                                             5
(i.e., loss of patent rights), but follow-up legislation on August 21, 1941 (77th Congress, P.L. 239)
threatened up to two years in prison and a fine of up to $10,000.6 In 1942, the policy was further
amended to remain in force for as long as the U.S. was at war.

To implement P.L. 700, the USPTO immediately created a new internal office named the Patent
Office Defense Committee (which later evolved into the Patent Office War Division, or POWD) on
July 9, 1940 to handle secrecy evaluations (Donnelly 1942).7 When patent applications arrived at
the USPTO, they were first assigned to one of 65 patent examining divisions, each led by a primary
examiner and specializing in a particular subject matter. The secrecy evaluation process began
with these primary examiners, who forwarded applications for inventions which in their opinion
“discloses a matter related to the national defense” to the POWD (OSRD Administrative Circular
10: Patents, April 27, 1944). At the POWD, representatives of four agencies – the War Department
(represented by the Army and Navy Patent Advisory Board, or ANPAB), War Production Board
(WPB), Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD), and Petroleum Administration for
War (PAW) – reviewed these applications and made recommendations for the issuance of secrecy
orders. Appendix A shows examples of secrecy determination forms that would accompany each
application and which circulated among the evaluators with a possible interest in the invention. As
soon as any of these reviewers recommended secrecy, a secrecy order would be issued and patent
examination indefinitely suspended for as long as the secrecy order was in place. The applicant
would then be sent a standardized notification letter explaining that a secrecy order has been
issued, instructing the inventor not to disclose the invention without the permission of the USPTO
at risk of a fine, jail time, and forfeiture of the patent, suggesting that the inventor tender his or
her invention to the government, and offering no means for appeal, as there was none at the time
(example notification letters are shown in Appendix B). Upon enactment of P.L. 700, the USPTO
commenced the secrecy order program by reviewing recently-allowed patents which were ready to
issue, followed by pending applications and new applications.

Although the issuance of secrecy orders may have been noisier in the earliest stages of the program

  by the inventor and unavailable to interested agencies” (JAG 1945). Although many inventions were so tendered,
  there are only a handful of examples of claims for ex-post compensation by inventors who did so, and only a fraction
  of these concluded in a favorable outcome for the inventor (U.S. Congress 1980).
6
  The initial legislation prohibited the disclosure of inventions ordered secret, including via foreign filing, except with
  approval from the USPTO. This statute left a loophole for inventions filed in foreign countries prior to being filed
  at the USPTO, which were as such previously-disclosed. The 1941 amendment closed this loophole by prohibiting
  individuals from filing any patent on U.S. inventions in foreign countries without prior consent of the USPTO, irre-
  spective of the issuance of a secrecy order, punishable by dispossession of existing patents and permanent disbarment
  from filing or assisting in the filing of patents thereafter. When permits for foreign filing were granted, they were
  typically to file in the U.K., which had an invention secrecy program of its own.
7
  Information on the administration of secrecy orders described here compiled from Fenning (1940), Donnelly (1942),
  OSRD (1944), JAG (1945), U.S. Government Manual (1945).


                                                            6
(as review procedures were being developed), contemporary evidence suggests administrators were
generally careful to avoid issuing secrecy orders without compelling reasons (Moore 1945). Once
issued, secrecy orders could be reviewed and rescinded if it was determined that the enemy had
access to comparable technology or an invention was no longer of strategic value. When one of the
reviewing agencies sought to have a secrecy order rescinded, a copy of the application in question
would be re-circulated to reviewers from the other three agencies, who then had to concur in the
rescission for the secrecy order to be lifted – a process which could take two to six months – but
the “natural tendency [was] to ‘play it safe’ and leave the secrecy order in effect” (Stoutenburgh
1945). Records of OSRD correspondence suggest that these case-by-case rescissions were relatively
rare, and that most were issued in 1945, near the end of the war.8

On August 30, 1945 – after the end of hostilities in Europe, and shortly before the end in the
Pacific theatre – a recently-appointed new Patent Commissioner (Ooms) organized an inter-agency
meeting to discuss the “expedited removal” of outstanding secrecy orders (Moore 1945). When
representatives from the War Department raised concerns about a subset of cases which they wished
to remain secret, the participants agreed to a 90-day grace period in which these advisory agencies
could compile a list of those patents which they wished to be excepted from a mass rescindment.
The meeting ended in the issuance of a “General Rescinding Order” (henceforth GRO) under which
all outstanding secrecy orders were rescinded effective November 30, 1945, excepting applications
which the recommending agencies requested be kept secret.

Contemporary records from the U.S. Army’s Judge Advocate General’s office (JAG 1945) indicate
that 11,182 secrecy orders were issued through June 14, 1945. Given that the program wound down
that summer, the true total is likely on the order of 11,200.

                                Secrecy orders issued by year, July 1940 to June 1945
                                                Secrecy orders issued Inventions tendered
                            Jul-40 to Dec-41             918                   95
                            1942                        2,611                 555
                            1943                        3,508                1,966
                            1944                        3,165                2,143
                            Jan-45 to Mar-45             613                  319
                            Apr-45 to Jun-45             367                unknown
                            Total                      11,182                5,078



8
    For example, of the 4,837 secrecy orders identified in OSRD records, only 311 were noted in these records as having
    been rescinded. Contemporary documents do indicate, however, that the WPB conducted a review in 1944 of the
    1,700 applications which it had recommended for secrecy, and that by September 1945, nearly all had been rescinded
    (Moore 1945). Of the 6,352 patents with secrecy orders observed in the data, 1,134 (17.9%) were granted before
    the General Rescinding Order took effect on November 30, 1945, implying that their secrecy orders were rescinded
    early – though it appears that the vast majority of these were rescinded that year.


                                                            7
Post-war invention secrecy policy

By December 31, 1945, there were less than 800 outstanding secrecy orders, with most being on
inventions related to atomic energy research (JAG 1945, U.S. Congress 1980). Although the war had
ended, the wartime secrecy order program remained in effect, as the national emergency declared
by Congress was not terminated until 1952. In the intervening years, the number of outstanding
secrecy orders grew to nearly 2,400 (Lee 1997), as secrecy orders continued to be issued on inventions
considered a security risk – especially those related to nuclear energy.

In 1951, Congress converted the wartime invention secrecy policy to a peacetime policy with the
enactment of the Invention Secrecy Act of 1951. Although the restrictions and penalties remained
the same, the Invention Secrecy Act made a few key departures from P.L. 700 and its subsequent
amendments, the most notable being fixed, one-year terms subject to renewal by the requesting
agency, which at least nominally subjected outstanding secrecy orders to annual review, and a
provision granting inventors the right to appeal a secrecy determination. Secrecy orders continue
to be issued under the authority of this legislation today, albeit at much lower frequency than
during World War II: between 2005 and 2015, the USPTO issued just 1,171 secrecy orders, out of
a total of nearly 5.8 million applications filed (FAS 2018).


Concerns about adverse effects of an invention secrecy policy

Though the benefits of secrecy orders were undisputed in a time of war, contemporaries also raised
concerns about adverse consequences. Fenning (1940), for example, writes in the Journal of the
Patent Office Society about the potential for secrecy orders to “prevent disclosure of applications
to interfering parties and [thus] decision of interferences.” Vannevar Bush noted that OSRD con-
tractors were uneasy about the possibility that “foreign companies would be able to enter the world
commercial market... in the lead of the U.S. manufacturers” when U.S. firms’ patent applications
were held up by secrecy orders (Stoutenburgh 1945). Even those in charge of administering the
program had hesitations: in a discussion about the possibility of a peace-time invention secrecy pol-
icy at the August 30, 1945 meeting, participants raised several objections, including that it would
delay the utilization of invention, drive invention underground and slow technological progress, and
preclude civilian users from being able to access and work out the “bugs” in inventions with both
civilian and military value “so that when the military forces need them [they] can quickly be added
to war uses” – with radio and radar being given as examples (Moore 1945).

The full range of concerns was recently on display after a USPTO request for comments in 2012 on


                                                  8
the feasibility of placing “economically significant” patents under secrecy order (Federal Register
2012), issued at the behest of Congress. Respondents included several organizations with an interest
in such a policy, such as the American Bar Association (ABA), American Intellectual Property Law
Association (AIPLA), and the Intellectual Property Owners Association (IPOA). Their concerns
included (i) undermining the public notice function of patents and depriving inventors of technical
information, at the risk of “stifling innovation” (IPOA 2012); (ii) precluding commercialization of
inventions which are readily ascertained by observation or reverse-engineering (AIPLA 2012); (iii)
driving R&D underground or overseas, away from the U.S. patent system (IPOA 2012); or even (iv)
discouraging invention altogether (IPOA 2012, ABA 2012). These concerns would have applied in
the 1940s as well – (i) and (ii) are both a focus of this paper – though it appears they were treated
by policymakers as second-order issues against the backdrop of war.



2        Data

To study the effects of the secrecy order program, I combine several sources of data, beginning with
a complete record of the nearly 2.5 million patents granted between 1920 and 1979 from the USPTO
historical master file (Marco et al. 2015), which lists the universe of granted patents and their grant
dates, patent class (USPC), and 2-digit NBER technology category (Hall et al. 2001). I supplement
these data with patent serial numbers (i.e., application numbers) and filing dates collected from
FreePatentsOnline.com, from which I also collect the complete network of forward and backward
front-page citations, and with standardized assignee names from the Clarivate Derwent Innovation
(previously Thomson Innovation) patent research database.

Using the assignee names, I classify assignees into four categories: firms, universities and hospitals,
government agencies, and individuals. At certain points in the paper I will also distinguish between
patents assigned to OSRD contractors (i.e., assignees which were performing R&D for the war effort)
and non-contractors, which were identified from the archival records of the OSRD. Concurrent with
these efforts, I also identify all patents associated with the Manhattan Project research program
and exclude them from the analysis below, as both the narrative history and the data suggest that
these patents were not only secret, but also exempted from the 1945 rescinding order.9 Appendix A
9
    The list of Manhattan Project patents was retrieved from from the Wilson Center’s Digital Archive, and originally
    collected through a Department of Energy FOIA (see Appendix A). Interestingly, almost none of these patents
    appear in other archival data sources for secrecy orders, but the sensitive (top-secret) nature of the research, as
    well as the exceptionally long grant lags observed in the data, imply that these patent applications were secret both
    during and after the war. The decision to exclude these patents from the analysis is further motivated by the fact
    that nuclear energy patenting at this time was fundamentally different than other patenting, with primarily military
    or government-sanctioned civilian activity on top of the security restrictions.


                                                             9
describes in more detail how these data were prepared, as well as additional steps taken to improve
the quality of the data on serials, filing dates, and assignee names.

I use archival records from three agencies – the OSRD, the Office of Production Research and
Development (OPRD), and the U.S. Army Judge Advocate General (JAG) – to identify patent
applications issued secrecy orders. Collectively, these records identified 8,475 serials which were
ordered secret during the war (roughly 75% of the likely true total of ≈11,200), of which 6,352
(75%) were granted by 1979, with the remainder either abandoned or still secret (for example, two
such applications on cryptographic inventions remained secret until they were granted in 2000).10
The OSRD and OPRD records also identify nearly 20,000 patent applications which were formally
evaluated for secrecy but disapproved, and the 13,131 of these which were granted will be used
later as a comparison group for patents which were ordered secret.

In addition to numeric data on patents and citations, this paper also uses information from patents’
textual content.11 I obtain from Google the title of each patent in the 1920-1979 sample, and I
identify words (more precisely, word stems) first used in the title of a patent filed between 1940
and 1945. New words are invoked in this paper as a measure of “new concepts” which entered the
patent record during World War II (an approach pioneered by Iaria et al. 2018), whose diffusion can
be traced both within the patent record and beyond it, using other sources of data such as books
and product catalogs (which I describe in Section 5). Measuring words in patent titles presents
two advantages over the full text: not only are titular words the most meaningful in describing the
invention, but they are also available throughout the period studied in this paper with minimal
transcription error (whereas full text OCR errors are pervasive, and the cost of manual transcription
is prohibitive). The main tradeoff visà-vis improved measurement using patent titles is sample size
(a smaller number of words), and in turn statistical power.12




10
   Although we only observe a subset (albeit a considerable majority) of secrecy orders, this undercounting only
   presents a risk of bias in a conservative direction due to attenuation (if the control group includes unobserved secret
   patents, then treatment-control differences will simply be understated).
11
   Appendix A discusses the inner workings of these data and methods in detail.
12
   In unreported analysis, I have also identified and measured the usage of new words in patents’ full text. The high
   error rate in the OCR full text, however, results in both over- and undercounting of word usage, and a long tail of
   non-word “words” that only appear once or twice in the corpus. It also causes many words which were in fact new
   in the 1940s to be dropped as an “existing” word because it appeared in the full text of earlier patents due to OCR
   error. For example, the string “radar” first appears in the title of patent 3015096, “Radar counter-measure radio
   repeater”, filed on March 30 1942, and in the OCR full text of several patents from the 1800s, including patents
   on washing machines, cigar bundling machines, and burglar alarms.


                                                           10
Patent citations as a measure of follow-on invention

Forward patent citations will be used throughout Section 4 to measure follow-on invention, supple-
mented later by content-based measures. To interpret these results, it is useful to first understand
how citations were historically generated, and what they represent.

At its most literal, the patent citations measured in this paper are just references to the relevant
prior art. As Appendix A shows, prior art references have been a part of the patent examination
process since before the USPTO began requiring that published patents list these references on the
final (now, front) page. In the course of patent examination, examiners make reference to prior art
which they have used to evaluate the novelty of the applicant’s claims, and in 1947, the USPTO
began requiring that these references be printed on the published patent itself. Until the USPTO
established applicants’ “duty to disclose” related prior art in 1992, it appears these references were
made primarily (if not entirely) by patent examiners. As such, citations identify closely-related
invention, not information flows or direct inputs per se – but this is enough to measure de facto
follow-on invention and serves the purpose of this paper.

Given the historical data-generating process, many of the concerns about what citations measure
in the modern period (e.g., Alcacer et al. 2009, Sampat 2010, Cotropia et al. 2013, Roach and
Cohen 2013) are less relevant than they would otherwise be. That most (if not all) of the citations
in these data will be examiner-added is also potentially important, and discussed at more length in
Appendix A. However, as Moser et al. (2017) have shown with more recent data, examiners tend to
use the characteristics of an invention (rather than performance) to identify prior art. Presuming
this generalizes to the historical period, the citations in this paper are best described as a measure
of intellectual proximity and content-driven connections.



3    Characteristics of Secrecy Orders

To better understand the potential impacts of the secrecy order program and contextualize results
throughout the paper, it is useful to begin with a descriptive overview of patenting in the 1940s
and the characteristics of patents with secrecy orders. Figure 1 presents the time series of monthly
patent applications at the USPTO from the late 1930s to the early 1950s (in blue, measured by
left axis), as well as monthly applications issued secrecy orders (in red, measured by right axis).
Aggregate patenting declined by nearly 50% by the height of the war in 1943, as resources were
diverted away from invention and into war and military production. Naturally, however, this is
also when secrecy orders were issued most intensively.

                                                 11
                                        [Figure 1 about here]

Figure 2 shows the distribution of patenting and secrecy orders across one-digit NBER patent
categories (Hall et al. 2001) during the wartime period. Although aggregate patenting declined
during the war, its distribution across technology areas was relatively stable (Figure 2, Panel A).
The distribution of secrecy orders, on the other hand, varied significantly over the course of the
war, shifting from chemical patent classes in 1939/1940 to classes related to communications and
electronics by 1945 (Panel B), reflecting the growing importance of radar and electronics to the war
effort. These were also the technology areas most intensively affected by the secrecy order program
as a fraction of annual patent applications (Panel C).

                                        [Figure 2 about here]

The technological priorities of the war effort can be seen more precisely in the set of patent classes
in which secrecy orders were issued at particularly high frequency. Table 1 lists the top ten classes
by the fraction of applications between 1939 and 1945 issued a secrecy order; among these are
classes related to radar, synthetic rubber, and catalytic cracking (for fuel production), all of which
are technologies of both military and commercial value. At the height of the war, in 1942-1943,
roughly half of filings in these classes were being ordered secret.

                                        [Table 1 about here]

Even within classes, secrecy orders were inevitably not randomly issued: the historical record
suggests that patent applications were evaluated carefully and in good faith, out of a concern
for interfering with the usual functioning of intellectual property rights (Moore 1945), with more-
sensitive and important inventions being the focus of the program. As a simple test for selection,
Table 2 estimates mean differences in patents’ forward citations as a function of whether a given
patent was issued a secrecy order and/or evaluated for a secrecy order. Here and throughout Section
4, I condition on fixed effects for each patent’s (i) primary class and filing year (for within-cohort
comparisons) and (ii) grant year (to account for the fact that patents only become “citeable” once
they are granted). The estimating equation for Table 2 is thus:


                     Yictg = β1 · 1(Secret)i + β2 · 1(Evaluated)i + αct + γg + εi                 (1)


where i indexes patents (the unit of observation), c, t, and g represent the patent’s class, filing
year, and grant year (fixed for each patent i), 1(Secret)i indicates that patent i was ordered secret,

                                                  12
1(Evaluated)i indicates that patent i was formally evaluated for secrecy (irrespective of whether it
was then ordered secret), αct and γg are fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered by patent
class. Table 2 shows that patents evaluated for secrecy were cited more, by more parties, and by
patents in more classes than those which were not. Patents with a secrecy order were cited even
more, on average receiving more than 1.5x as many citations as the typical patent from the same
class and year (+2.6 citations on an average of 4.6).


                                        [Table 2 about here]


Immediate effect: Delayed grant and publication

Recall that the immediate effect of a secrecy order was to suspend examination and prohibit the
filer from unauthorized invention disclosure for as long as the secrecy order was in effect. Although
secrecy orders were sometimes rescinded early, the majority remained in place until the GRO took
effect in late 1945. As a result, patents with a secrecy order filed early on in the war should have
on average taken more time to grant than those filed near its end.

To verify that secrecy orders generated the predicted effect on pendency, Table 3 estimates the
incremental grant lag (years from filing to grant) of patents filed each year 1939 and 1945 with a
secrecy order, relative to others in the same primary class and year:


                             Grant Lagict = β1t · 1(Secret)i + αct + εi                          (2)


The effect of secrecy on time-to-grant is large early in the war – on average around 2.5 extra years
for 1940 and 1941 applications, doubling the mean – and not significantly different from zero by
1945. Note that although the table includes 1939 filings for completeness, as many were ordered
secret, patents filed in 1939 which received a secrecy order were necessarily still pending as of the
enactment of P.L. 700 in July 1940, and their longer grant lags are thus in part selected – for this
reason, later tables will focus on the July 1940 to June 1945 period.


                                        [Table 3 about here]


Figure 3 shows the full distribution of grant lags for secret patents shifting down monotonically
over time to match that of their non-secret counterparts (in the same class and filing year) by 1945.
No comparable differences emerge when comparing patents evaluated for secrecy but not ordered


                                                 13
secret against those not evaluated for secrecy at all (Appendix Figure C.1), suggesting it was the
secrecy order, rather than the evaluation, generating these delays.


                                                  [Figure 3 about here]



4        Invention Secrecy and Follow-on Invention

As we have already seen, simple comparisons between secret and non-secret patents’ citations can
be problematic because secrecy orders (and evaluations) were positively selected (Table 2). The
empirical strategy I use to study follow-on invention will instead be to compare the outcomes of
secret and non-secret patents filed earlier versus later in the war. Variation in filing dates in turn
generates intent-to-treat variation in the duration of secrecy, due to the mass rescindment in late
1945.13 I thus compare patents which were secret for a shorter versus longer time, differencing both
against contemporaries in the same patent class and filing year. The initial sample for this analysis
will be all patents filed between July 1, 1940, when P.L. 700 was enacted, and June 30, 1945, when
the secrecy order program was mostly concluded. Restricting the sample to patents filed after July
1, 1940 causes us to lose some earlier filings which were still pending as of that date and were
subsequently ordered secret, but because these are already selected on longer examination, I choose
to focus on patents filed when P.L. 700 was in place and being actively applied.

Throughout this section, I estimate variants of the following specification via OLS:

                                  1945
                                  X                             1945
                                                                X
                       Yictg =            β1t · 1(Secret)i +            β2t · 1(Evaluated)i
                                 t=1941                        t=1941

                                 + γ1 · 1(Secret)i + γ2 · 1(Evaluated)i + αct + γg + εi                             (3)


where β1t and β2t are estimated by filing year and the other variables are defined as before. Yictg
will alternately be (i) whether the patent was ever cited, (ii) whether the patent reached particular
citation thresholds, or (iii) citation counts, estimated with a count model (each measured through
1979, by which point most patents will have realized the majority of their eventual citations, e.g.
Hall et al. 2001). I estimate separate effects by filing year to enable comparisons between secret
and non-secret patents filed earlier or later in the war, with 1940 being the omitted category. With
this specification, we will be able to make statements about the difference between secret patents
13
     Noncompliance (in the econometric sense) exists in the form of early rescindments, but as Section 1 explains, these
     were relatively uncommon, and most were issued in 1945, shortly before the mass rescindment, such that the effects
     of noncompliance are limited – as confirmed by Figure 3 and Table 3.


                                                               14
and their non-secret contemporaries in the same class filed in 1945, and compare it to same such
difference for those filed in 1940, for which a secrecy order was far more imposing.

With this specification, contemporaneous trends in U.S. invention (e.g., the immigrant inventor
effects documented by Moser et al. 2014), will be controlled for by the class-year fixed effects. But
a remaining threat to this approach is the possibility of time-varying selection into secrecy, which
could confound or even explain the results: if evaluators applied more stringent standards later in
the war than earlier in the war, then what appears to be an effect of a shorter secrecy term may just
be positive selection. The controls for whether each patent was evaluated for secrecy can partially
address this concern, by either accounting for differential selection into evaluation or showing that
there are no such patterns in the data. To more thoroughly tackle this possibility, I run robustness
checks controlling for a series of patent- and assignee-level characteristics. As a placebo test, I also
separately estimate Equation 3 for non-self citations and self citations, as secrecy should only affect
the former, whereas selection will likely be reflected in both.

The main limitation of historical citation-based analysis is the fact that the citation record only
begins in February 1947, which is when the USPTO first required granted patents to include formal
references to prior art. As a result, any citations observed in these data are necessarily from patents
granted after 1947, and the measures will undercount follow-on granted prior to this date (although
modern evidence suggests that the bulk of forward citations are accumulated over longer horizons,
e.g. Hall et al. 2001). All else equal, the truncation of the citation record will more severely affect
earlier applications (which have more years of “missing” citations) than later applications, but it
should affect secret and non-secret patents of the same class and vintage in a similar way, such that
the class-year fixed effects will account for these differences.


Forward citations

In the first column of Table 4, I estimate the probability of any forward citations for the full July
1940 to June 1945 sample. There are no clear differences in the likelihood that earlier or later secret
patents are subsequently cited – and based on this evidence, one might be tempted to conclude
either that invention secrecy did not have a meaningful effect on forward citations, or that the
comparisons are muddied by other confounding patterns.

                                         [Table 4 about here]

The latter concern may in fact have merit. This period was a time of national emergency: the U.S.
economy and population were mobilized for a major war, with the Federal government contracting

                                                   15
with firms and universities around the country to supply the war effort, including supplying R&D
on war-related technology – an effort led by the OSRD. In these circumstances, firms contribut-
ing to the scientific war effort may have been permitted to share information on otherwise-secret
invention to further contract work. Contemporary records suggests this was the case in at least
some industries: in his minutes from the August 1945 inter-agency meeting to discuss secrecy order
rescindment, Moore (1945) quotes a representative of the Petroleum Administration for War who
“pointed out that secrecy orders strictly interpreted would have hampered the petroleum industry
enormously in its war effort, so they had worked out a system of general permits for the exchange
of information.” A similar pool was created in the synthetic rubber industry (Herbert and Bisio
1985, Morris 1989). This could well be true for other industries too.

In the next two columns I use data on the identities of OSRD contractors to split the sample into
patents without versus with an OSRD contractor assignee, where a different pattern emerges. Non-
OSRD contractor patents filed early in the war are significantly less likely than contemporaries to
later be cited as prior art, but this effect reverses for later filings, with the effect approximately
monotonic in the filing year; the point estimates suggest that patents with shorter secrecy terms
(filed in 1945) are nearly 15% more likely to later be cited than those with longer secrecy terms
(filed in 1940), with differences significant beyond the 5% level. There are no such patterns for
patents evaluated for secrecy but not ordered secret – with these estimates being relatively precise
zeros – suggesting that the effects are driven by the secrecy condition itself. In contrast, there was
no empirically-detectable effect of secrecy orders on inventions by OSRD contractors. The final
two columns of the table show results from a triple-differences variant of Equation 3, where the
focal variables (1(Secret)i and 1(Evaluated)i ) are included alone and interacted with an indicator
for patents of OSRD contractors, but where fixed effects can be estimated off of the pooled sample.
The effects of secrecy orders manifest for patents from assignees who were not involved in the war
effort, but these effects are eliminated for OSRD contractors.

In Table 5 I explore the robustness of these patterns to a variety of controls. Column (1) reproduces
the result from Table 4 for non-OSRD contractors. Column (2) then controls for other observable
patent characteristics, with fixed effects for the number of inventors and length of the patent
(number of pages, number of drawings), which correlate with citations. Column (3) controls for
other assignee characteristics, with fixed effects for firms and individuals, and fixed effects for
the assignee’s pre-war patenting in the 1930s, as a measure of assignees’ prior experience in and
intensity of invention. Column (4) includes both the patent and assignee controls, and Column
(5) replaces the latter with assignee fixed effects. Across all specifications, the empirical patterns


                                                 16
are unchanged – although standard errors increase in Column (5), due to the more limited within
variation available for estimating the focal parameters.

                                          [Table 5 about here]

Appendix D presents additional results. Tables D.1 and D.2 reproduce the regressions in Table 4,
first excluding secret patents which granted prior to August 30, 1945 (indicating that they were
rescinded early), and then excluding patents in weapons-related classes, which were of high military
priority but had only limited commercial potential, such as firearms, ammunition, ordnance, and
explosives. The results are not sensitive to either restriction. Table D.3 separately estimates the
effects for non-self and self citations, and citations from firms versus individuals, where we see that
the results are driven by non-self citations, with no statistically discernable effects for self citations,
and likewise by citations from firms rather than individuals.

Appendix Tables D.4 studies effects on forward citation levels, first in the form of indicators for
different citation thresholds, which can be estimated via OLS with multi-level fixed effects (Columns
1 to 6) without the threat of an incidental parameters problem and is thus the preferred approach,
and then for citation counts, estimated as a conditional fixed-effects Poisson with only filing year
and grant year fixed effects, reported as incidence rate ratios (Column 7). The table shows that
the effects of secrecy are strongest at lower citation thresholds, particularly for the probability
of receiving at least one or two citations, but not detectable for higher thresholds. The Poisson
estimates suggest that for patents of non-OSRD contractors, secret patents filed in 1945 receive
roughly 1.65x as many citations as those filed in 1940, after controlling for cohort differences, and
that this effect varies inversely with the duration of secrecy.


Alternative measure: Diffusion of new words

Although researchers have traditionally used patent citations as a measure of follow-on invention
(from Jaffe et al. 1993 through Galasso and Schankerman 2015), and many of the idiosyncracies of
modern citation data do not apply in the period studied in this paper, the analysis still faces two
limitations. The first is that patents only become “citeable” when published – which motivated
the inclusion of grant year fixed effects. An additional limitation which is particularly germane to
this paper is that the patent citation record only begins in 1947, as the USPTO did not require
published patents to list references to prior art until February 4, 1947.

As a workaround, I therefore develop a content-based measure of follow-on invention, which can
be constructed for patents throughout this period. The focus here will be new word stems in the

                                                    17
titles of patents filed between 1940 and 1945, as a measure of new ideas which entered the patent
record during the war (see Section 2). We can then compare subsequent usage of stems which first
entered the patent record in secret versus non-secret patents, as a measure of inventions which
incorporate new ideas embodied in these patents – similar to the approach taken in Iaria et al.
(2018), who study the introduction of new words in the title of scientific publications as a proxy
for new scientific concepts, and the use of these words in patents.14

In preparing the data, I take the 1,129 stems first appearing in the title of a patent filed between
July 1, 1940 and June 30, 1945, and for each stem I identify all subsequent patents with that stem in
its title. This approach yields a panel of usage for every stem, and it allows us to compare the nearly
100 stems which originated in secret patents against the remainder which did not. Comparisons in
levels remain difficult, due to positive selection: new stems from secret patents are subsequently
used more than their non-secret counterparts, much like the patterns in Table 2. However, we can
estimate variants of Equation 3 for word usage in place of patent citations.

The results are shown Table 6 for the 548 word stems which originated in patents of non-OSRD
contractors filed between July 1940 and December 1944 (because there were no stems originating
in secret patents from 1945, the 1945 year is omitted). Due to the small sample, these regressions
reduce the class-year fixed effects to filing year fixed effects only, as class-year fixed effects would
leave too little residual variation to identify the focal parameters.

                                                [Table 6 about here]

The results are similar to those in Tables 4 and 5. Column (1) estimates the effects on log stem
usage (through 1979) and finds that new stems from secret patents filed in 1940 on average have
lower subsequent usage, but these effects more than reverse for new stems from later filings in 1943
and 1944. We see similar patterns for the probability of achieving 10, 20, 30, and 50 uses (Columns
2 to 5), though the effects are statistically weaker at higher thresholds. As before, there are no
statistically significant effects for stems first appearing in patents evaluated for secrecy but not
ordered secret, although in this case the estimates are substantially noisier.


Mechanisms: Temporarily veiled or permanently forgotten?

The results invite the question of why temporary invention secrecy (of at most five years) would
affect long-run citations. One possibility is that the results could be driven by a “lost generation”
14
     Williams (2013) and Sampat and Williams (2019) have also made successful inroads in studying follow-on innovation
     in the form of scientific research and commercial products which build on and can be directly linked back to the
     IP-protected innovation, especially human gene sequences.


                                                           18
of follow-on invention that might have been produced in the 1940s had information not been
suppressed. An alternative with perhaps more serious welfare implications is that these inventions
were permanently forgotten. To try to understand which of these two mechanisms might be driving
the results, in Appendix Table D.5 I estimate analogous regressions for the probability of being
cited in subsequent cohorts of inventions, focusing on patents filed between 2 and 25 years later,
to explore whether the differences between patents with shorter and longer secrecy terms in Tables
4 and 5 emerge over the short run or long run. The results provide suggestive evidence for a “lost
generation” mechanism, rather than permanently forgotten: patents with shorter secrecy terms are
more likely to be cited by patents filed 3-4 years later than are those with longer secrecy terms,
but these differences fade when it comes to citations from later filings.



5       Effects on Commercialization

Secrecy orders prohibited the inventor from disclosing “the invention or any hitherto unpublished
details” of the invention (Appendix B). Contemporary sources (including statute) are unclear on
whether this restriction would have impeded the commercial use or sale of the invention, partic-
ularly when the invention is a component or a method of manufacture that would not be easily
detected or reverse-engineered. However, in the case of inventions which are themselves final goods,
such as drugs and specialty chemicals, this restriction could have conceivably interfered with com-
mercialization and kept new inventions out of the product market.

The most accessible setting for testing this question is in the specialty chemicals industry. Much
as they do now, large chemical manufacturers in the 1940s circulated product catalogs which listed
their commercially available products and where we can search for chemical terms from the titles
of patents which were subjected to secrecy orders. Although many such catalogs have likely not
been preserved, several editions of the Du Pont Products Index (DPPI) are available from the Du
Pont collection at the Hagley Museum. For the purposes of this paper, I extracted the text of five
editions – 1938, 1944, 1946, 1949, and 1955-56 – to be used below.15

To build a sample of words to search for in these catalogs, I began with the set of words whose
stems first entered the patent record in the title of a patent filed in the 1940 to 1945 period (as
before) and was classified in a chemical patent class (according to the NBER classification system
15
     The Du Pont Products Index was the only major chemical manufacturer catalog from the 1940s that could be
     located (others company catalogs searched for included Dow Chemical and American Cyanamid). Du Pont was
     also the firm with (i) the most patents and (ii) the most secret patents in chemical classes in the 1940s. These
     editions were chosen to enable a search for keywords in the pre-war, mid-war, and short- and long-run post-war
     periods, but the Hagley collection includes many more volumes, spanning the 1910s to the 1980s.


                                                          19
of Hall et al. 2001). I then manually reviewed these words to identify those which were chemical
compounds or processes – yielding a sample of 633 “chemical words” and 542 unique stems – and
programmatically searched for these words and stems in each edition of the DPPI. The test is then
to see whether the stems from secret versus non-secret patent titles were differentially likely to
appear in each edition of the catalog.16 Specifically, I regress an indicator for a stem’s presence in
the given edition of the DPPI on indicators for whether the stem originated in a patent which was
issued a secrecy order or evaluated for secrecy, as follows:


                   1(Word is in DPPI)i = β1 · 1(Secret)i + β2 · 1(Evaluated)i + α + εi                               (4)


where i indexes stems, and α is a constant (for stems from non-secret, non-evaluated patents). Table
7 shows the results: stems which first appeared in a secret patent are less likely to be included in
the catalog in 1944 and 1946, with no significant differences in the other years, nor for stems which
first appeared in a patent which was evaluated for secrecy but not ordered secret. When compared
against the baseline rate of ≈10% of non-evaluated stems appearing in the catalog, the effect size
indicates that almost none of the words with stems from secret patents show up in 1944 and 1946.
Results are similar for a sample of the full words themselves, rather than stems, when testing for
the presence of each of these words in the DPPI volumes.


                                                [Table 7 about here]


These results could reflect different underlying phenomena: they could be due to suppression of
new Du Pont inventions from the product market; a reduction in Du Pont’s licensing and sale of
third party inventions; a reduction in Du Pont products using technology first introduced in third
party inventions which are not yet disclosed; or even just concealing language. Distinguishing these
channels is difficult, not only due to measurement challenges but also due to the sample size. In
unreported results I split Table 7 into stems originating in the titles of Du Pont patents versus
other patents, and find that the results are driven by the words from non-Du Pont patents, but the
Du Pont-only sample is too small (with N = 72 stems, only 12 of which first appeared in the title
of secret patents) to draw strong conclusions.17
16
   Note that whereas the specification in Section 4 leveraged intensive variation in the duration of secrecy, the regres-
   sions here and in the next section test whether secrecy orders were in fact binding for non-patent, contemporary
   outcomes during the war, for which the duration of secrecy is not material. Secrecy orders could potentially also be
   positively selected with respect to these outcomes, but this selection only risks biasing estimated effects upwards
   (i.e., in the more conservative direction, for negative effects), and should also manifest in patents evaluated for
   secrecy but not ordered secret, which provides a natural placebo below.
17
   Another natural question is whether the unavoidably noisy nature of the optical character recognition used to


                                                           20
6    Were secrecy orders effective at preventing disclosure?

Whether or not the consequences of the secrecy order program on invention were understood at the
time, the original intent behind the policy was to prevent the disclosure of subject matter which
might be “detrimental to the public safety or defense,” as stated in the text of P.L. 700 and secrecy
order notification letters (Appendix B). Other security measures were also in place during the war,
including the traditional security classification for government and government-funded activities.
But the question remains: as part of the broader security apparatus, were secrecy orders effective
at keeping sensitive new technology out of the public’s view?

To answer this question, I turn to the Google Books corpus as a data source which can measure the
broader use (beyond the inventive sector) of new words whose stem first appeared in secret versus
non-secret patents. Google makes available for download data on the annual usage of individual
words and phrases (N-grams) in the books that have been scanned into the Google Books corpus
as of 2012. For this exercise, I retrieved the annual usage of words with stems which entered the
patent record in the title of a patent filed in the 1940 to 1945 period (as before), as well as the
total number of words in the corpus by year, to calculate focal stems’ frequency as a fraction of
the corpus in a given year. 1,050 (93% of the original 1,129) stems from patent titles match to the
Google Books data in this way. I then compare the annual frequency of stems first appearing in
secret patents versus non-secret patents, by year, truncating to stems below the 90th percentile of
pre-patent usage (in levels) in the Google Books corpus so as to eliminate already-common language
– although the results below are similar for 75th, 90th, or 95th percentile truncation. Specifically,
I run the following regression on a sample of 945 unique stems from 1935 to 1955, where i indexes
stems and t indexes years, and standard errors are clustered by stem:

                                1955
                                X                             1955
                                                              X
         Pct. of corpusit =             β1t · 1(Secret)i +            β2t · 1(Evaluated)i + αi + δt + εit        (5)
                               t=1936                        t=1936


Figure 4 plots the annual differences (the β1t parameters), along with the associated 95% confidence
intervals. The results indicate that prior to 1945, there was not differential usage of words whose
stem first entered the patent record in secret or non-secret patents, but that beginning in 1945,
the use of words from secret patents in this broader literature discretely jumps, with the difference
 extract text from the DPPI catalogs might be interfering with these results. Although the best available commercial
 software (ABBYY FineReader 14) was used for the OCR, its output is imperfect. The analysis described above
 was repeated with fuzzy matching to the DPPI catalogs, allowing matches with a Levenshtein edit distance of up
 to one character – though it is not obvious that this is an improvement, given that one character differences can
 represent distinct molecular structures (e.g., octane versus octene). The results with fuzzy matching are similar to
 those in Table 7 for the sample of words, but the effects fade for the sample of stems.


                                                        21
persistent through at least 195.18 Though not presented here, no such differences are present for
stems originating in patents evaluated for secrecy but not made secret (the β2t parameters), which
are precisely-estimated zeros. The sharp jump in 1945 in the use of technical words with stems
from secret patents around the time that the secrecy orders were rescinded suggests the policy was
indeed effective at achieving the intended objective.


                                                   [Figure 4 about here]


In Table 8 I estimate a difference-in-differences version of Equation 5, comparing usage in the pre-
and post-1945 eras. The dependent variable in the first three columns is annual stem frequency (as
before), and in the last three columns is the annual fraction of works in the corpus which include the
stem; for each measure, the table presents results truncating the sample at alternative percentiles
(75th, 90th, 95th) of pre-war usage. The table confirms that the difference-in-difference estimate
is statistically significant at traditional levels, and that there is no such difference for stems from
patents evaluated for secrecy but not ordered secret.


                                                    [Table 8 about here]



7        Implications and Conclusion

This paper thus finds that compulsory secrecy in World War II was effective at protecting sensitive
invention from disclosure, but that it restricted commercialization and impeded follow-on invention,
as measured in both the citation record and in the use of new terms appearing in patent titles. Taken
together, these results suggest there are consequences to a compulsory secrecy policy to be weighed
against the security concerns – and analogously, potential welfare consequences of voluntary trade
secrecy over patenting, despite any private benefit to inventors.

The more difficult-to-answer question is whether these consequences should be interpreted as severe
or relatively modest. The answer depends on whether a 10-15% higher probability of future citation
(the result in Tables 4 and 5) should be considered economically large or small, and whether or
not the extensive margin of citations – where secrecy orders appear to have been most binding – is

18
     Note that although a natural expectation secrecy would have also reduced usage of treated word stems during the
     war, many of these stems were new terms with little usage prior to 1945. Appendix Figure D.1 plots the time
     series of Google Books usage of four familiar stems which first entered the patent record in a secret patent: Radar,
     Penicillin, Antibiot, Fission. In all of these cases, usage is near zero prior to the first appearance in a patent, is low
     until 1945 (independent of the filing date), and then shoots up after the war.


                                                               22
important. Losing sight of patents that would have otherwise only been cited one or two times may
not seem like much of a loss, but one could also argue that this margin is of first-order concern, as it
represents the difference between being built upon or not. Moreover, the fact that that around 85%
of patents from the period were eventually cited might suggest that the welfare costs were limited
– but that remaining 15% could also be material. The answers to these questions are non-obvious,
and beyond the scope of this paper, but deserve further study.

That said, the policy must also be interpreted in the context of its temporary nature: the systemic
effects of secrecy could potentially be very different had these inventions been secret for a longer
time, or had the policy been applied throughout the war as intensively as it was at its height in
1943 (Figure 1). As it were, patent classes in which secrecy orders were issued at the highest rates
during the war were growing quickly both before and after the war, relative to others (see Appendix
E), suggesting the impact on aggregate invention may have been limited, but pre-trends and the
absence of a clean control group make conclusive inference impossible.

These questions are an important target for future research, as secrecy orders are still issued today
– and although they are issued at lower frequency than in the 1940s, they are still highly disruptive
to inventors and organizations that receive them (AUECO 2019). The more serious problem,
however, is the recent explosion in scientific espionage and intellectual property theft by foreign
actors, which the FBI considers to be the top counterintelligence threat in the U.S. today, and
potential regulatory actions may include ramped-up secrecy measures.

Although the focus of this paper is on the effects of concealment, a final remaining question is
whether compulsory secrecy had an incentive effect on inventors and organizations doing research
in sensitive technology areas: by holding up patent rights and precluding commercialization, secrecy
orders could discourage patenting and invention altogether. Concerns about the detrimental impact
on domestic invention, such as stifling U.S. innovation and driving R&D abroad, were among those
raised by the ABA and IPOA in their responses to the USPTO’s 2012 request for comments. An
answer to this question is important to understanding the consequences of compulsory secrecy in
a fully holistic way, and would complement existing literatures on both the incentive effects of
intellectual property rights and the decision to patent.




                                                  23
References
Alcácer, Juan, Michelle Gittelman, and Bhaven Sampat. 2009. “Applicant and Examiner Citations in US
  Patents: An overview and analysis,” Research Policy, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 415–427.

American Bar Association (ABA). 2012. Response to Request for Comments on the Feasibility of Placing Eco-
 nomically Significant Patents Under a Secrecy Order and the Need To Review Criteria Used in Determining
 Secrecy Orders Related to National Security, 77 Fed. Reg. 23662 (April 20, 2012).

American Intellectual Property Law Association (AIPLA). 2012. Response to Request for Comments on the Fea-
 sibility of Placing Economically Significant Patents Under a Secrecy Order and the Need To Review Criteria
 Used in Determining Secrecy Orders Related to National Security, 77 Fed. Reg. 23662 (April 20, 2012).

Anton, James J. and Dennis A. Yao. 2004. “Little Patents and Big Secrets: Managing Intellectual Property,”
  RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 1–22.

Arundel, Anthony. 2001. “The Relative Effectiveness of Patents and Secrecy for Appropriation,” Research Policy,
  Vol. 30, pp. 611–624.

Arundel, Anthony and Isabelle Kabla. 1998. “What Percentage of Innovations are Patented? Empirical Esti-
  mates for European Firms,” Research Policy, Vol. 27, pp. 127–141.

Association of University Export Control Officers (AUECO). 2019. Secrecy Orders. Available at http://www.
  aueco.org/training/.

Biasi, Barbara and Petra Moser. 2018. Effects of Copyright on Science. Working paper.

Bryan, Kevin A., Yasin Ozcan, and Bhaven Sampat. 2018. A User’s Guide to In-text Citations. Working paper.

Business Insider. 2012. Elon Musk: ‘If We Published Patents, It Would Be Farcical’. November 9.

Cohen, Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh. 2000. Protecting Their Intellectual Assets: Appro-
  priability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not). NBER Working Paper 7552.

Cotropia, Christopher A., Mark A. Lemley, and Bhaven Sampat. 2013. “Do Applicant Patent Citations Matter?”
  Research Policy, Vol. 42, No. 4, pp. 844–854.

Devlin, Alan. 2010. “The Misunderstood Function of Disclosure in Patent Law,” Harvard Journal of Law &
  Technology, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 401–446.

Donnelly, A. E. 1942. “June Issue,” Journal of the Patent Office Society, Vol. 24, p. 511.

E. I. Du Pont de Nemours & Co., Inc.. 1938. Du Pont Products Index. Also 1944, 1946, 1949, and 1955-56.

Federation of American Scientists (FAS). 2018. Invention Secrecy Activity. Available at https://fas.org/sgp/
  othergov/invention/stats.html.

Fenning, Karl. 1940. “Patents and National Defense,” Journal of the Patent Office Society, Vol. 22, pp. 869–884.

Fontana, Roberto, Alessandro Nuvolari, Hiroshi Shimizu, and Andrea Vezzulli. 2013. “Reassessing Patent
  Propensity: Evidence from a dataset of R&D awards, 1977–2004,” Research Policy, Vol. 42, pp. 1780–1792.

Fromer, Jeanne C. 2009. “Patent Disclosure,” Iowa Law Review, Vol. 94, pp. 539–606.

Furman, Jeffrey, Markus Nagler, and Martin Watzinger. 2018. Disclosure and Subsequent Innovation: Evidence
  from the Patent Depository Library Program. Working paper.

Ganglmair, Bernhard and Imke Reimers. 2019. Visibility of Technology and Cumulative Innovation: Evidence
  from Trade Secrets Laws. Working paper.


                                                      24
General Tire & Rubber Co. v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co.. 1972. 349 F. Supp. 345. U.S. District Court for
  the Northern District of Ohio.

Gross, Daniel P. and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2019. The Effects of the World War II Research Effort on the Direction
  and Geography of U.S. Invention. Work in progress.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2001. NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
  Insights and Methodological. NBER Working Paper No. 8498.

Hall, Bronwyn, Christian Helmers, Mark Rogers, and Vania Sena. 2014. “The Choice between Formal and
  Informal Intellectual Property Rights,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 52, pp. 375–423.

Hegde, Deepak, Kyle Herkenhoff, and Chenqi Zhu. 2018. Patent Disclosure. Working paper.

Hegde, Deepak and Hong Luo. 2018. “Patent Publication and the Market for Ideas,” Management Science, Vol.
  64, pp. 652–672.

Herbert, Vernon and Attilio Bisio. 1985. Synthetic Rubber: A Project that Had to Succeed. Westport: Greenwood
  Press.

Iaria, Alessandro, Carlo Schwarz, and Fabian Waldinger. 2018. “Frontier Knowledge and Scientific Production:
   Evidence from the Collapse of International Science,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 133, No. 2, pp.
   927–991.

Intellectual Property Owners Association (IPO). 2012. Response to Request for Comments on the Feasibility of
   Placing Economically Significant Patents Under a Secrecy Order and the Need To Review Criteria Used in
   Determining Secrecy Orders Related to National Security, 77 Fed. Reg. 23662 (April 20, 2012).

Kultti, Klaus, Tuomas Takalo, and Juuso Toikka. 2007. “Secrecy versus patenting,” RAND Journal of Eco-
  nomics, Vol. 38, pp. 22–42.

Lee, Sabing H. 1997. “Protecting the Private Inventor Under Peacetime Provisions of the Invention Secrecy
  Act,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 345–411.

Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter. 1987. “Appropriating the
  Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 3, pp.
  783–831.

Marco, Alan C., Michael Carley, Steven Jackson, and Amanda Myers. 2015. The USPTO Historical Patent Data
 Files: Two Centuries of Innovation. SSRN working paper, available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2616724.

Michel, Jean-Baptiste, Yuan Kui Shen, Aviva Presser Aiden, Adrian Veres, Matthew K Gray, Joseph P Pickett,
  Dale Hoiberg, Dan Clancy, Peter Norvig, Jon Orwant, Steven Pinker, Martin A. Nowak, and Ezra Lieberman
  Aiden. 2011. “Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books,” Science, Vol. 331, No.
  6014, pp. 176–182.

Moore, William Cabler. 1945. Meeting of the Patent Office Advisory Committee. Letter from William Cabler
 Moore to D. B. Keyes, September 5, 1945. Available from the National Archives and Records Administration:
 Records of the War Production Board.

Morris, Peter J. T. 1989. The American Synthetic Rubber Research Program. Philadelphia: University of Penn-
 sylvania Press.

Moser, Petra. 2005. “How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from Nineteenth-Century World’s
 Fairs,” American Economic Review, Vol. 95, pp. 1214–1236.

Moser, Petra, Joerg Ohmstedt, and Paul W. Rhode. 2017. “Patent Citations–An Analysis of Quality Differences
 and Citing Practices in Hybrid Corn,” Management Science, Vol. 64, No. 4, pp. 1926–1940.


                                                     25
Moser, Petra and Alessandra Voena. 2012. “Compulsory Licensing: Evidence from the Trading with the Enemy
 Act,” American Economic Review, Vol. 102, pp. 396–427.

National Institutes of Health (NIH). 2018. Foreign Influences on Research Integrity. 117th Meeting of the
  Advisory Committee to the Director, December 13.

New York Times (NYT). 2019. Vast Dragnet Targets Theft of Biomedical Secrets for China. November 4.

(NSF), U.S. National Science Foundation. 1958. Nonconventional Scientific and Technical Information Systems
  in Current Use. Washington: Government Printing Office.

Png, I. P. L. 2017a. “Law and Innovation: Evidence from State Trade Secret Laws,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, Vol. 99, No. 1, pp. 167–179.

        . 2017b. “Secrecy and Patents: Theory and Evidence from the Uniform Trade Secrets Act,” Strategy
  Science, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 176–193.

Priestap, Edward W. 2018. Testimony to U.S. Congress, Senate Judiciary Committee, December 12, 2018. 115th
  Congress, Second session.

Roach, Michael and Wesley M. Cohen. 2013. “Lens or Prism? Patent citations as a measure of knowledge flows
  from public research,” Management Science, Vol. 59, No. 2, pp. 504–525.

Roin, Benjamin N. 2005. “The Disclosure Function of the Patent System (Or Lack Thereof),” Harvard Law
  Review, Vol. 118, pp. 2007–2028.

Sampat, Bhaven N. 2010. “When Do Applicants Search for Prior Art?” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol.
  53, No. 2, pp. 399–416.

Sampat, Bhaven and Heidi L. Williams. 2019. “How Do Patents Affect Follow-on Innovation? Evidence from
  the Human Genome,” American Economic Review, Vol. 109, pp. 203–236.

of Sciences (NAS), National Academy. 1969. Scientific and Technical Communication: A Pressing National
   Problem and Recommendations for its Solution. Washington: National Academy of Sciences.

Stoutenburgh, Paul P. 1945. Coordination of Rescission of Secrecy Orders with British Release of Information.
  Letter from Paul P. Stoutenburgh to Vannevar Bush, April 27, 1945. Available from the National Archives
  and Records Administration: Records of the OSRD.

United States Army Office of the Judge Advocate General (JAG). 1945. Legal Work of the War Department,
  1 July 1940 – 31 March 1945: A History of the Judge Advocate General’s Department. Available at http:
  //www.loc.gov/rr/frd/Military Law/pdf/Legal-Work War-Department.pdf.

United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2012. Notice of Request for Comments on the Feasibility
  of Placing Economically Significant Patents Under a Secrecy Order and the Need To Review Criteria Used in
  Determining Secrecy Orders Related to National Security. 77 Fed. Reg. 23662 (April 20, 2012).

U.S. Congress. 1959. Synthetic Rubber: A Case Study in Technological Development under Government Direc-
  tion. Study of the Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights of the Committee on the Judiciary,
  United States Senate, 85th Congress, Second Session.

        . 1981. The Government’s Classification of Private Ideas. Hearings before a Subcommittee of the Com-
  mittee on Government Operations, United States House of Representatives, 96th Congress, Second Session.

        . 2011. H.R. Report 112-169. 112th Congress, First session.

U.S. Department of Energy. 2017. List of US Patents Related to the Manhattan Project. Obtained via FOIA
  request by Bill Streifer and available at the Wilson Center History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive,
  https://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/165247.

                                                      26
U.S. Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD). 1944. Administrative Circular 10 (Patents). Enclo-
  sure to letter from Irvin Stewart of the OSRD to Colonel F. H. Vanderwerker of the Army and Navy Patent
  Advisory Board, April 27, 1944. Available from the National Archives and Records Administration: Records
  of the OSRD.

U.S. Office of War Information. 1945. U.S. Government Manual. 1st edition (Revisions through March 10).

Wall Street Journal (WSJ). 2018. U.S. Accuses Chinese Firm, Partner of Stealing Trade Secrets From Micron.
 November 1.

        . 2019. Huawei Targeted in U.S. Criminal Probe for Alleged Theft of Trade Secrets. January 16.

Williams, Heidi L. 2013. “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human Genome,”
 Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 121, pp. 1–27.




                                                     27
                               Figure 1: Monthly patent applications, 1935-1955

                                                                                                                             200
              4000




                                                                                                                                   Patents w/ secrecy order
                                                                                                                             150
              3500
All patents




              3000                                                                                                           100



              2500                                                                                                           50



              2000                                                                                                           0
                     34


                                36


                                           38


                                                      40


                                                                 42


                                                                            44


                                                                                       46


                                                                                                  48


                                                                                                             50


                                                                                                                        52
                    19


                               19


                                          19


                                                     19


                                                                19


                                                                           19


                                                                                      19


                                                                                                 19


                                                                                                            19


                                                                                                                       19
                n


                           n


                                      n


                                                 n


                                                            n


                                                                        n


                                                                                  n


                                                                                             n


                                                                                                        n


                                                                                                                   n
               Ja


                          Ja


                                     Ja


                                                Ja


                                                           Ja


                                                                      Ja


                                                                                 Ja


                                                                                            Ja


                                                                                                       Ja


                                                                                                                  Ja
                                                                     Filing month

                                           All patents                            Patents w/ secrecy order

                    Notes: Figure shows monthly counts of (i) patent filings from 1935 to 1955
                    (in blue/left axis), and (ii) filings observed in the data as having been issued
                    secrecy orders under P.L. 700 (in red/right axis).




                                                                           28
Figure 2: Patterns in distribution of patent applications across NBER patent categories

       Panel (A): Fraction of applications in each top-level NBER category, 1939-1945
                                             0.4




                    Pct. of all patents
                                             0.3


                                             0.2


                                             0.1


                                             0.0
                                                1939    1940     1941        1942    1943         1944          1945
                                                           Chemical                  Computers & Comms.
                                                           Drugs & Medical           Electrical & Electronics
                                                           Mechanical                Other



      Panel (B): Fraction of secrecy orders in each top-level NBER category, 1939-1945
                                             0.60
                    Pct. of secret patents




                                             0.45


                                             0.30


                                             0.15


                                             0.00
                                                 1939   1940      1941        1942    1943        1944          1945
                                                           Chemical                  Computers & Comms.
                                                           Drugs & Medical           Electrical & Electronics
                                                           Mechanical                Other



   Panel (C): Fraction of applications in each top-level NBER category issued secrecy order
                                             0.30
                    Pct. of patents secret




                                             0.25

                                             0.20

                                             0.15

                                             0.10

                                             0.05

                                             0.00
                                                 1939   1940      1941        1942    1943        1944          1945
                                                           Chemical                  Computers & Comms.
                                                           Drugs & Medical           Electrical & Electronics
                                                           Mechanical                Other


            Notes: Panel (A) shows the distribution of patent filings across NBER cate-
            gories in each year from 1939-1945. Panel (B) shows the annual distribution
            across NBER categories of filings known to have been issued secrecy orders.
            Panel (C) shows the rate at which filings in each top-level NBER category
            were issued secrecy orders over time.



                                                                         29
Figure 3: Grant lags of applications placed under secrecy, vs. others, 1939-1945

                           Applications in 1939                                                         Applications in 1941
                                           Not secret                                                                   Not secret
               0.15                                                                         0.15

               0.10                                                                         0.10

    Fraction   0.05                                                                         0.05




                                                                                 Fraction
               0.00                                                                         0.00
                                               Secret                                                                       Secret
               0.15                                                                         0.15

               0.10                                                                         0.10

               0.05                                                                         0.05

               0.00                                                                         0.00
                      −5   −4   −3   −2   −1     0      1   2   3   4   5                          −5   −4   −3   −2   −1     0      1   2   3   4   5
                            Residualized Grant Lag (years)                                               Residualized Grant Lag (years)
                           (ex. patent class−filing year FEs)                                           (ex. patent class−filing year FEs)




                           Applications in 1943                                                         Applications in 1945
                                           Not secret                                                                   Not secret
               0.15                                                                         0.15

               0.10                                                                         0.10

               0.05                                                                         0.05
    Fraction




                                                                                 Fraction
               0.00                                                                         0.00
                                               Secret                                                                       Secret
               0.15                                                                         0.15

               0.10                                                                         0.10

               0.05                                                                         0.05

               0.00                                                                         0.00
                      −5   −4   −3   −2   −1     0      1   2   3   4   5                          −5   −4   −3   −2   −1     0      1   2   3   4   5
                            Residualized Grant Lag (years)                                               Residualized Grant Lag (years)
                           (ex. patent class−filing year FEs)                                           (ex. patent class−filing year FEs)



  Notes: Figure shows the distribution residual grant lags of patent applications with versus
  without secrecy orders, after controlling for patent class-year FEs. Note that patent ap-
  plications filed prior to July 1940 were only evaluated for secrecy if still under examination
  (such that pre-1940 differences in total pendency are in part selected).




                                                                            30
 Figure 4: Annual use of new word stems from secret vs. non-secret
             patent titles in the Google Books corpus
                                                        1.5




      Percent of words in Google Books corpus (x 1e6)
                                                         1



                   Secret vs. Non−Secret
                                                         .5


                                                         0


                                                        −.5


                                                        −1
                                                          1935   1940        1945   1950   1955
                                                                             Year
Notes: Figure shows estimated differences over time in the Google Books corpus
frequency of word stems which first appeared in the title of a secret versus non-secret
patent filed in the 1940-1945 period. In the underlying regression, observations are
new stems in patent titles from this period, crossed by year, and the outcome
variable is each stem’s fraction of all words in the Google Books corpus in the
given year. This outcome is regressed on indicators for the year, interacted with
indicators for whether the stem was first used in the title of a patent which was (i)
evaluated for secrecy and (ii) ordered secret. The figure plots effects for the latter.
Specification includes stem fixed effects, such that comparisons are within stems,
over time. Omitted category is 1935 for stems from both secret and non-secret
patents. Sample censors stems at the 90th percentile of pre-patent usage in the
Google Books corpus, to eliminate already-common language. Error bars represent
95% confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the stem level.




                                                                        31
        Table 1: Top 10 patent classes with applications placed in secrecy, 1939-1945
                                                           Pct. of Applications w/       Max Pct. Secret in
 USPC     Description                                     Secrecy Order, 1939-1945       Any Year, 1939-1945
 380      Cryptography                                              21.3%                      71.4%
 342      Directive radio wave systems/devices (radar)              16.2%                      61.0%
 585      Chemistry of hydrocarbon compounds                        12.8%                      51.9%
 367      Acoustic wave systems/devices                             11.7%                      55.9%
 526      Synthetic resins or natural rubbers                        8.6%                      62.4%
 333      Wave transmission lines and networks                       8.3%                      51.8%
 315      Electric lamp and discharge device systems                 7.7%                      42.4%
 375      Pulse or digital communications                            7.5%                      37.0%
 343      Radio wave antennas                                        7.0%                      56.0%
 331      Oscillators                                                6.4%                      38.0%
Notes: Table lists the 10 patent classes with the highest fractions of applications in 1939-1945 issued
secrecy orders, in descending order, and the maximal fraction of applications in any single year
ordered secret. Data for eventually-granted patents only.




        Table 2: Forward citations of secret vs. non-secret patents, 1939-1945
                                     Cites       Citers       Citing classes   Non-self         Self
            Secrecy ordered        1.578***    1.232***         0.365***       1.419***      0.135***
                                    (0.343)     (0.272)          (0.078)        (0.316)       (0.038)
            Secrecy evaluated      0.907***    0.603***         0.290***       0.728***      0.168***
                                    (0.109)     (0.076)          (0.036)        (0.098)       (0.018)
            Constant               2.637***    2.615***         1.438***       2.471***      0.107***
                                    (0.130)     (0.115)          (0.046)        (0.121)       (0.019)
            N                       243193      243193           243193         243193        243193
            R2                       0.09         0.09             0.12          0.09          0.06
            Grant year FEs             X           X                X              X             X
            Class-year FEs             X           X                X              X             X
            Mean of DV                4.57        4.17             2.04          4.21          0.27
            s.d. of DV                5.63        4.61             1.89           5.25          0.94
            Notes: Table estimates differences in patents’ forward citations, unique citing
            assignees, unique citing classes, non-self citations, and self citations for patents
            which were evaluated for secrecy and/or ordered secret. All columns control
            for (i) patent class by filing year and (ii) grant year fixed effects. *, **,
            *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs
            clustered by patent class in parentheses.



                Table 3: Effect of secrecy on patent grant lags, 1939-1945
                                                               Applications filed in:
                                     1939        1940       1941        1942         1943      1944      1945
   Incremental grant lag (years)   3.272***   2.527***    2.309*** 1.334*** 0.834***         0.388***    0.205
                                    (0.189)    (0.103)     (0.073)    (0.064)      (0.074)    (0.110)   (0.173)
   N                                 40739      40361       35207      29535        28502      32130     36719
   R2                                 0.17       0.20        0.23       0.22         0.20       0.20      0.21
   Class FEs                           X          X           X          X            X          X         X
   Mean lag                           2.25       2.31        2.42       2.70         2.99       3.48      4.06
    Notes: Table estimates differences in patents’ grant lags for secret versus non-secret patents,
    by filing year. All columns include patent class FEs, such that comparisons are between
    patents in the same class in the given year. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
    and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by patent class in parentheses.




                                                         32
Table 4: Effects of secrecy on probability of any forward citations, July 1940 to June 1945
                                                                         Triple difference
                                    All    Non-OSRD      OSRD         Baseline      OSRD
         Secrecy ordered          -0.006    -0.071**       0.040      -0.069** 0.113***
                                 (0.021)     (0.034)     (0.031)       (0.032)      (0.042)
         * filed in 1941          -0.025       0.026      -0.048        0.022        -0.081
                                 (0.024)     (0.043)     (0.037)       (0.041)      (0.055)
         * filed in 1942           0.017       0.052      -0.007         0.054       -0.073
                                 (0.023)     (0.040)     (0.033)       (0.038)      (0.049)
         * filed in 1943           0.021     0.089**      -0.035       0.083**     -0.113**
                                 (0.023)     (0.042)     (0.030)       (0.040)      (0.049)
         * filed in 1944           0.028      0.084*      -0.016       0.087**     -0.109**
                                 (0.026)     (0.044)     (0.034)       (0.042)      (0.050)
         * filed in 1945           0.034    0.132***      -0.011      0.138*** -0.171***
                                 (0.028)     (0.042)     (0.043)       (0.040)      (0.051)
         Secrecy evaluated         0.019      0.035*      -0.007      0.039**       -0.046*
                                 (0.014)     (0.018)     (0.022)       (0.017)      (0.025)
         * filed in 1941           0.010      -0.001       0.023        -0.003        0.027
                                 (0.015)     (0.020)     (0.025)       (0.019)      (0.029)
         * filed in 1942          -0.004      -0.018       0.012        -0.020        0.032
                                 (0.015)     (0.020)     (0.024)       (0.019)      (0.025)
         * filed in 1943           0.009      -0.008       0.028        -0.013        0.042
                                 (0.016)     (0.021)     (0.024)       (0.019)      (0.027)
         * filed in 1944           0.006      -0.016       0.025        -0.018       0.047*
                                 (0.017)     (0.023)     (0.025)       (0.022)      (0.028)
         * filed in 1945           0.012      -0.002       0.016        -0.014        0.048
                                 (0.019)     (0.027)     (0.026)       (0.025)      (0.033)
         Constant               0.705***    0.673***    0.984***      0.702*** 0.702***
                                 (0.054)     (0.059)     (0.046)       (0.054)      (0.054)
         N                       162628      125335       37293               162628
         R2                         0.05        0.05       0.10                0.05
         Grant year FEs              X           X           X                  X
         Class-year FEs              X           X           X                  X
         Mean of DV                 0.86        0.86        0.88               0.86
         s.d. of DV                 0.34        0.35        0.32               0.34
   Notes: Table estimates the probability that a patent filed between July 1940 and June
   1945 generates any forward citations, as a function of whether the patent was evaluated
   for secrecy and/or ordered secret, with estimates by filing year, and with 1940 being the
   omitted (reference) year. Column (1) includes all such patents. Columns (2) and (3)
   restricts the sample to patents by non-OSRD and OSRD contractors, respectively (see text
   for discussion). Columns (4) and (5) repeat this comparison in a pooled, triple-differenced
   sample. All columns control for (i) patent class by filing year and (ii) grant year fixed
   effects. Specifications estimated via OLS. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
   and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by patent class in parentheses.




                                                33
          Table 5: Effects of secrecy on probability of any forward citations:
              Robustness to alternative specifications (non-OSRD only)
                                        (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)
               Secrecy ordered     -0.071**    -0.071**   -0.075**   -0.074**     -0.079
                                    (0.034)     (0.034)    (0.034)    (0.034)    (0.050)
               * filed in 1941        0.026       0.022      0.028      0.022      0.024
                                    (0.043)     (0.042)    (0.043)    (0.042)    (0.065)
               * filed in 1942        0.052       0.049      0.055      0.051      0.050
                                    (0.040)     (0.039)    (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.058)
               * filed in 1943      0.089**     0.086**    0.090**    0.086**      0.097
                                    (0.042)     (0.041)    (0.043)    (0.042)    (0.062)
               * filed in 1944       0.084*     0.077*     0.085**     0.080*      0.072
                                    (0.044)     (0.044)    (0.043)    (0.043)    (0.062)
               * filed in 1945     0.132***    0.123***   0.132***   0.124***    0.141**
                                    (0.042)     (0.042)    (0.042)    (0.042)    (0.059)
               Secrecy evaluated     0.035*       0.026    0.031*       0.023     0.026
                                    (0.018)     (0.018)    (0.018)    (0.018)    (0.028)
               * filed in 1941       -0.001       0.003     -0.002      0.002      0.002
                                    (0.020)     (0.021)    (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.031)
               * filed in 1942       -0.018      -0.013     -0.020     -0.015     -0.029
                                    (0.020)     (0.021)    (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.030)
               * filed in 1943       -0.008      -0.005     -0.010     -0.007     -0.025
                                    (0.021)     (0.021)    (0.020)    (0.021)    (0.032)
               * filed in 1944       -0.016      -0.010     -0.017     -0.012     -0.024
                                    (0.023)     (0.023)    (0.023)    (0.023)    (0.032)
               * filed in 1945       -0.002       0.002     -0.007     -0.003     -0.026
                                    (0.027)     (0.027)    (0.026)    (0.027)    (0.038)
               Constant            0.673***    0.544***   0.688***   0.552***   0.707***
                                    (0.059)     (0.060)    (0.063)    (0.065)    (0.101)
               N                    125335      125167     125335     125167     125167
               R2                      0.05        0.06       0.05       0.06      0.54
               Grant year FEs            X           X          X          X         X
               Class-year FEs            X           X          X          X         X
               Patent ctrls                          X                     X         X
               Assignee ctrls                                X             X
               Assignee FEs                                                         X
               Mean of DV             0.86       0.86       0.86       0.86        0.86
               s.d. of DV             0.35       0.35       0.35       0.35        0.35
Notes: Table estimates the probability that a patent filed between July 1940 and June 1945 generates
any forward citations, as a function of whether the patent was evaluated for secrecy and/or ordered
secret, with estimates by filing year, and with 1940 being the omitted (reference) year. Sample
restricted to patents by non-OSRD contractors only. Column (1) presents the baseline result from
Table 4. Columns (2), (4), and (5) control for various patent characteristics (fixed effects for the
number of inventors, number of pages in the patent publication, number of drawings). Columns
(3) and (4) control for characteristics of assignees (indicators for whether the assignee is a firm or
individual, and fixed effects for the assignee’s number of patents in the 1930s). Column (5) replaces
these with assignee fixed effects. All columns control for (i) patent class by filing year and (ii) grant
year fixed effects. Specifications estimated via OLS. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1,
0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by patent class in parentheses.




                                                   34
Table 6: Effects of secrecy on diffusion of new word stems in patent titles
                            Ln(Uses)     Uses≥10    Uses≥20    Uses≥30    Uses≥50
        Secrecy ordered     -0.987***   -0.667***    -0.333*    -0.333*     -0.167
                              (0.356)    (0.195)     (0.195)    (0.195)    (0.154)
        * filed in 1941         0.699     0.708*       0.333     0.333      -0.000
                              (0.829)    (0.383)     (0.344)    (0.344)    (0.280)
        * filed in 1942         0.784     0.702*       0.262     0.262      0.095
                              (1.094)    (0.358)     (0.318)    (0.318)    (0.345)
        * filed in 1943      1.398**    0.817***       0.308     0.375      0.408
                              (0.681)    (0.248)     (0.298)    (0.285)    (0.251)
        * filed in 1944     1.876***    0.967***       0.533    0.633*      0.367
                              (0.709)    (0.258)     (0.333)    (0.334)    (0.339)
        Secrecy evaluated      0.208       0.207       0.050      0.158     0.018
                              (0.405)    (0.201)     (0.208)    (0.206)    (0.164)
        * filed in 1941         0.616     -0.052       0.126      0.069     0.302
                              (0.566)    (0.265)     (0.245)    (0.243)    (0.218)
        * filed in 1942         0.820     -0.066       0.105      0.091     0.335
                              (0.912)    (0.287)     (0.299)    (0.296)    (0.262)
        * filed in 1943        -0.021     -0.182       0.031     -0.037     -0.044
                              (0.503)    (0.237)     (0.259)    (0.233)    (0.188)
        * filed in 1944        -0.101     -0.044      -0.004     -0.130     0.009
                              (0.533)    (0.259)     (0.252)    (0.248)    (0.206)
        Constant             2.755***   0.525***    0.342***   0.256***   0.177***
                              (0.052)    (0.024)     (0.021)    (0.020)    (0.016)
        N                        561        561         561        561       561
        R2                      0.03       0.03         0.02       0.03      0.04
        Filing year FEs           X          X           X          X         X
        Mean of DV              2.82       0.54         0.35       0.28      0.19
        s.d. of DV               1.23       0.50        0.48       0.45      0.40
Notes: Table estimates the subsequent usage of word stems which first appeared in the
title of a patent filed in the 1940-1944 period, as a function of whether the first patent
with the stem was evaluated for secrecy and/or ordered secret, with estimates by filing
year, and with 1940 being the omitted (reference) year. Sample restricted to new stems
from non-OSRD contractor patents only (the 1945 year is omitted because there are no
such stems which originated in secret patents that year). Column (1) estimates effects
on the number of subsequent patents with that stem in the invention title (through
1979). Columns (2) to (5) estimate effects on the probability of a stem generating 10,
20, 30, and 50 such uses. All columns control for filing year fixed effects. The latter
four specifications are estimated via OLS. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1,
0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by patent class in parentheses.




                                           35
   Table 7: Presence of new chemical word stems in the Du Pont Products Index
                                       1938        1944       1946       1949       1955
                Secrecy ordered       -0.025   -0.078***   -0.076**     -0.023     0.003
                                     (0.039)     (0.027)    (0.037)    (0.046)    (0.060)
                Secrecy evaluated     -0.012      -0.020     -0.011     -0.030     -0.024
                                     (0.029)     (0.031)    (0.033)    (0.033)    (0.038)
                Constant            0.081***    0.098***   0.109***   0.119***   0.152***
                                     (0.014)     (0.015)    (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.018)
                N                       544         544       544         544        544
                R2                     0.00        0.01       0.01       0.00       0.00
                Mean of DV             0.08        0.09       0.10       0.11       0.15
                s.d. of DV             0.26        0.28       0.30       0.31       0.35
            Notes: Table estimates the probability that a word stem which first appeared
            in the title of a patent filed in a chemical class in the 1940-1945 period
            appears in the Du Pont Products Index in 1938, 1944, 1946, 1949, and
            1955, as a function of whether the first patent with the stem was evaluated
            for secrecy and/or ordered secret. The stems in this sample were further
            screened by the author to identify stems related to chemical content and
            processes. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
            respectively. Heteroskedascity-robust SEs in parentheses.



Table 8: Annual use of new word stems from secret vs. non-secret patent titles in the
          Google Books corpus, difference-in-differences pre- vs. post-1945
                                         Percent of words (x1e6)           Percent of works   (x1e3)
                                       75th        90th       95th       75th       90th           95th
   Secrecy ordered x post-1945      0.462**      0.415**    0.475**    5.707** 6.743***         6.502***
                                     (0.228)     (0.193)    (0.196)    (2.723)    (2.531)        (2.485)
   Secrecy evaluated x post-1945      -0.006      -0.008     -0.011     0.052      -0.104         -0.036
                                     (0.013)     (0.019)    (0.021)    (0.238)    (0.316)        (0.563)
   Post-1945                        0.038*** 0.060*** 0.072***        0.885*** 1.449***         1.862***
                                     (0.009)     (0.009)    (0.012)    (0.141)    (0.178)        (0.237)
   Constant                         0.042*** 0.169*** 0.377***        1.187*** 4.748***        12.381***
                                     (0.007)     (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.098)    (0.103)        (0.121)
   N                                  16989       20433      21567      16989      20433          21567
   R2                                  0.53        0.69       0.88       0.63       0.87           0.98
   Stem FEs                             X           X          X          X           X              X
   Mean of DV                          0.07        0.21       0.42       1.79       5.63           13.46
   s.d. of DV                          0.44        0.61       1.18       5.76       13.27          38.78
    Notes: Table estimates a difference-in-difference of the pre- vs. post-1945 Google Books
    corpus frequency of word stems which first appeared in the title of a patent filed in the
    1940-1945 period and was evaluated for secrecy and/or ordered secret. Columns (1) to (3)
    estimate effects on the fraction of words with a given stem, and Columns (4) to (6) estimate
    effects on the fraction of works with the given stem. Each column censors stems at the given
    percentile (75th, 90th, 95th) of pre-patent usage in the corpus, to eliminate already-common
    language. All columns include stem FEs. The table is effectively a difference-in-difference
    presentation of the results in Figure 4. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and
    0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by stem in parentheses.




                                                   36
Web Appendix
A         Data Appendix

A.1        Construction of patent datasets

A.1.1        Base data

The construction of the core patent-level dataset used in this paper begins with the USPTO histori-
cal master file (Marco et al. 2015), which provides a master list of granted patents with grant dates,
patent class/subclass (USPC), and two-digit NBER category (Hall et al. 2001). In building this
paper’s dataset, I restrict the sample to patents granted between January 1, 1920 and December
31, 1979 – although most of the paper invokes only a subset of these. For all granted patents in
this set, I obtain additional patent characteristics from the following sources:

       • FreePatentsOnline.com (FPO): serial numbers, filing dates, and the network of forward and
         backward citations (front-page citations only)
       • Derwent Innovation database (DI): (mostly) standardized assignee names1

A small subset of patents are missing filing dates and assignees. Table A.1 shows the number
patents with missing data, by decade of grant. For the period sampled in this paper (1930-1960),
approximately 2.4% of patents are missing a filing date and 2.5% missing an assignee (note: these
percentages calculated for patents granted between 1930 and 1960, whereas the paper uses the
sample of patents known to have been filed between 1930 and 1960).


                         Table A.1: Number of patents with missing data, by decade
                                                 No filing date      No assignee data
                  Decade of grant Patents Number Percent Number Percent
                  1920-1929           414901    25738       6.2%      25918       6.2%
                  1930-1939           442842    11102       2.5%      11221       2.5%
                  1940-1949           307630     5470       1.8%       5546       1.8%
                  1950-1959           425985    12461       2.9%      12661       3.0%
                  1960-1969           567761    11203       2.0%      11363       2.0%
                  1970-1979           689027       2        0.0%        73        0.0%
                  Total              2848146    65976       2.3%      66782       2.3%
               Notes: Table shows counts of patents with missing data, and their fraction of all patents, by
               decade (of grant).


Because secrecy orders were issued to patent applications, they are identified by serial number.
For the purposes of this paper, it is thus critical to have accurate data on serial numbers. The

1
    Note that serial numbers, filing dates, and the network of patent citations were also retrieved from the Derwent
    database for comparison against the FPO data, as a validation exercise. The two data sources overwhelmingly
    agreed, and where they disagreed, spot checks revealed that FPO was consistently the more accurate of the two, and
    when there was an error in the FPO data, it typically reflected the occasional typographical error on the printed
    patent publication itself, such as two flipped digits, or a digit one unit off the correct value. Given their reliability,
    the data for this paper thus use serial numbers, filing dates, and citations from FPO.


                                                               1
application-level data (serials and filing dates) from FPO were therefore manually reviewed and
validated for the period around the secrecy order program, by checking patents with serial numbers
or filing dates which are out of sequence. The important feature of the USPTO’s application
numbering system for my purposes here is that applications are organized into application “series”,
which span several years, and identified by a serial number within that series, generally issued in
the order in which patent applications arrive at the USPTO, with serial numbers never exceeding
six digits. Application series increment, and serial numbers reset, at the beginning of a year in
which the serial numbers from the previous series are expected to surpass 1,000,000. Series 2 begins
January 1, 1935 and ends December, 1947 and is the focus of this data cleaning effort. I take all
patents identified by FPO as belonging to Series 2 and sort these patents by serial. I then look for
patents where the previous and next serial have the same filing date but the given patent has a
different filing date, and then manually validate the serial and filing date for these patents. Out of
over 370,000 patents in Series 2, corrections were made to 279 serials and 188 filing dates. Although
these corrections are valuable for matching patents to secrecy orders, the low error rate for this
sample also indicates that such errors are not widespread in the data.


A.1.2    Harmonizing assignee names

Although the assignee names from DI are largely already standardized, closer examination reveals
that there are still variants on individual assignee names (e.g., BELL TELEPHONE LABOR INC
with > 10, 000 patents, and BELL TELPHONE LAB INC, BELL TEL PHONE LAB INC, and
BELL TEIEPHONE LAB INC with 1 patent each). I undertake several procedures to further
harmonize assignee names. I begin by sorting a unique list of assignees in alphabetical order, and
for each assignee recording other nearby assignees up to 9 positions before and after in the sorted
list. I then calculate the edit distance between the given assignee name and each of these nearby
assignee names. When this edit distance is less than 25% of the length of the longer name in each
pair, I flag that pair as a candidate for manual review. I then review all such matches for several
categories of assignees, and standardize names when a match is found:

   •   Assignees   with ≥ 15 patents between 1930 and 1960
   •   Assignees   with at least 1 secrecy order
   •   Assignees   which were OSRD contractors
   •   Assignees   identified as government agencies (see next section)
   •   Assignees   identified as universities or hospitals (see next section)
   •   Assignees   which were synthetic rubber manufacturers
   •   Assignees   which were spinouts from Standard Oil

This process is repeated (because each round of harmonization may bring new assignees into the
set with ≥ 15 patents between 1930 and 1960) until no new matches are found.
This harmonization is neither perfect nor exhaustive, but it is believed to be effective for the
purposes of this paper. It is also worth noting that for the vast majority of assignee names which

                                                     2
were standardized by this procedure, there was clearly a primary spelling for that assignee in the
original DI data, with hundreds or thousands of associated patents in the case of large assignees,
and at worst a handful of secondary spellings with one or two associated patents – such that the
actual effects of both (i) performing this harmonization for the priority assignees above, and of (ii)
not performing it for non-priority assignees, are likely minimal.


A.1.3    Determining assignee types

Assignees are then classified into four categories – firms, universities and hospitals, government
agencies, and individuals – through a combination of rule-based and manual classification. I begin
by classifying assignees as firms when the assignee name includes any of roughly 120 words which
indicate firms (e.g., CO, CORP, INC, LTD, SPA, GMBH, etc., as well as technical words such
as AERO, AUTO, CHEM, ENG, MACHINE, OIL, PROD, TECH, WORKS; full list available on
request). I then manually classify remaining assignees with ≥ 15 patents between 1930 and 1960,
as well as assignees whose name includes any of the following strings:

   • COLLEGE, INST, UNIV, HOSP, RES FOUND
   • US, CANADA, UK, FRANCE, GERMANY, SWITZERLAND, AUSTRALIA, JAPAN, IS-
     RAEL, and assorted other countries
   • ATOM (to identify international atomic energy commissions)

Assignees with > 200 patents in the 1920-1979 period which are thus far unclassified are then
classified as firms. Any remaining unclassified assignees are classified as individuals.

This classification procedure was developed over several years, and although – like the name har-
monization – it is neither perfect nor exhaustive, random spot checks suggest it is overwhelmingly
effective at categorizing assignees into the right bins. In total, 60.1% of patents with an assignee
in the 1920-1979 sample are assigned to a firm, 0.2% to a university, 0.8% to a government agency,
and 39.1% to an individual (numbers sum to > 100% because 5% of patents have multiple assignees,
and 0.2% have assignees in multiple categories).


A.1.4    Identifying patents of OSRD contractors

As part of a broader data collection effort around U.S. science during World War II, I retrieved
information on R&D contracts let by Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD), the
primary R&D contracting agency during the war, from its archival collection at the U.S. National
Archives and Records Administration (NARA). A complete list of contractors was compiled from
contract lists and contractor directories. These contractors were then manually matched to the
harmonized assignee names, making it possible to identify patents by government R&D contractors
versus non-contractors. Contractors spanned all sectors of the economy but were primarily firms



                                                   3
and universities. Given that universities were not heavy filers of patents in this period, the vast
majority of patents by OSRD contractors are by firms.2


A.1.5       Identifying patents with secrecy orders

Patent applications with secrecy orders were identified from the archival records of three U.S.
government agencies: (i) the Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD), whose records
yielded 4,837 serials with a secrecy order; (ii) the Office of Production Research and Development
(OPRD), which yielded 2,047 serials; and (iii) the U.S. Army Office of the Judge Advocate General
(JAG), which yielded 5,976 serials. These sets partly overlap, and collectively they identify a
total of 8,475 patent applications which were at some point ordered secret. According to other
contemporary records from the JAG office, a total of 11,182 secrecy orders were issued through June
14, 1945, when the war – and the secrecy program – were winding down and few new secrecy orders
were being issued. The data thus identify roughly 75% of all secrecy orders. Undermeasurement is
not a significant concern, particularly because it will only tend to attenuate comparisons between
patents known to have been issued a secrecy order versus those not so observed. Of these 8,475
identified serials with secrecy orders, 6,352 (75%) were eventually granted.3
2
  The OSRD contract and contractor data can be found at:
    • “Index to Contracts, 1941-1947” in RG 227 (Records of the Office of Scientific Research and Develop-
       ment), located in Stack Area 130, Row 20, Compartment 11, Shelf 1, Boxes 1-5. Online catalog entry
       at https://catalog.archives.gov/id/6882818.
    • “Contractor Lists, 1940-1946” in RG 227 (Records of the Office of Scientific Research and Development),
       located in Stack Area 130, Row 20, Compartment 11, Shelf 4, Boxes 1-2. Online catalog entry at
       https://catalog.archives.gov/id/16955595.
    • “Contract Ledgers, 1941-1946” in RG 227 (Records of the Office of Scientific Research and Development),
       located in Stack Area 130, Row 22, Compartment 18, Shelf 2-3, Boxes 1-6. Online catalog entry at
       https://catalog.archives.gov/id/6920064.
3
  The OSRD records which yielded data on secrecy orders can be found at:
    • “D-1 Forms Used by the War Division of the Patent Office, 1942-1946” in RG 227 (Records of the Office of
       Scientific Research and Development), located in Stack Area 130, Row 20, Compartment 34, Shelf 3, Boxes
       1-3. Online catalog entry at https://catalog.archives.gov/id/6882835.
    • “Correspondence Relating to Secrecy Orders, 1942-1945” in RG 227 (Records of the Office of Scientific
       Research and Development), located in Stack Area 130, Row 20, Compartment 42-43, Shelf 7 and 1-3, Boxes
       1-27. Online catalog entry at https://catalog.archives.gov/id/16955603.
    The OPRD records which yielded data on secrecy orders can be found at:
      • “Index to Patent Applications, 1945-1945” in RG 179 (Records of the War Production Board), Office of
         Production Research and Development, located in Stack Area 570, Row 64, Compartment 12, Shelf 4. Online
         catalog entry at https://catalog.archives.gov/id/567665.
    The JAG records which yielded data on secrecy orders can be found at:
      • “Records Pertaining to Patent Applications under Secrecy Orders Tendered to the Federal Government, 1941-
         1945” in RG 153 (Records of the Office of the Judge Advocate General), located in Stack Area 270, Row 2,
         Compartment 28, Shelf 6, Boxes 1-2. Online catalog entry at https://catalog.archives.gov/id/26335074.
      • “Records Relating to Patents Tendered to the Federal Government Under Secrecy Orders, 1941-1949” in RG
         153 (Records of the Office of the Judge Advocate General), located in Stack Area 270, Row 2, Compartment
         28, Shelf 7, Box 1. Online catalog entry at https://catalog.archives.gov/id/17396215.
      • “Patent cases, 1941-1952” in RG 153 (Records of the Office of the Judge Advocate General), lo-
         cated in Stack Area 270, Row 2, Compartment 28, Shelf 6, Box 1.                   Online catalog entry at
         https://catalog.archives.gov/id/17382698.


                                                          4
The OSRD records contain two sources of data on secrecy orders: a 27-box collection of secrecy
determination forms (“Form D-1”), which were used to evaluate patent applications for secrecy, and
miscellaneous agency correspondence discussing the secrecy order program and patent applications
affected by it. Together with wartime administrative histories of the agencies involved, the D-1
forms and internal correspondence from the OSRD records provide a rich picture of how P.L. 700
was implemented at the USPTO, and how the review process was executed.
Recall from the historical background section of the paper that when a patent application arrived
at the patent office, it was assigned to an examining division, and the primary examiner for that
division would forward applications he or she viewed as a candidate for a secrecy order to the
Patent Office War Division (POWD), where representatives from various other agencies (namely:
the Army and Navy Patent Advisory Board, the War Production Board, the OSRD, and/or the
Petroleum Administration for War) would review these applications and make a recommendation
for or against secrecy. For every application sent to the POWD, a D-1 form was drawn up with
identifying information including the serial, filing date, title, inventor, assignee, patent attorney,
patent office examining division and primary examiner, and date of receipt at the POWD (see
Figures A.1 and A.2 for examples). The application was then read by the relevant reviewers, who
would each sign or stamp the form with their recommendation. Often, reviewers would defer to
other reviewers’ judgments (typically, to the armed services). If all reviewers declined to recommend
secrecy, the application would be “disapproved” (for secrecy) and sent back to Washington; if any
reviewer requested secrecy, the application was issued a secrecy order.
There are approximately 24,000 D-1 forms in the OSRD records. I had these forms scanned and
transcribed via double entry with verification (under which discrepancies in the transcription are
manually reviewed). Given the importance of these data, and that the original print on some of
these forms is hard to read, I had them transcribed via the same procedure a second time by a
distinct contractor. I then personally reviewed all differences between the two transcriptions and
performed numerous checks to validate the data, making corrections as needed, and sometimes even
catching typographical errors on the original forms themselves (these checks include: (i) ensuring
serials are consistent with filing dates, (ii) ensuring that date of receipt is after filing date, (iii)
ensuring that date of review is after date of receipt (although there are a few cases where it appears
the application arrived at the POWD already-recommended for secrecy), (iv) harmonizing primary
examiner name spellings and ensuring that examiner names and examining divisions were paired
in a consistent way). Although most of the contents of each form were transcribed, currently the
only data being used in this paper are the serial and the recommendation.
Of these ≈24,000 forms, 23,690 were for utility patent applications, covering 22,549 unique serials
(some patent applications were evaluated multiple times), of which 3,557 were issued a secrecy
order. Given that many more secrecy orders are known to have been issued during the war than
are in this record set, it does not comprise an exhaustive list of applications formally reviewed for
secrecy, let alone issued a secrecy order, but knowing patents which were evaluated for secrecy but
disapproved allows us to specify a more refined control group than just the set of all patents which

                                                   5
were not secret. Presumably, the applications covered by these forms are those which were reviewed
by an OSRD representative, but the precise sampling conditions are not known. Unfortunately, no
additional D-1 forms could be located in other NARA collections.

In addition to these forms, OSRD agency correspondence related to secrecy orders identifies 1,484
serials with a secrecy order. Most of this correspondence consists of letters between OSRD staff
members notifying about the issuance of a secrecy order. The two sets of serials overlap, however,
resulting in a total of 4,837 secrecy orders identified in OSRD records.

The next source of information on secrecy orders is an eight-box set of index cards in the archived
records of the Office of Production Research and Development (OPRD), an agency whose mission
was to promote the development of new materials and efficient methods for war production during
World War II. According to documentation in the records, one set of index cards served as an index
to patent applications “on which secrecy orders were imposed by the War Production Board and
its predecessor agencies during the period 1941 to August 30, 1945.” A second set indexed patent
applications “on which no secrecy orders were issued... after examination by the War Production
Board.” A total of 2,047 unique serials appear in the set with secrecy orders, and 2,021 in the set
without them. For unknown reasons, 135 serials appear in both sets. These serials are presumed
to have been issued a secrecy order at some point in the war.

The final source of data on secrecy orders is a set of files from the records of the U.S. Army Judge
Advocate General’s office (JAG), which received patent applications with secrecy orders which
were tendered to the government for its use, pursuant to the statutory terms of P.L. 700. These
records contain lists of tendered inventions (see Figure A.3 for an example). The records also
contain extensive agency correspondence that identifies additional serials with secrecy orders. In
total, the lists of tendered inventions identify 5,957 unique serials with a secrecy order, and the
correspondence identifies 928 serials. As with the other agencies, the two sets of serials overlap,
resulting in a total of 5,976 secrecy orders found in JAG records.

I supplement these sources with a distinct list of patents associated with Manhattan Project re-
search, obtained by an independent researcher via FOIA request to the U.S. Department of Energy
and publicly hosted at the digital archives of the Woodrow Wilson Center (see Streifer 2017). This
document lists 1,070 nuclear energy-related patent applications and 887 granted patents from the
World War II period, including many designs for nuclear reactors. None of these patents were
included in the NARA records described above, and although no formal indication of secrecy was
included in this document, the median grant lag for patents on this list is almost 12 years (10th
percentile = 4.74 years). Because nuclear energy research is especially distinctive, and the narrative
record suggests that these patents were exempted from the 1945 General Rescinding Order (which
otherwise generates key variation used in this paper) and remained secret long after the war ended,
I exclude them from the analysis throughout the paper.




                                                  6
                                                Figure A.1: Sample secrecy determinations from OSRD records with secrecy recommended
                                                                                                                    r
    Form   D--1                                                                                                     I                             d
                                                                                                                    I                  [fAtLEr]
      st                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                i

                                                                                                                                 ocT       5   tg4t
         DIVISION **                        CLASS           1?ef*3}S*.    (    *ffie**t I&* &S&$
                                                                          (     Make no entrle.s'here.                                     )


         FTLTNG    DAIE #BItr SS* t{r*&                                       sERTAL NUMBER &#t$#m;*-"*"-""-

         INVENTIO                  wtffi**effi #s*t*
         INVENTOR                  WkS*r ffinwtffi* #r*
         ATTORNEY                  ffifiw* w* &{*ffiw fls* s* ffi* ffi#Mffi
         ASSIGNEE                  B*X& ffit*ffiM rs&trs*tw.t**1 ffi**

         DRAIilINGS_        * STTUEIS                             EXAMINER              tsr $h8t8t r          fi&Io-:ue*

                                                                  ++++        +

         DISAPPROVED BY PATENT OF5'ICE DEFENSE COMMITTEE
                                                                                                                        *

         SUBMITTED TO:

             ARMY     &    NAVY PATENT ADVISORY BOARD

             WAR PRODUCTION BOARD

             oFFrcE oF scrENTrrrc RES. &                                 DEV.           tffil




7
              OFEICE OF PETROI,EUM COORDINATOR



                  DISAPPROVED

                   sEcREcy REC'MMENDED
                                                                  g*ffi^Wr }ff;                 &ffie


                        In vlew of the attached request, 1t is recommenCled
                   that a secrecy order be lssued in this appllcatlon under
                   the provisions of Public No. 700, as amend.ed August 2L,
                   1e41 bY Pub1lc                     No' 23e
                                                                                        $
                                                                                   fn ; ,2                  4.,             -   - //
                                                                                  i;'           >'       f";it-ll@/
                  Placing of this applicallon under ttra   prc'                                      '                                 /
                  visions of "Public   700' h   racommanded
                  fid*   &*    #Fttrn              f,-sr    ff* Sr   &itx*r        *Asf&s




            A;PPBOYED

            ocT 1r{9*21\
     ^
8
                                    Figure A.2: Sample secrecy determinations from OSRD records, with secrecy disapproved

     Form D-I
                                                                                                             Form D-I                                                                              a,

                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                       rrtJ E6 tg43
          DrvrsroN         65       cr.,Ass      3?L   .   (                                       )
                                                           (     Make   no'entrles here.           )            DIVISION     3T'        .   CLAss SIA**S+.$.                                   )
                                                                                                                                                               (     Mate   no entfles here.   )
          FTLTNG oeru gwl:En t*#                               sERTAL   NUMBun   l*Hf*ry --V7-
                                                                                                                FrrJrNG DATE          F$Jt*bff ?* I.?&S            sERrArJ NUMBER   &6&rSft
          INVENTION*       ea*&d" -                                              -             -
                                                                                                                 INVENTION            aEtffitl0 $?|qrt{**r
                                                                                                                                                        -      s*sbxux-
          TNVENTOR ffi,tit# *, fi&                                                     .
                                                                                           -                     INVENTOR             sf*fil&fr ftr E*#h
          ATTORNEY _ffir e- *sEqF
                                                       -                                                         ATTORNEY             flrl.rlr Etul.rt
          ASSIGNEE
                                                                                                                AssTGNEE Sfritts $amr., of Seffi!,+
          DNAWINGS         }    SHEETS            EXAMINER        F*?o *Effi*t             Mt
          .
                                                                                                       LIC      DRAWINGS 8 SUETTS          E1AMINER.6' Sn Htffi (I*ls*mrl
                                                 +++++
                                                                                                                                           +++++
                        PATENT OFFICE             DEFENSE COMMITTEE
     #f" DISAPPROVED BY                                                                                       TS DISAPPROVED BY PATENT OT'FICE DEFENSE COMMITTEE
    rf{       SUBMTTTED TO:
    I                                                                                                            SUBMITTED TO:
                ARMY   &   NAVY PATENT ADVISORY BOARD
                                                                                                                    ARMY    &   NAVY PATENT ADVISORY BOARD            x
                WAR PRODUCTION BOARD
                                                                                                                    WAR PRODUCTION BOARD                              x
                 OT'FICE OF SCIENTIFIC RES.       &    DEV.
                                                                                 tx*                                  OFFICE OF SCIENTIFIC RES. A DEV.                &
                 OFFICE OF' PETROLEUM COORDINATOR
                                                                                                                      oFFICE    0f'   PETRoLEUM CooRDINATOR




9
                    DTSAPPROVED                        l&r rB*
                                         E**hs                                                                           DISAPPROVED         ffiT $[' }$E}
                    SECRECY RECOMMENDED
                                                                                                                         SECRECY RECOMMENDED
                                               --+++++
                                                                                                                                                  ---+++++
                                                                                                              Sffi.ss rlth **#***r
                                                                                                                &.Lr&}*trf ***?'-&!
                                                                                                              Srer*af mst xstw*&**
                                                                                                                &*ff*ftx*.3-69 $*$*g}
                                                                                                              &utss
                                                                                                                ffi*SrF#}.tsn 3*1&*SF
          ##ffi.ffiee*@                                                                                       S*srsof aot rrcaomrs4eil
          s* #. k*#*aw'           a&t'Eef'&#                                                                    ir$*Bauohslor ,-15-+l
                                                                                                                S'f't*il$1,**x fuI1*&3
Figure A.3: Sample page from lists of tendered inventions in JAG records




                                  10
A.2     Textual analysis: new words in patent titles

The text-based analysis in this paper requires additional data on patents’ content. For the pre-1976
period, patent text is not available in a clean, USPTO-issued machine-readable format. Google
Patents makes available OCR full text for historical patents, but the quality of the character recog-
nition is less than great and generally declines going further back in time, due to older documents
and lower-quality typesetting, which increases the OCR error rate. Other data sources, including
Derwent Innovation, also provide the full text of pre-1976 patents, but with the same limitations.
To minimize concerns about how the OCR quality and spelling errors may influence the results
of the paper, particularly given the focus on identifying and measuring the subsequent use of new
words in the patent record, I therefore seek out a cleaner source of data.
Google also makes available, via the Google Cloud Platform and its BigQuery web service, addi-
tional textual and text-based patent data. I used this service to retrieve titles (which are cleanly
transcribed) and top terms (according to Google, “the top 10 salient terms extracted from the
patent’s title, abstract, claims, and description) of patents granted from 1920-1979. For each
patent, Google also provides a 64-element machine-learned component vector which can be used
to compute pairwise similarity measures (according to Google: this component vector is “based on
document contents and metadata, where two documents that have similar technical content have a
high dot product score of their embedding vectors” and “trained on full text bag of words to predict
CPCs using the WSABIE classification model” – in other words, a model designed to predict each
patent’s classification from its content and metadata). I take these vectors off-the-shelf and use
them to calculate the measure of similarity invoked at the end of Section 4.4
New words (more specifically, new stems) are identified from patent titles as follows. After loading
the patent titles, I remove numeric tokens, punctuation, and special characters. I then tokenize
the remaining text in the title, splitting it into a list of constituent “words”. I then loop over this
list and drop (i) words which match a set of stop words, (ii) words with < 4 or > 25 characters,
and (iii) words with a numeric character.5 The remaining words are then stemmed by the NLTK
toolkit and reduced to a set of unique stems for each patent. To restrict our focus to stems which
are neither exceedingly common nor vanishingly rare, and to minimize the computational burden
of the remaining steps, I further reduce these stems to those (i) used by at least 5 patents but no
more than 20% of patents in the complete 1920-1979 sample, and (ii) used by at least one patent
filed between 1940 and 1945, since the stems of interest will be from this set.
After reshaping the data to patent-stem pairs, the next step is to identify stems which were first
used in a patent filed between 1940 and 1945 – that is, stems which are ostensibly new to the patent
4
  Patent titles are from the BigQuery Patents dataset (patents-public-data → patents → publications → title localized;
  see https://console.cloud.google.com/bigquery?p=patents-public-data&d=patents&t=publications), and top terms
  and component vectors from the Google Patents Research dataset (patents-public-data → google patents research
  → publications → top terms, embedding v1; see https://console.cloud.google.com/bigquery?p=patents-public-
  data&d=google patents research&t=publications)
5
  Stop words used in this step are a combination of off-the-shelf stop words from the NLTK toolkit for Python, stop
  words from Iaria et al. (2018), and stop words from Younge and Kuhn (2016).


                                                         11
record when they are used in the title of a patent filed in the early 1940s. The 1920 to 1939 period
is used to define a stock of “existing” stems; this interval is considered sufficient for constructing
an existing stock of words, since it includes nearly one million patents and covers the 20+ most
recent years of invention. The final step is to then reduce the data to stems which were first used
in a patent filed in the 1940 to 1945 period. The empirical output from this procedure is a dataset
of these stems and the patents using them between 1940 and 1979.

Table A.2 lists the most-heavily used new stems from the 1940 to 1945 period, highlighting in
red those which were first appeared in the title of a secret patent, and in light red those which
ever appeared in a secret patent. The term semiconductor entered the patent record during this
period, as did radar, ultrasonic, monomer and elastomer, and antibiotics and penicillin. As this
table demonstrates, the stemming procedure is also imperfect, as both “elastom” and “elastomer”
enter this table, the former likely stemmed from “elastomer” itself, and the latter from words like
“elastomerization”. There is no perfect solution to this problem, as iterative stemming will often
reduce words down to unrecognizable objects and cause unrelated words to get binned together
into the same stem of stems. I thus limit the text cleaning procedure to one round of stemming,
so that similar words (e.g., singular and plural variants of a noun) will be grouped into a common
stem, at the same time recognizing the limitations of the methods.


                 Table A.2: Most heavily used new           stems in patent titles, 1940-1945
                                  Subseq. uses                                        Subseq. uses
               Stem               (1940-1979)                    Stem                  (1940-1979)
          1.   semiconductor         6935                     9. antibiot                  940
          2.   disc                  3260                   10. phosphon                   894
          3.   radar                 2255                   11. elastomer                  848
          4.   ultrason              2017                   12. curabl                     810
          5.   monom                 1366                   13. cryogen                    771
          6.   elastom               1237                   14. readout                    672
          7.   waveguid              1160                   15. penicillin                 627
          8.   electrophotograph     1158                   16. recognit                   601
          Notes: Red = Stem first used in title of secret patent. Light red = Stem ever used in title of
          secret patent.


This same procedure was repeated for patents’ top terms, as well as for the union of titles and top
terms. Although my focus in the paper is on titles only, the results in Sections 4 and 5 are similar
when the analysis is based on these top terms. (The analysis was not repeated for the union of
titles and top terms; because they each measure distinct features of patents, their union is a strange
object and was not considered suitable for analysis.)




                                                       12
Other textual data sources

In addition to looking for these words in the patent record, the paper also studies two other corpora:
Du Pont product catalogs, and the Google Books N-gram database.

The Du Pont Products Index (DPPI) was a Du Pont product catalog published at regular intervals,
and is used to look for focal chemical terms in Du Pont literature as a proxy for the product market.
The 1938 edition of the DPPI is available online from Hathitrust, and working with the Hagley
Museum in Wilmington, Delaware, which houses the Du Pont archival collection, I had four other
editions of the DPPI digitized: 1944, 1946, 1949, and 1955-56, all of which are now available as
well. These catalogs were then converted to text using ABBYY FineReader 14, which is subject
to similar limitations as the OCR of historical patents previously discussed, although the OCR
quality is higher because the scans are higher-resolution and the source documents have cleaner
typesetting. The implications of using OCRed text for this part of the paper, and some robustness
checks explored in light of these issues, are discussed in the paper.6

As explained in the paper, I make use of the Google Books N-gram data, which are freely available
for download, to measure the use of focal technical words in the broader public discourse.7 These
data provide annual usage of unique N-grams in the Google Books corpus. This paper uses the
data on 1-grams (i.e., words), matching words from patent titles to words in this set (specifically,
I identify all words in patent titles whose stem entered the patent record in a patent filed between
1940 and 1945, link these to words in the N-grams data, and measure their use by year, in levels
and as a fraction of all words in the Google Books corpus in the given year).


A.3     What’s being measured by patent citations

Although researchers from Jaffe et al. (1993) to Galasso and Schankerman (2015) have used prior
art references to measure linkages and follow-on invention, several papers have also highlighted the
limitations of modern citation data, including the fact that citations can be strategic and that a
large fraction are added by examiners rather than applicants (Alcacer et al. 2009, Sampat 2010,
Cotropia et al. 2013, Roach and Cohen 2013), which is a concern because examiner-added citations
may not measure intellectual inputs to invention. An additional wrinkle that more directly affects
this paper is that the citation record only begins in 1947, as the USPTO did not require published
patents to list references to prior art until February 4, 1947. Given the myriad issues, it is useful
to include a more detailed discussion of what patent citations measure.

Prior art references have been an integral part of the patent examination process since well before
the 1947 requirement that they be printed on the final page (now front page) of the patent document
itself. The 1940 USPTO Rules of Practice, for example, instructs that:
6
  For the 1938 volume, see https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001042925; for the 1944, 1946, 1949, and 1955-56
  volumes, see https://digital.hagley.org/islandora/search/%22Du%20Pont%20Products%20Index%22?type=edismax
  &f%5B0%5D=-RELS EXT isMemberOfCollection uri ms%3A%28%22info%3Afedora/islandora%3Aead%22%29.
7
  Data and documentation available at http://storage.googleapis.com/books/ngrams/books/datasetsv2.html.


                                                       13
      Upon taking up an application for action on the merits the examiner shall make a
      thorough investigation of the prior art, with respect to the invention sought to be
      protected in the application. Upon the rejection of an application for want of novelty,
      the examiner must cite the best references at his command. When the reference shows
      or describes inventions other than that claimed by the applicant, the particular part
      relied on must be designated as nearly as practicable. The pertinence of the reference,
      if not obvious, must be clearly explained and the anticipated claim specified.

Thus, although the patent citation data used in modern research are drawn from published, front-
page/final-page references, and these begin only in 1947, it is not that prior art references were not
previously made, but rather that they are not easily observed (a paper trail would have been kept in
the examination file, not on the patent document itself). Moreover, prior to 1992, when the USPTO
issued a new rule establishing applicants’ “duty to disclose” information material to patentability
(37 CFR §1.56), these references appear to have been made primarily (if not exclusively) by patent
examiners, in the course of examination. Given the functional role they played, forward citations
will identify closely-related subsequent invention, not information flows per se – but this is enough
to measure de facto follow-on invention for the purposes of this paper.

Examiner-added citations: curse or blessing?
That patent citations in this period come from examiners is also important: as Moser et al. (2017)
show with modern data, patent examiners use physical traits (rather than performance) to identify
patents that should be cited as prior art, which provides reassurance that citations in this paper will
be measuring intellectual proximity (even within patent classes, since most specifications include
patent class fixed effects) rather than quality or importance.

Given that modern examiners rely on the results of prior art searches and may draw on a smaller
pool of “favorite” examples of prior art during patent examination (e.g., Cockburn et al. 2002), a
remaining concern is that differences in forward citations attributed to secrecy orders in Section 4
might actually just be driven by differences in what information the future examiners making these
references knew or had access to with respect to earlier patents with secrecy orders. This concern
is mostly obviated by the fact that secrecy orders were rescinded long before any of the citing
patents in my data were granted (November 1945 versus February 1947), such that secrecy is not
standing in the way of these inventions being found or cited as prior art. But a reasonable question
is whether secrecy orders could have affected what enters the set of examiners’ frequently-cited
prior art, and could this then explain the patterns found in the paper.

However, this seems unlikely for two reasons. First, if secrecy orders kept certain patents out of the
pool of prior art that examiners tended to cite, this would likely have applied equally to earlier and
later applications – since it is a function of the secrecy order, not the timing. More importantly,
it is my understanding that examiners had access to applications with secrecy orders, since these
could still be used for interference (although formal notification and interference proceedings would
be delayed until the priority application came off secrecy order).


                                                  14
B        Historical Appendix

This appendix provides supplementary material to accompany the discussion of the secrecy order
program in Section 1 of the paper. Figure B.1 shows the text of Public Law 700, enacted July 1,
1940, which authorized the USPTO to issue secrecy orders. Figures B.2 to B.4 show examples of
secrecy order notification letters mailed to inventors. Figure B.5 shows an announcement of the
General Rescinding Order printed in the USPTO Official Gazette (the USPTO’s weekly newsletter,
accessible by subscription) on September 18, 1945.


                                                Figure B.1: Public Law 700


                           [CHAPTER 501]
         July 1,1940                                        AN ACT
        IH. R. 10058!      To amend the Act relating to preventing the publication of inventions in the
    (Public, No. 700]
                                            national interest, and for other purposes.
                              Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
                           United States of America in Congress assemhled, That the Act of
                           Congress approved October 6, 1917 ( 40 Stat. 394, ch. 95, U. S. C.,
                           title 35, sec. 42), be amended to read as follows:
   Withholding of pat·        "Whenever the publication or disclosure of an invention by the
 ents in national inter·
 est.                      granting of a patent might, in the opinion of the Commissioner of
                           Patents, be detrimental to the public safety or defense he may order
                           that the invention be kept secret and withhold the grant of a patent
                           for such period or periods as in his opinion the national interest
    Profliso.
    Deemed abandoned       requires : Provided, That the invention disclosed in the application
 1f published, etc.        for said patent may be held abandoned upon it being established
                           before or by the Commissioner that in violation of said order said
                           invention has been published or disclosed or that an application for
                           a patent therefor has been filed in a foreign country by the inventor
                           or his assigns or legal representatives, without the consent or approval
                           of the Commissioner of Patents.
                                                                                                            liigt.t o! patentee to
                             ·"When an applicant whose patent is withheld as herein provided              sue !or compensation.
                           and who faithfully obeys the order of the Commissioner of Patents
                           above referred to shall tender his invention to the Government of the
                           United States for its use, he shall, if and when he ultimately receives
                           a patent, have the right to sue for compensation in the Court of
                           Claims, such right to compensation to begin from the date of the use
                           of the invention by the Government: Provided, That the Secretary                 Prooiso.
                                                                                                            Settl e ment with
                           of War or the Secretary of the Navy or the chief officer of any estab-         applicant for damage,
                                                                                                          etc.
                           lished defense agency of the United States, as the case may be is
                           authorized to enter into an agreement with the said applicant in full
                           settlement and compromise for the damage accruing to him by reason
                           of the order of secrecy, and for the use of the invention by the
                           Government."
                              SEo. 2. This Act shall take effect on approval and shall remain in            Effective date; pe-
                                                                                                          riod in rorce.
                           force for a period of two years from such date.
                              Approved, July 1, 1940.




                                                              15
Figure B.2: Example Secrecy Order: Bell Labs




                    16
                Figure B.3: Example Secrecy Order: Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co.


         Form D-2
        ADDRESS ONLY
THE COIIMISSIONER OF PATENTS
      IvASHll'lGION. D. C.                                                           ,'fui;itr.

                                  DEPARTMENT OF COMMEFTCE
                                   UNITEO sTATE5 PATENT OFTICE
                                                                                 &t,r6i H+j

                                           WASHINGTON

seriar No.           l+altr 555                                  Filed Des. 27, 19!tI
For                  eoaposltlon of ldatter and Polyuer fhoroof
Applicant lrvl'ag B. Idaskat and Franllln Etrala
Assignee Plttebtlrgh Plate elass eonpany
      NgTICE:- To the appLioant above named., his heirs, and. any and all his
assignees, at,torneys and agents:
       Under the provisions of the Act of Ootober 6, 1917 (Publio No. B0), as
amended July 1, !g4A (Public No. 700), as amended August,2L,1941 (Public No.
239), you are hereby notified that your application as above iclentifieil has
been found to contain subject matter the disclosure of whj.ch might be detri-
mental to the publio safety or defense, and. you are hereby ordered to in nowise
publish or disclose the lnvention or any hitherto unpubllshed. detaiLs of the
disclosure of said application, but to keep the same seoret (except by written
permission first obtained. of the Commissioner of Patents), under the penalties
of the amended Act. This application must be prosecuted under the Bules of
Practice untit a notice is reoeived from the office that all the claims then
in the case are allowable. Such notice oloses the prosecution of the case.
Furthermore, if previously allowed and now withdrawn from issue the prosecution
of the case is likewise closed. Y{hen the applioation is in condition for allow-
ance il, vrill be withhelcl from issue during such period or periods as the nation-
al interest requires.
       This order should not be construed in any way to mean that the Government
has ad.opted or contemplates adoption of the alleged invention disclosed in this
applioation, nor is it any lndication of the value of such invention. In order
to make the details of your invention available for inspection by the various
national defense agencies for defense purposes and at the same time to preservo
your rights under the Act, it is suggested that you promptly tender this inven-
tion to the Government of the United States for its use. Such tender may be
effected by a communication directed to the Secretary of War or to the Secretary
of the Navy and should be accompanied by a power to inspect the application and
a copy of the application, including drawings.
      Applicant and his assignees are authorized to diselose the subject mat,ter
of this application to the head of any Department or independent agency of the
Government of the United Stat,es, to the head of any Bureau of any such Department,
or to any subordinate officer or employee thereof known to the party making dis-
closure to be coneerned directly in an official capacity witlr the subject matter,
or designated specifically by the head of the Department,, independent agency or
Bureau a6 the proper party to receive confidential disclosures of such nature.


   t-= e -r*lIIT=1


    ' ,; i. ,':l;)'i
                                                   a--lGq
                                                                 Commissioner.




         .AIPEO,YED



  GfrurtPSo
                                                   17
Figure B.4: Example Secrecy Order: Individual




                     18
Patents Nos. 2,384,785 to 2,385 ,323




   Figure B.5: Notice of General Rescinding Order in USPTO Official Gazette


                                                                                       THE

     OFFICIAL GAZETTE
                                                                                     OF THE

                                     United States Patent Office
Vol. 578-No. 3                                             TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 1945                                           Price-$16 per year

     The OFFICIAL GAZETTE is mailed under the direction of the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office,
to whom all 1ubscri!ltions should be made payable and all communications resnectinir the Gazette should be addressed . Issued
weekly. Subscriptions, $16.00 per annum, includinll' annual index, $18.75; single numbers, 35 cents each. ·
     PRINTED COPIES OP PATENTS are furnished by the Patent Office at 10 cents each. For the latter address the Commi~­
sioner of Patents, Washington 25, D. C.
     CIRCULARS OF GENERAL INFORMATION concernlnll' PATENTS or TRADE-MARKS will be sent without cost on
request to the Commissioner of Patents, Washinll'ton 25, D. C.


                            CONTENTS                                                                            Notice of Cancellation
                                                                                        Page
lsSUE OF SEPTEMBER 18, 1945.------- ---- -- -- ---- - --- -- - ----- -- - 281                          U. S. PATENT OFFICE, Richmond, Va., Aug. U, 1945.
NOTICE .-- ------- -- -- -- - -- --- --- ------ ---- - -- ---- -------- --- --- 281             CeCo Manufacturing Company, Inc., its assigns or legal
 GENERAL RESCINDING ORDER... ---- - -- - --- - -·--- --- -------- -- 281                          representatives, take notice:
NOTICE OF CANCELLATION .. ---- ---- --- --- -- ----- ---- ---- --- --- 281
DISCLAIMER_.   _-- --- -- --__---- . - -- ---- -- -- --__--____
                                                            -. --_________
                                                                  -- . - -- --._______
                                                                                -. - -- - 281
                                                                                          281      A petition for cancellation having been filed in this
NOTICE OF OPPOSITION          __ _______   __ ______                                            Office by Argus, Incorporated, 405 Fourth St., Ann Arbor,
APPLICATIONS UNDER EXAMINATION ___ ___ _________ ____ __ ___ __ 282                             Mich., to effect the cancellation of trade-mark registration
DECISIONS OF THE U. S. COURTS-                                                                  of CeCo Manufacturing Company, Inc., 1200 Eddy St.,
    In re Fisher . . ---- - --- -- -- ----- --- ---- ---- - ----- --- --- - -- -- 283           Providence, R. I., No. 286,146, issued August 18, 1931, and
 REGISTER OF PATENTS AVAILABLE FOR LICENSING OR SALE... 284                                     the notice of such proceeding sent by registered mail to
TRADE-MARKS PUBLISHED (77 APPUCATIONS) ___-- - -- ·- -- - --- - 287                             the said Ceco· Manufacturing Company, Inc., at the said
TRADE-MARK REGISTRATIONS GRANTED-- --- -- -- - --- ----- -- -- 298                              address having been returned by the post office undeliver-
TRADE-MARK REGISTRATIONS RENEWED----- - -- - ----- -- --- -- 306                                able, notice is hereby given that unless said CeCo Manu-
REISSUES.-- ---- ---- ---- -- ---- - ---- - --. -. -. -. - --. - --. . . --- -- --- 311         facturing Company, Inc., its assigns or legal representa-
PA TENTS GRANTED . . .. _. __ . __. • ___ _____ -- - - ----·- __---- -- - __.. 312              tives, sh all enter an appearance therein within thirty days
                                                                                                from the first publication of this order the cancellation
                                                                                                will be proceeded with as In the case of default. This
                                                                                                notice will be published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE for three
                            September 18, 1945                                                  consecutive weeks.
Trade-Marks . ______                                                                                                              LESLIE FRAZER,
                               134-No. 416,469 to No. 416,602, inclusive.                                                  First Assistant Commissioner.
T. M. Renewals ____             87
Reissues __ __ ___ ____ _        1- No. 22,674
Patents ______ --- --- -       539- No. 2,384,785 to No. 2,385,323, in clusive.
                                                                                                                       Disclaimer
        Total_________         761
                                                                                                2,259,527. -Keith R. Manville, Highland P a rk, N. J . SYN-
                                                                                                     ciIRONizING MECHANISM . Patent dated Oct. 21, 1941.
                                                                                                     Disclaimer filed Aug. 24, 1945, by the Inventor; the
                                        Notice                                                      assig nee, Mack Manufacturing Corporation, approving
                                                                                                     a nd consenting.
  Under the provisions of Public Law 239, 77th Congress,
Approved Aug. 21, 1941 (55 Stat. 657; 35 U. S. C. 42a),                                           Hereby enters this disrla imer to claim 3 of said patent.
the optional procedure a uthorized in regulation 16 will
apply to a ll foreign countries excluding Japan, Germany,
Bulgaria, Italy, Austria, Roumania, and Hungary.
                              CONDER C. HENRY,                                                                    Notice of Opposition
                                 Assistant Commissioner of Patents.
                                                                                                       u. s. PATENT OFFICE, Richmond, Va.,    Sept. 4, 1945.
                                                                                                James A. S. Furlonge, his assigns or legal r epresentatives,
                                                                                                  take notice:
                                                                                                   An opposition proceeding has been instituted by this
                       General Rescinding Order                                                 Office upon the petition of San-Nap-Pak Co., Inc., 1440
                                                                                                Broadway, New York, N. Y. , against the application for
   Subject to the exception hereinafter noted, all Orders                                       registration of a trade-ma rk to James A. S. Furlonge, 712
of Secrecy heretofore issued by the Commissioner of Patents                                     S. Olive St., Los Angeles 14, Calif. The Office has been
pursuant to the Act of October 6, 1917 ( 40 Stat. 394;                                          notified of the death of said Furlonge. An · opportunity
U. S. C., title 35, sec. 42), as amended, are hereby rescinded.                                 was afforded the legal representative of tfle deceased to
                                                                                                intervene. No response having beeu made thereto, notice
   The Commissioner of Patents may except any applica-                                          is hereby given that unless said Furlonge, his assigns or
tion from this order by written notice sent to the principa ls                                  legal representatives, shall enter an appearance therein
at their addresses of r ecord on or before the effective date                                   within thirty days from the first publication of this order,
hereof.                                   / ·                                                   the opposition will be proceeded with as in the case of
   This order shall take effect on November 30, 1945.                                           default. This notice will be published in the OFFICIU
                                   CASPER W. OOMS,                                              GAZETTE for three consecutive weeks.
                                                                  Commissioner.                                                  LESLIE FRAZER,
August 30, 1945.                                                                                                           First Assistant Commissioner.
                                                                                                                                                281




                                                                                           19
C      Additional Descriptives

This appendix section provides descriptive results which supplement those in the paper.

Figure C.1 provides a counterpart to Figure 3 in the paper, comparing the grant lags of (i) patents
formally evaluated for secrecy but not ordered secret, versus (ii) those not evaluated for secrecy. The
figure shows little difference in grant lags as a result of simply being evaluated for secrecy (note that
1939 filings are included in this figure for completeness, because many were evaluated for secrecy,
but a necessary condition was that they were still pending as of July 1940 – such that this set is
selected on longer pendency). Recall, on the other hand, that Figure 3 compared the grant lags
of secret versus non-secret patents, and showed that secret patents on average took longer to issue
than their non-secret counterparts in the same class and filing year, with the difference diminishing
over time. The results suggest that it was secrecy orders – rather than secrecy evaluations – which
were the cause of the time-varying delays in patent grant and publication.


    Figure C.1: Grant lags of non-secret applications evaluated for secrecy, vs. others, 1939-1945

                                     Applications in 1939                                                          Applications in 1941
                                               Not evaluated for secrecy                                                     Not evaluated for secrecy
                         0.15                                                                          0.15

                         0.10                                                                          0.10

                         0.05                                                                          0.05
              Fraction




                                                                                            Fraction




                         0.00                                                                          0.00
                                               Evaluated and disapproved                                                     Evaluated and disapproved
                         0.15                                                                          0.15

                         0.10                                                                          0.10

                         0.05                                                                          0.05

                         0.00                                                                          0.00
                                −5   −4   −3    −2    −1   0   1    2      3   4   5                          −5   −4   −3     −2   −1   0   1    2      3   4   5
                                      Residualized Grant Lag (years)                                                Residualized Grant Lag (years)
                                     (ex. patent class−filing year FEs)                                            (ex. patent class−filing year FEs)




                                     Applications in 1943                                                          Applications in 1945
                                               Not evaluated for secrecy                                                     Not evaluated for secrecy
                         0.15                                                                          0.15

                         0.10                                                                          0.10

                         0.05                                                                          0.05
              Fraction




                                                                                            Fraction




                         0.00                                                                          0.00
                                               Evaluated and disapproved                                                     Evaluated and disapproved
                         0.15                                                                          0.15

                         0.10                                                                          0.10

                         0.05                                                                          0.05

                         0.00                                                                          0.00
                                −5   −4   −3     −2   −1   0   1    2      3   4   5                          −5   −4   −3     −2   −1   0    1   2      3   4   5
                                      Residualized Grant Lag (years)                                                Residualized Grant Lag (years)
                                     (ex. patent class−filing year FEs)                                            (ex. patent class−filing year FEs)



             Notes: Figure shows the distribution residual grant lags of patent applications evalu-
             ated for secrecy but not issued a secrecy order versus those not evaluated for secrecy,
             after controlling for patent class-year FEs. Note that patent applications prior to July
             1940 were only evaluated for secrecy if still under examination (such that pre-1940
             differences in total pendency are in part selected).




                                                                                       20
Table C.1 provides a more detailed look at who the OSRD contractors are, providing context for
the analysis in Section 4 which splits patents into subsamples of OSRD and non-OSRD firms – i.e.,
firms which were performing R&D under contract for the war effort, versus those which were not –
to draw out differences in the effects. The table examines the set of all assignees who filed a patent
in the 1940s, and the patents filed in this period with a known assignee. Out of nearly 135,000
unique assignees, roughly 21,000 were firms. Of these, the majority (66%) filed no patents in the
1930s, and nearly 90% filed fewer than 10 patents. Many of the OSRD assignees, on the other hand,
were among the most active filers in this era. Nearly 85% were firms, and the distribution skews
towards large, R&D-intensive outfits like Bell Labs, General Electric, Westinghouse, Du Pont, and
so on. Although OSRD assignees comprise only 0.2% of assignees in the 1940s, they account for
19.1% of patents, and nearly 35% of patents filed by firms.


          Table C.1: Characteristics of OSRD and non-OSRD patent filing in the 1940s

                                        All assignees      Non-OSRD assignees       OSRD assignees
                                                Percent             Percent                 Percent
                                      Number of firms      Number   of firms       Number of firms
           Patents                     375,681              303,769                  71,912
           Assignees                   134,794              134,488                     306
           Firms                        21,117    100.0%     20,862     100.0%          255  100.0%
            with 0 patents in 1930s     13,851     65.6%     13,808      66.2%           43   16.9%
            with 1-5 patents             3,984     18.9%      3,949      18.9%           35   13.7%
            with 6-10 patents            1,043      4.9%      1,028       4.9%           15    5.9%
            with 11-20 patents             905      4.3%        891       4.3%           14    5.5%
            with 21-50 patents             783      3.7%        740       3.5%           43   16.9%
            with 51-100 patents            292      1.4%        256       1.2%           36   14.1%
            with 101-200 patents           143      0.7%        119       0.6%           24    9.4%
            with 501+ patents               85      0.4%         57       0.3%           28   11.0%
            with 201-500 patents            85      0.4%         57       0.3%           28   11.0%
            with 501+ patents               31      0.1%         14       0.1%           17    6.7%

           OSRD percent of...
           Assignees                      0.2%
           Patents                       19.1%
           Patents by firms              34.7%

          Notes: Table shows characteristics of assignees who filing in the 1940s, focusing on the number
          of all / non-OSRD / OSRD assignees, the number which were firms, and the fraction of those
          with zero, few, or many patents in the prior decade. The table illustrates that the OSRD
          contractors are disproportionately large, R&D-intensive firms.




                                                        21
D    Robustness Checks and Supplementary Results

This appendix section provides additional results which supplement those in the paper.


                  Table D.1: Effects of secrecy on probability of any forward citations
        excl. secrecy orders rescinded prior to the General Rescinding Order (August 30, 1945)
                                                                                  Triple difference
                                           All     Non-OSRD       OSRD         Baseline      OSRD
                Secrecy ordered          -0.013      -0.074*        0.034       -0.075*      0.113**
                                        (0.025)      (0.042)      (0.034)       (0.040)      (0.049)
                * filed in 1941          -0.019        0.017       -0.039        0.019        -0.073
                                        (0.028)      (0.052)      (0.039)       (0.050)      (0.063)
                * filed in 1942           0.022        0.050       -0.004         0.055       -0.069
                                        (0.027)      (0.045)      (0.037)       (0.044)      (0.055)
                * filed in 1943           0.029      0.088*        -0.026        0.085*      -0.106*
                                        (0.027)      (0.047)      (0.035)       (0.045)      (0.055)
                * filed in 1944           0.036      0.085*        -0.010        0.092*     -0.108**
                                        (0.029)      (0.050)      (0.037)       (0.048)      (0.054)
                * filed in 1945           0.042     0.135***       -0.005      0.144*** -0.171***
                                        (0.030)      (0.049)      (0.044)       (0.047)      (0.057)
                Secrecy evaluated         0.020      0.034*        -0.006      0.038**       -0.045*
                                        (0.014)      (0.018)      (0.022)       (0.017)      (0.025)
                * filed in 1941           0.009       -0.000        0.023        -0.003        0.025
                                        (0.015)      (0.020)      (0.025)       (0.019)      (0.029)
                * filed in 1942          -0.004       -0.018        0.012        -0.020        0.031
                                        (0.015)      (0.020)      (0.024)       (0.019)      (0.025)
                * filed in 1943           0.009       -0.007        0.027        -0.012        0.041
                                        (0.016)      (0.021)      (0.024)       (0.019)      (0.027)
                * filed in 1944           0.006       -0.015        0.024        -0.018        0.045
                                        (0.017)      (0.023)      (0.024)       (0.022)      (0.028)
                * filed in 1945           0.011       -0.001        0.015        -0.013        0.047
                                        (0.019)      (0.027)      (0.026)       (0.025)      (0.033)
                Constant               0.704***     0.673***     0.983***      0.702*** 0.702***
                                        (0.054)      (0.059)      (0.046)       (0.054)      (0.054)
                N                       161938       124998        36940               161938
                R2                         0.05         0.05        0.10                0.05
                Grant year FEs              X            X            X                  X
                Class-year FEs              X            X            X                  X
                Mean of DV                 0.86         0.86         0.88               0.86
                s.d. of DV                 0.34         0.35         0.32               0.34
           Notes: Table estimates a variant on Table 4 of the paper, excluding secret patents which
           were granted before the General Rescinding Order (August 30, 1945), and thus whose
           secrecy orders were rescinded early. See table notes in the body of the paper for additional
           explanation. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
           SEs clustered by patent class in parentheses.




                                                         22
        Table D.2: Effects of secrecy on probability of any forward citations
excl. patents in weapons-related classes (firearms/ammunition/ordnance/explosives)
                                                                       Triple difference
                                 All    Non-OSRD       OSRD         Baseline      OSRD
      Secrecy ordered          -0.007    -0.081**        0.040      -0.078** 0.124***
                              (0.022)     (0.035)      (0.032)       (0.033)      (0.043)
      * filed in 1941          -0.023       0.038       -0.050        0.033       -0.096*
                              (0.025)     (0.044)      (0.038)       (0.043)      (0.056)
      * filed in 1942           0.015       0.058       -0.010         0.058       -0.083
                              (0.023)     (0.041)      (0.034)       (0.040)      (0.051)
      * filed in 1943           0.022     0.106**       -0.040       0.098** -0.134***
                              (0.024)     (0.043)      (0.031)       (0.041)      (0.050)
      * filed in 1944           0.027      0.090*       -0.018       0.090**     -0.118**
                              (0.026)     (0.046)      (0.035)       (0.044)      (0.052)
      * filed in 1945           0.030    0.133***       -0.016      0.140*** -0.178***
                              (0.028)     (0.043)      (0.044)       (0.041)      (0.051)
      Secrecy evaluated         0.013       0.028       -0.012       0.031*       -0.045*
                              (0.014)     (0.018)      (0.023)       (0.017)      (0.026)
      * filed in 1941           0.019       0.012        0.028         0.007        0.024
                              (0.015)     (0.020)      (0.026)       (0.019)      (0.029)
      * filed in 1942           0.002      -0.011        0.019        -0.013        0.030
                              (0.015)     (0.020)      (0.024)       (0.019)      (0.026)
      * filed in 1943           0.016      -0.002        0.035        -0.007        0.045
                              (0.016)     (0.021)      (0.024)       (0.020)      (0.028)
      * filed in 1944           0.014      -0.008        0.032        -0.011       0.049*
                              (0.017)     (0.024)      (0.025)       (0.023)      (0.029)
      * filed in 1945           0.020       0.007        0.024        -0.006       0.050
                              (0.019)     (0.027)      (0.027)       (0.026)      (0.034)
      Constant               0.714***    0.683***     0.983***      0.711*** 0.711***
                              (0.054)     (0.059)      (0.046)       (0.054)      (0.054)
      N                       160313      123436        36877               160313
      R2                         0.05        0.05         0.10               0.05
      Grant year FEs              X           X            X                  X
      Class-year FEs              X           X            X                  X
      Mean of DV                 0.86        0.86         0.88               0.86
      s.d. of DV                 0.34        0.35         0.32               0.34
Notes: Table estimates a variant on Table 4 of the paper, excluding patents in weapons-
related classes with strictly military application (USPC 42, 86, 89, 102, and 149, covering
firearms, ammunition, ordnance, and explosives). See table notes in the body of the paper
for additional explanation. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
respectively. SEs clustered by patent class in parentheses.




                                              23
Table D.3: Effects of secrecy on probability of assorted types of forward citations
                                   All     Non-self       Self     Firms      Indivs.
          Secrecy ordered      -0.071**     -0.062*      0.004   -0.095**       0.020
                                (0.034)     (0.036)    (0.046)    (0.040)     (0.070)
          * filed in 1941         0.026       0.022     -0.014      0.063      -0.039
                                (0.043)     (0.044)    (0.049)    (0.044)     (0.069)
          * filed in 1942         0.052       0.051     -0.010    0.084*       -0.042
                                (0.040)     (0.042)    (0.048)    (0.045)     (0.073)
          * filed in 1943       0.089**     0.093**      0.034   0.102**       -0.003
                                (0.042)     (0.043)    (0.050)    (0.048)     (0.074)
          * filed in 1944        0.084*     0.076*       0.040   0.134**        0.050
                                (0.044)     (0.046)    (0.058)    (0.055)     (0.080)
          * filed in 1945      0.132***    0.125***      0.059   0.143**        0.101
                                (0.042)     (0.044)    (0.071)    (0.070)     (0.088)
          Secrecy evaluated      0.035*     0.041**    0.036*    0.057***       0.019
                                (0.018)     (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.022)     (0.025)
          * filed in 1941        -0.001      -0.005      0.005     -0.001       0.016
                                (0.020)     (0.021)    (0.023)    (0.025)     (0.032)
          * filed in 1942        -0.018      -0.023     -0.011     -0.009      -0.020
                                (0.020)     (0.021)    (0.021)    (0.024)     (0.031)
          * filed in 1943        -0.008      -0.018     -0.017      0.004      -0.027
                                (0.021)     (0.022)    (0.024)    (0.029)     (0.029)
          * filed in 1944        -0.016      -0.018     -0.028     -0.007      -0.037
                                (0.023)     (0.023)    (0.024)    (0.029)     (0.032)
          * filed in 1945        -0.002      -0.007      0.005      0.003      -0.041
                                (0.027)     (0.027)    (0.035)    (0.041)     (0.047)
          Constant             0.673***    0.665***      0.030   0.419***    0.543***
                                (0.059)     (0.060)    (0.026)    (0.069)     (0.061)
          N                     125335      125335     125335     125335      125335
          R2                       0.05        0.05       0.05      0.11         0.10
          Grant year FEs            X           X          X          X           X
          Class-year FEs            X           X          X          X           X
          Mean of DV               0.86        0.84      0.11        0.69        0.60
          s.d. of DV               0.35        0.37       0.32       0.46        0.49
        Notes: Table expands on Tables 4 and 5 in the paper, estimating effects
        on the likelihood of various types of forward citations. Column (1) repeats
        the baseline result for all citations. Columns (2) and (3) examine non-self
        and self citations, respectively. Columns (4) and (5) examine citations from
        firms and individuals. See table notes in the body of the paper for additional
        explanation. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
        respectively. SEs clustered by patent class in parentheses.




                                               24
Table D.4: Effects of secrecy on (i) probability of exceeding various thresholds
     in the number of forward citations, and (ii) forward citation counts
                                                    OLS                                 Poisson
                         ≥1          ≥2         ≥4         ≥6         ≥8        ≥10      Count
 Secrecy ordered     -0.071**     -0.071*      0.027      0.074      0.037     0.007     1.011
                      (0.034)     (0.043)    (0.060)    (0.054)    (0.047)   (0.042)    (0.149)
 * filed in 1941        0.026       0.045     -0.043     -0.084     -0.067    -0.007     0.989
                      (0.043)     (0.045)    (0.060)    (0.057)    (0.055)   (0.055)    (0.196)
 * filed in 1942        0.052       0.050     -0.030     -0.055      0.017     0.040     1.239
                      (0.040)     (0.050)    (0.064)    (0.063)    (0.057)   (0.044)    (0.203)
 * filed in 1943      0.089**     0.093*       0.040      0.033     0.049      0.076     1.253
                      (0.042)     (0.052)    (0.065)    (0.057)    (0.052)   (0.047)    (0.262)
 * filed in 1944       0.084*     0.142**      0.048      0.011     0.026      0.062    1.309**
                      (0.044)     (0.059)    (0.075)    (0.069)    (0.058)   (0.050)    (0.162)
 * filed in 1945     0.132***    0.173***      0.126      0.057     0.132      0.127   1.660***
                      (0.042)     (0.064)    (0.088)    (0.111)    (0.112)   (0.114)    (0.213)
 Secrecy evaluated     0.035*    0.062***   0.057**      0.041     0.044*      0.024   1.233***
                      (0.018)     (0.022)    (0.028)    (0.026)    (0.024)   (0.020)    (0.077)
 * filed in 1941       -0.001      -0.004     0.016      0.034       0.036   0.040*      1.071
                      (0.020)     (0.025)    (0.033)    (0.029)    (0.027)   (0.024)    (0.076)
 * filed in 1942       -0.018      -0.026     -0.012     0.015      -0.001     0.006     0.926
                      (0.020)     (0.023)    (0.032)    (0.029)    (0.028)   (0.022)    (0.054)
 * filed in 1943       -0.008      -0.027     -0.007     0.009       0.000     0.006     0.971
                      (0.021)     (0.030)    (0.033)    (0.031)    (0.028)   (0.025)    (0.063)
 * filed in 1944       -0.016      -0.010     -0.001     0.005      -0.018    -0.018     0.992
                      (0.023)     (0.029)    (0.036)    (0.033)    (0.031)   (0.024)    (0.073)
 * filed in 1945       -0.002      -0.027     -0.005     0.009      -0.008     0.011     1.047
                      (0.027)     (0.042)    (0.049)    (0.048)    (0.047)   (0.043)    (0.110)
 Constant            0.673***    0.511***   0.324*** 0.155***      0.067*     0.032
                      (0.059)     (0.065)    (0.060)    (0.049)    (0.035)   (0.025)
 N                    125335      125335     125335     125335     125335    125335    125322
 R2                      0.05        0.06       0.07       0.07      0.06       0.06
 Filing year FEs                                                                          X
 Grant year FEs          X          X           X          X          X        X          X
 Class-year FEs          X          X           X          X          X        X
 Mean of DV             0.86       0.70        0.44       0.28       0.18     0.11       4.44
 s.d. of DV             0.35       0.46        0.50       0.45       0.38     0.32       5.24
Notes: Columns (1) to (6) expand on Tables 4 and 5 in the paper, estimating effects on the
likelihood of exceeding various thresholds in forward citations, as indicated in the header of
each column. See table notes in the body of the paper for additional explanation. Column (7)
estimates effects on forward citation counts with a conditional fixed-effects Poisson model to
account for the count nature of the dependent variable, limiting the fixed effects to filing year
and grant year only (due to the limitations of the estimation method). Column (7) reports
incidence-rate ratios for ease of interpretation. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1,
0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by patent class in parentheses.




                                               25
 Table D.5: Effects of secrecy on probability of citation in a given year since filing
                     2 years    3 years    4 years     5 years   10 years   15 years   20 years   25 years
Secrecy ordered        0.004     -0.076     -0.019       0.045      0.017     -0.033      0.041      0.015
                     (0.036)    (0.054)    (0.052)     (0.056)    (0.044)    (0.033)    (0.043)    (0.028)
* filed in 1941        0.003      0.050      0.029       0.015     -0.003     0.048      -0.052     -0.021
                     (0.041)    (0.067)    (0.053)     (0.064)    (0.048)    (0.043)    (0.043)    (0.032)
* filed in 1942       -0.034      0.081      0.077      -0.005     -0.005      0.028     -0.029     -0.011
                     (0.038)    (0.057)    (0.055)     (0.062)    (0.047)    (0.041)    (0.048)    (0.032)
* filed in 1943        0.019   0.170***      0.091       0.021      0.029     0.049      -0.019     -0.002
                     (0.045)    (0.063)    (0.064)     (0.058)    (0.052)    (0.040)    (0.044)    (0.028)
* filed in 1944        0.063    0.133**      0.056       0.023      0.006     0.066      -0.027     -0.013
                     (0.054)    (0.058)    (0.067)     (0.065)    (0.056)    (0.042)    (0.046)    (0.032)
* filed in 1945        0.094   0.243***    0.170**       0.099     -0.000     0.042      -0.021      0.039
                     (0.064)    (0.079)    (0.080)     (0.108)    (0.090)    (0.059)    (0.064)    (0.042)
Secrecy evaluated    0.024**   0.080***   0.075***      0.035       0.010     0.003      -0.008     -0.018
                     (0.011)    (0.021)    (0.024)     (0.024)    (0.021)    (0.016)    (0.017)    (0.014)
* filed in 1941        0.010     -0.004     -0.001      0.017       0.028      0.019      0.024      0.024
                     (0.014)    (0.023)    (0.029)     (0.030)    (0.023)    (0.020)    (0.019)    (0.017)
* filed in 1942        0.020     -0.028     -0.025      -0.004      0.034      0.019     0.018       0.015
                     (0.016)    (0.021)    (0.028)     (0.028)    (0.023)    (0.017)    (0.019)    (0.017)
* filed in 1943        0.021    -0.049*     -0.040      -0.015      0.018     -0.005      0.022    0.027*
                     (0.019)    (0.027)    (0.028)     (0.029)    (0.022)    (0.019)    (0.020)    (0.016)
* filed in 1944        0.022   -0.065**     -0.044      -0.025      0.004      0.016     -0.000      0.012
                     (0.022)    (0.026)    (0.031)     (0.030)    (0.027)    (0.022)    (0.021)    (0.014)
* filed in 1945        0.042    -0.059*    -0.064*      -0.036     -0.029     0.040       0.009      0.020
                     (0.030)    (0.031)    (0.037)     (0.037)    (0.034)    (0.030)    (0.026)    (0.020)
Constant            0.103***   0.155***   0.191***    0.203***   0.149***   0.114***   0.082***   0.055***
                     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
N                    125335     125335     125335      125335     125335     125335     125335     125335
R2                      0.08       0.07       0.05        0.04       0.03      0.03       0.03        0.03
Class-year FEs           X          X          X           X          X          X          X          X
Mean of DV              0.09       0.14      0.18        0.19        0.16      0.12        0.09       0.06
s.d. of DV              0.28       0.34       0.38        0.40       0.36       0.32       0.28       0.23
Notes: Columns (1) to (7) estimate effects on the likelihood of receiving any forward citations from
future patents filed in a given number of years (in this table: 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25) since the
focal patent’s filing. All columns control for post-February 1947 examination lags (i.e., time elapsed
between February 1947, when the citation record begins, and grant), to account for the fact that
patents are not citeable until issued, and these delays can mechanically reduce citations within fixed
windows since filing. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.
SEs clustered by patent class in parentheses.




                                                     26
Table D.6: Annual use of new word stems from secret vs. non-secret patent titles in the Google
                Books corpus, difference-in-differences, w/ multiple periods
                                            Percent of words   (x1e6)           Percent of works   (x1e3)
                                           75th       90th         95th       75th       90th           95th
        Secrecy ordered x 1940-1945       0.102      0.073         0.111     1.155       0.961         0.521
                                         (0.092)    (0.079)      (0.092)    (0.800)    (0.753)        (1.426)
        Secrecy ordered x post-1945      0.518*     0.455**      0.536**   6.337**     7.267**       6.786**
                                         (0.271)    (0.229)      (0.230)    (3.098)    (2.865)        (2.977)
        Secrecy evaluated x 1940-1945     0.016      -0.011        0.016     0.132      -0.361         1.147
                                         (0.020)    (0.023)      (0.029)    (0.257)    (0.331)        (0.789)
        Secrecy evaluated x post-1945     0.003      -0.014       -0.002     0.124      -0.301         0.589
                                         (0.022)    (0.027)      (0.032)    (0.349)    (0.444)        (0.863)
        1940-1945                       0.030*** 0.070***       0.079***   0.752*** 1.468***         1.322***
                                         (0.006)    (0.012)      (0.012)    (0.127)    (0.235)        (0.254)
        Post-1945                       0.054*** 0.099***       0.115***   1.295*** 2.250***         2.583***
                                         (0.010)    (0.013)      (0.015)    (0.185)    (0.274)        (0.316)
        Constant                         0.020*    0.129***     0.328***   0.721*** 3.955***        11.511***
                                         (0.011)    (0.011)      (0.012)    (0.143)    (0.182)        (0.212)
        N                                 16989      20433        21567      16989      20433          21567
        R2                                 0.53       0.69          0.88      0.63        0.87          0.98
        Stem FEs                            X          X             X         X           X             X
        Mean of DV                         0.07       0.21          0.42      1.79        5.63         13.46
        s.d. of DV                         0.44       0.61          1.18      5.76       13.27         38.78
        Notes: Table expands on Table 8 of the paper by separating the pre-1940, 1940-1945, and
        post-1945 periods in estimating difference-in-differences effects for Google Books corpus stem
        frequency. See table notes in the body of the paper. *, **, *** represent significance at the
        0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by stem in parentheses.




                                                      27
Figure D.1: Usage of select stems from secret patents in Google Books corpus, 1935-1955

                                         Panel (A): Radar                                                                              Panel (B): Penicillin
                               25                                                                                              25
                                                 < First appearance in patent title                                                             < First appearance in patent title
  Number of uses (thousands)




                                                                                                  Number of uses (thousands)
                               20                                                                                              20


                               15                                                                                              15


                               10                                                                                              10


                               5                                                                                               5


                               0                                                                                               0
                                1935     1940        1945            1950             1955                                      1935     1940        1945            1950            1955
                                                     Year                                                                                            Year



                                        Panel (C): Antibiot                                                                             Panel (D): Fission
                               25                                                                                              25
                                                      < First appearance in patent title                                                            < First appearance in patent title
  Number of uses (thousands)




                                                                                                  Number of uses (thousands)
                               20                                                                                              20


                               15                                                                                              15


                               10                                                                                              10


                               5                                                                                               5


                               0                                                                                               0
                                1935     1940        1945            1950             1955                                      1935     1940        1945            1950            1955
                                                     Year                                                                                            Year


                                    Notes: Figure plots annual uses of the given word stems in the Google Books corpus
                                    from 1935 to 1955. All are examples of words which first appeared in the title of a
                                    patent which was ordered secret. The dashed vertical line marks the filing date of
                                    the first patent with the given stem in its title.




                                                                                             28
E    The Aggregate View

Given the scale of the secrecy order program in key fields of invention, it could have plausibly had
systemic consequences for innovation in affected technology areas. For example, by curtailing the
spread of information about new invention, secrecy orders may have increased barriers to entry in
the affected fields or slowed technological progress, and by delaying the granting of property rights
over new inventions and evidently hindering commercialization, the program may have distorted
incentives for R&D or patenting in sensitive subject matter.

In the results below, I examine aggregate patenting over time at the patent class level, comparing
classes which were more versus less affected by secrecy orders in the 1940s, where class-level treat-
ment is defined as the fraction of patents filed between July 1940 and June 1945 which were issued
a secrecy order (which I term the class-level “secrecy rate”). Because this measure is skewed (with
a few classes heavily affected by secrecy orders, and many only modestly or not at all affected), and
sensitive to small numbers, I bin classes into treatment quartiles. The baseline specification for these
tests takes the following form, where i indexes patent classes and t indexes years, run on a sample
of all patent classes between 1930 and 1960, and controlling for quartiles of the analogously-defined
class-level evaluation rate, similar to previous specifications:

                            4
                            X 1960
                              X
                                           1
         Ln(P atents)it =                [βqt · 1(Class i in secrecy rate quartile q)
                            q=1 t=1931
                                 2
                              + βqt · 1(Class i in evaluation rate quartile q)] + αi + δt + εit


This regression compares patent classes in different quartiles of the class-level secrecy rate, with the
omitted category being the set of classes in which no patents in the 1940 to 1945 period received
                                                                                    1 should
a secrecy order (38.4% of 429 classes), and the omitted year being 1930, such that βqt
be interpreted as the mean difference in the given year between classes in secrecy rate quartile q
versus classes without any secrecy orders, relative to the difference in 1930, controlling for secrecy
evaluation rates. Standard errors are clustered at the patent class level.
                                                                   1 parameters). Even after controlling
Figure E.1 plots the effects for the top quartile of classes (the β4t
for selection into evaluation, the most-affected classes were growing quickly before, during, and after
the war – although there is a noticeable level decline in 1946-1948, just after the war (and secrecy
program) concluded, after which growth resumes on its previous trend. Although this drop-off could
potentially be related to secrecy, a causal interpretation is difficult given the myriad adjustments
taking place in the immediate aftermath of the war, and it may simply reflect the demobilization
of the American research effort in World War II.




                                                     29
Figure E.1: Changes over time in log patenting in patent classes in the top quartile of secrecy
        order issuance rate from 1940-1945, relative to classes without secrecy orders

                                     1.5


                                      1




                       Ln(patents)
                                      .5


                                      0



                                       1930   1940             1950             1960
                                                      Year
                 Notes: Figure shows the estimated mean difference in log patents for
                 classes in the highest quartile of class-level wartime secrecy rates (de-
                 fined as the fraction of patents filed in a given class between 1940 and
                 1945 which were issued a secrecy order), relative to classes without any
                 secrecy orders, by year. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals,
                 computed from SEs clustered at the patent class level.




                                                     30
Appendix references
Cockburn, Iain M., Samual Kortum, and Scott Stern. 2002. Are All Patent Examiners Equal? The Impact
  of Characteristics on Patent Statistics and Litigation Outcomes. NBER Working Paper No. 8980.

Kuhn, Jeffrey M. and Neil C. Thompson. Forthcoming. “How to Measure and Draw Causal Inferences with
  Patent Scope,” International Journal of Business Economics.

Younge, Kenneth A. and Jeffrey M. Kuhn. 2016. Patent-to-Patent Similarity: A Vector Space Model. SSRN
  working paper, available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2709238.




                                                 31
