NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FULLY CLOSED: INDIVIDUAL RESPONSES TO REALIZED GAINS AND LOSSES
Steffen Meyer
Michaela Pagel
Working Paper 25542
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25542

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

We thank Paul Tetlock, Jonathan Parker, Miguel Anton, Alessandro Previtero, Benjamin Loos,
Stefan Ruenzli, Martin Weber, Justine Hastings, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Florian Peters, Marina
Gertsberg, Kent Daniel, Gur Huberman, Francesco D'Acunto, and Johannes Wohlfart for
valuable comments as well as seminar and conference participants at UCLA Anderson,
University of Chicago Booth, Berkeley Haas, Harvard economics, Columbia, IESE, ECBE in
Bergen Norway, University of Mannheim, NBER Household Finance Summer Institute, SITE
Workshop Psychology and Economics, SFS Cavalcade, Boulder Summer Conference on
Consumer Financial Decision Making, AFA, University of Ulm, Tsinghua Business School,
CKGSB, and Frankfurt School of Finance. This research would not have been possible without
the collaboration of a German bank. We gratefully acknowledge provision of data from this bank.
We thank this bank and all its employees who helped us. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Steffen Meyer and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Fully Closed: Individual Responses to Realized Gains and Losses
Steffen Meyer and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 25542
February 2019
JEL No. D14,D90,G41
ABSTRACT
We use transaction-level data of portfolio trades and holdings linked to checking, savings, and
settlement account transactions and balances to explore how individuals respond to realized
capital gains and losses. We exploit plausibly exogenous sales due to mutual fund liquidations for
identification. Specifically, we estimate the marginal propensity to reinvest out of one dollar
received from a forced liquidation, when the investor either achieved a gain or a loss relative to
his or her initial investment. Theoretically, if individuals held optimized portfolios, the marginal
propensity to reinvest out of forced sales should be 100%. Individuals should just reinvest all of
their liquidity immediately into a fund with similar characteristics. Empirically, individuals
reinvest 83% on average if the forced sale resulted in a gain, but only 40% in the event of a loss.
If individuals do not reinvest, they keep a share of their newly found liquidity in cash, save it, or
consume it. Such differential treatment of gains and losses is inconsistent with active rebalancing
or tax considerations, but consistent with mental accounting and the idea that individuals treat
realized losses differently than paper losses. We thus provide evidence for realization utility and
effects (Barberis and Xiong, 2012; Imas, 2016) and that individuals do not appear to learn
rationally from experiences in the stock market (Malmendier and Nagel, 2011; Koudijs and Voth,
2016).

Steffen Meyer
University of Southern Denmark
Campusvej 55
5230 Odense M
Denmark
stme@sam.sdu.dk
Michaela Pagel
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mpagel@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

Standard economic theory predicts that uctuations in stock prices should aect households' savings
and consumption decisions; after all, stock and mutual fund holdings represent a signicant portion
of household nancial wealth  comparable to the stock of housing wealth.

At the same time,

stocks and mutual funds are very liquid, much more so than housing wealth, and can be easily
monetized any time when individuals adjust consumption or other liquidity needs arise. Therefore,
standard economic theory predicts that individuals should respond to changes in the value of their
stockholdings independent of whether those holdings are liquidated, if transaction costs and tax
considerations are negligible.
But there are also economic theories such as Barberis et al. (2001), Barberis and Xiong (2012),
and Pagel (2018) that postulate how uctuations in stock prices may elicit direct utility ows and
be a source of emotional stress making investors reluctant to liquidate for consumption, rebalance
optimally, or even invest in the rst place. Moreover, there are a number of experimental studies
such as Imas (2016), Thaler and Johnson (1990), and Kuhnen (2015) that analyze how subjects
change their preferences in response to gains and losses as well as studies using using observational
data and other personal experiences (Malmendier and Nagel, 2011; Koudijs and Voth, 2016; Kaustia and Knüpfer, 2008; Coval and Shumway, 2005). Nevertheless, clean empirical evidence using
observational data about how individuals respond to realized and large capital gains and losses and
how those experiences shape their preferences to invest into stocks and mutual funds is scarce.
Clearly, estimating the marginal propensity to reinvest or consume out of stock price changes
or liquidations is dicult.

Aggregate uctuations in stock prices are endogenous with respect

to other macroeconomic conditions, such as income growth and consumer condence. Therefore,
the relationship between aggregate investment, consumption, and stock price uctuations will be
overestimated due to common shocks. Common shocks are arguably less problematic when utilizing
individual-level data and abnormal returns as in Baker et al. (2006) and Maggio et al. (2017). This
way, one could sensibly estimate the marginal propensity to invest or consume out of unrealized
capital gains or irregular dividends. However, if one were to look at realized capital gains, there

2

are obvious endogeneity problems. When individuals decide to liquidate stockholdings, they do so
endogenously because they decide to rebalance or consume.
To investigate the eect of capital gains and losses on individual investor reinvestment, savings,
and consumption, we use a unique panel dataset on the daily trading of 113,031 retail investors in
Germany spanning more than 10 years. We precisely measure each individual's daily activity by his
or her log on and trading behavior as well as his or her balances and transactions in checking, savings,
and settlement accounts. To estimate the causal eect of realized capital gains and losses, we utilize
mutual fund liquidations. Mutual fund liquidations are arguably independent of individual retail
investor characteristics and thus constitute an exogenous source of forced sales.

For the period

from 2006 to 2016, we obtain and use the International Securities Identication Number (ISIN)
and dates of 3,306 mutual fund closures. Not all of our individuals are aected by all of the fund
closures; therefore, our sample of forced sale events equals 2,228 cases.
We nd that individuals reinvest  on average  approximately 70% of their funds within a
few days and up to a month after a forced sale event.

Furthermore, the reinvestment share is

approximately 83% for gains but only 40% for losses. These ndings are not consistent with the
idea that individuals hold optimized portfolios, actively rebalance, or optimize their taxes.

If

individuals held optimized portfolios at the time of the fund closure, they would reinvest 100% of
their newly found liquidity in a fund with similar characteristics. If individuals held suboptimal
portfolios because of transaction costs or tax considerations, they might use the forced sale event
as an opportunity to rebalance and not reinvest 100% of their funds. However, in that case, they
should always reinvest a loss at a higher rate than a gain. After all, losses should not be aected
by tax considerations and, moreover, losses should not cause a rebalancing away from the initial
amount of the closing fund's holdings or stock holdings in general.
Our main ndings can be easily observed in the raw data. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the
share of funds individuals reinvest within 30 days after the forced sale event separately in response to
a gain or a loss relative to their initial investment. The graphs clearly indicate that some individuals
do not reinvest any funds and that individuals are much less likely to reinvest in response to a loss.
Furthermore, Figure 2 shows the share of funds individuals reinvest within 30 days after the forced

3

sale event relative to the simple arithmetic return of their individual fund investment. This gure
also indicates that individuals are much less likely to reinvest when the investment resulted in a
loss. Instead of showing all observations, Figure 3 shows averages in bins of the arithmetic returns
and standard deviation bars. One can clearly observe a statistically signicant discontinuity at and
below the fund return rate of 0%, i.e., the fund being a losing versus a winning investment.
We estimate the eects of forced liquidations on reinvestment using a simple cross-sectional
approach. The cross-sectional approach treats the mutual fund liquidations as exogenous shocks
and estimates the average response to it.

We can complement the identication approach with

controls for time and each liquidation, i.e., month-by-year and fund (ISIN) xed eects and nd that
our results are robust to dierent econometric specications and controls. To further understand
whether the experience of being forced out of an investment at a gain versus a loss aects individuals'
preferences, i.e., risk aversion, or beliefs about their ability to invest in stocks, is dicult.

We

nd evidence for both channels by showing that risk-taking at the internal margin is aected, i.e.,
individuals invest less into securities with a high risk rating (as determined by German regulations),
but also showing that individuals are less likely to reinvest into funds as an asset class and more
likely to stay disinvested in the stock market as a whole. Arguably it is not the retail investors'
faults that a given fund closes at a loss. We thus conclude that individuals do not appear to learn
rationally from the experience of forced losses in the stock market.
It has to be kept in mind that we estimate a treatment eect on a randomly selected sample of
German clients of an online bank who hold a portfolio, trade at least once per year, and happen to
be invested in a mutual fund that closes out on them. We carefully address three potential concerns
about this eect. (1) The announcement of the fund closure may aect individual decisions to sell
prior to the fund closure.

While we outline several reasons to think that most individuals miss

the closure announcement, we address this concern by controlling for the individual holding period
fund returns to account for the factor that may aect their decision to sell. We also instrument
the amount of the liquidation and whether it is a loss by the amount invested at time of the
announcement and whether the investment was trading as a loss at announcement. (2) The decision
to reinvest may be aected by omitted variables that also aect the return of the fund investment

4

or overall portfolio, e.g., economic sentiment. We address this concern by including month-by-year
xed eects as well as the market or individual portfolio returns over the fund investment or 3
and 12 months prior to the closing of the fund. (3) Individuals that choose to hold on to a losing
investment may be dierent from individuals choosing to hold a winning investment.

While we

do not think that individuals have the skill to predict whether a fund will lose or win, we may
estimate dierent eects for individuals holding a losing versus a winning fund. However,  all of
our individuals  hold both losing and winning funds. Therefore, if the liquidation is exogenous to
them, the gain or loss is exogenous too. Furthermore, we show that, on observables, the losing group
does not dier from the winning group. Additionally, we can control for a dummy of holding a losing
fund to account for all time-invariant (un)observable characteristics of holding a winner versus a
loser. Finally, we can also run a regression discontinuity design which compares individuals near
the threshold of a fund return rate of 0%, i.e., the fund being a losing versus a winning investment.
We argue that we provide empirical evidence for the theoretical framework developed in Barberis
and Xiong (2012) where the authors explain the disposition eect through a utility function in which
individuals narrowly frame utility over individual stock's sales or realizations. Because individuals
dislike realizing losses more so than they like realizing gains, the utility specication explains the
disposition eect. Our empirical nding of a reverse disposition eect (Chang et al., 2016) after
forced realizations provides evidence for the modeling assumptions put forward in Barberis and
Xiong (2012) in the sense that our ndings indicate that realizations matter in causing utility ows.
Furthermore, that our investors are subject to the disposition eect (Odean, 1998), and thus treat
unrealized capital gains and losses very dierently, has been documented by Koestner et al. (2017).
By showing that an individual's propensity to reinvest appears to be aected by losses, we
also provide new empirical evidence from observational data relating to a large but mostly experimental literature on how prior losses aect subsequent risk-taking.

The literature has analyzed

risk-taking in response to losses in a variety of settings, including choices over lotteries in laboratory
experiments (Thaler and Johnson, 1990), trading decisions of experienced market-makers (Coval
and Shumway, 2005), and IPO investors (Kaustia and Knüpfer, 2008; Anagol et al., 2015). This
research has produced contradictory results: some studies nd that individuals become more risk-

5

seeking following losses (Andrade and Iyer, 2009; Langer and Weber, 2008; Coval and Shumway,
2005), while other studies nd that they become more risk-averse (Shiv et al., 2005; Liu et al.,
2010). Imas (2016) reconciles this evidence by arguing that individuals become more risk averse
only after realized losses but not after paper losses (the realization eect). Our results are unique
in providing clean evidence from consequential investment decisions in the eld, and can thus be
seen as additional empirical support for the realization eect.
Our ndings are related to the literature on experiential learning and how personal experiences
aect beliefs and preferences, such as Malmendier and Nagel (2011), Anagol et al. (2015), and
Andersen and Nielsen (2011). The way individuals react to gains versus losses suggests that they are
learning about their own ability from a bad experience, such as being forced out of an investment at
a loss. Furthermore, they appear to become more risk averse in response as documented in Koudijs
and Voth (2016). Related to our ndings, Choi et al. (2009) show that individuals save less in their
401(k)s after their portfolio returns were relatively bad or had high variance and Strahilevitz et al.
(2011) show that brokerage investors tend to repurchase individual stocks they previously sold for
a gain while shunning individual stocks they previously sold for a loss.
Gaining an understanding of individual learning and preferences for investing in stocks and
funds is important for long-standing puzzles in household nance such as the stock market-nonparticipation puzzle. In the context of stock market participation, we thus provide empirical evidence using observational data for the mechanism in Kuhnen (2015) that individuals learn less
rationally from losses in stock market investments because they form more pessimistic beliefs. Our
ndings are also consistent with the empirical observation in Frydman et al. (2015) that individuals
do not display disposition eects because they may not close mental accounts when they reinvest
again quickly. After all, for our mutual fund liquidations, no equivalent reinvestment exists. Furthermore, two recent papers, Briggs et al. (2015) and Andersen and Nielsen (2011), estimate the
marginal propensity to invest in stocks using administrative data and large wealth shocks but focus
on rst-time participants. In contrast to these two papers, we focus on stock-market participants'
marginal propensities to reinvest out of forced liquidations and look at potential stock market exit
in response to losses.

6

Finally, by showing that individuals do not rebalance in due course after forced sales, we conclude
that they do not appear to hold optimized portfolios following Kaustia and Rantapuska (2012), who
show that individuals do not reinvest cash ows brought about by irregular dividends and tender
oer proceeds, and providing evidence for investor inattention and inertia following Bilias et al.
(2010), Alvarez et al. (2012), Bonaparte and Cooper (2011), Calvet et al. (2009a,b), Karlsson et al.
(2009), Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008), Agnew et al. (2003), Dahlquist and Martinez (2013), and
Mitchell et al. (2006).

As shown by Chien et al. (2012), Reis (2006), and Gabaix and Laibson

(2002), such inattention matters in the aggregate.

2

Data and Summary Statistics

Our data set stems from one of the largest online banks in Germany.

The data contains daily

information on logins (from 2012 onwards), trades, and portfolio holdings of approximately 112,072
customers as well as all balances and transactions of each investor's accounts at the online bank
from 2003 to 2016. We keep only private investors that reside in Germany. Moreover, in online
banks, silent attribution is a common phenomenon, as usually there is no charge for having an
account. Therefore, in order to not analyze accounts of investors who stopped trading, we require
that individuals execute at least 1 trade per year. In turn, we have data on a random 7% sample
of the bank's customer base.

Beyond all self-directed trades and holdings, we obtain data on

customer demographics such as gender, age, and occupation as well as detailed information on
traded securities such as asset class, risk class, issuer, and issue date of a security from Lipper in
Datastream. An advantage of our data set is that we can exclude quasi-automatic trades, such as
savings plan transactions. Additionally, trading decisions in our sample are not moderated by any
inuence from third parties, such as nancial advisers.
Our sample is not representative of the German population as a whole; less than half of Germans
invest in stocks, either directly or indirectly. However, our sample is representative of self-directed
retail investors in Germany and more generally of individuals in Germany holding an investment
portfolio at a major bank. The average age of investors is 54 and the median age is 53. 14% of our

7

sample is female and 86% is male. Brokerage clients are generally expected (Cole et al., 2014) and
found to be more sophisticated than the overall population (Dorn and Huberman, 2005). The same
is true for our sample: 9% of our investors hold a doctoral degree, which is higher than average in
the German population (1.1%, German Federal Bureau of Statistics, 2008).

¿, on average.

Investors own portfolios that are worth 72,181

These descriptive statistics are

comparable to those reported by household nance studies using US data (Barber and Odean,
2000).

In addition, we compare average portfolio values to ocial statistics in Germany.

The

Deutsche Bundesbank (2013) reports the average portfolio value of a German stock market investor

¿.

to be around 48,000

This value seems comparable to the average we observe in our sample

¿.

when we restrict our data to the years up until 2013. The average portfolio value is then 55,854

Additionally, we compare portfolio holdings to self-reported gross annual household income for
those investors who self-reported income data. Since income is reported in several ranges, we use
the midpoint of each range as a proxy for investor income. The mean ratio of the average portfolio
value (over the entire sample period) to annual income is 1.3. For comparison, the ratio of total
nancial assets to gross household income in the German population is about 1.1 (German Federal
Bureau of Statistics, 2008; Bundesbank, 2013).
We observe 3,606 fund closures roughly evenly distributed between 2006 and 2016 as can be
seen in Figure 4. The information on fund closures was obtained from the Bundesverband Investment und Asset Management e.

V. (BVI). The BVI is the point of contact for politicians and

supervisory authorities on all issues related to the German Capital Investment Code (Kapitalanlagegesetzbuch, KAGB), and it represents the interests of the German fund industry at the national
and international level.

[Insert Figure 4 about here]

Table 1 shows detailed summary statistics for our forced sale events including the holding periods
before closure, the purchase and sale share prices, and the average value and return of the forced
sales.

[Insert Table 1 about here]

8

The SPIVA US Scorecard 2017 documents that over a 15-year period, 58% (48%) of equity
(xed income) funds were merged or liquidated and states that the main reason is continued poor
performance. Brown and Goetzmann (1995), the forerunners of mutual fund termination studies,
found that US mutual fund disappearance is a function of lagged relative returns, relative fund size,
fund expenses, and fund age. Bu and Lacey (2009) argue that the importance of returns depends
on the age and style of the fund and also show that expenses, turnover, the S&P 500, and the
short-term interest rate matter for mutual fund closures.

Evans (2006) shows that total returns

are more important than risk-adjusted returns in explaining mutual fund termination. When we
perform a kitchen-sink regression in a linear probability model of mutual fund closures, we nd that
returns and size decrease the probability to close a fund but overall fund closures are not explained
well by observables. After all, mutual funds are fairly diversied and thus mostly determined by
market conditions and there is no clear evidence for manager skill (refer to Carhart, 1997, among
many other studies).

In any case, for identication, it matters whether investors can choose to

invest in to-be-closed funds endogenously. We feel that is unrealistic and thus consider liquidations
as plausibly exogenous.
Tables 2 and 3 show detailed summary statistics for all funds that did not close or closed
respectively including returns.

It can be seen that the closed funds did not necessarily perform

much worse than the remaining universe of funds. In fact, in the raw return numbers, there does
not appear to be a clear pattern in terms of the decision to keep a fund open and none of the
statistics are signicantly dierent except fund size.

To make the comparison as appropriate as

possible, we compare the return and size statistics to a matched sample of funds by asset class and
regional focus. Overall, the size of the fund appears a more important factor for the sample of our
closed funds than their performance. We conrm this nding in a kitchen-sink linear probability
regression of a dummy for fund closure on all our observed fund characteristics.

[Insert Tables 2 and 3 about here]

Of those 3,606 fund closures, we observe 2,228 forced sales, i.e., individuals aected by the
mutual fund closures. Most forced sales happen in 2007 but we also observe many in 2008, 2013,

9

and 2015, as can be seen in Figure 5.

[Insert Figure 5 about here]

Table 4 shows detailed summary statistics for our universe of investors relative to those aected
by the fund closures, i.e., holding funds that were closed, and relative to those aected by the
fund closures and ultimately forced to sell.

It can be seen that the three samples of investors

look very similar in terms of demographics and income as well as trading behavior and portfolio

1

characteristics.

[Insert Table 4 about here]

Furthermore, Table 5 shows detailed summary statistics for our investors that were forced to
sell a fund at a gain at or a loss.

It can be seen that the two samples of investors look similar.

Individuals appear to be less active traders if they are forced out of a fund at a loss because their
average holding period is longer and they have less of a disposition to sell both winners and losers.
However, it is important to note that all individuals hold  both  winning and losing funds. To
make that clear the table shows the sum of all paper and realized gains as well as losses at the time
of sale (when individuals pay attention to their portfolios), and those are large for both groups of
investors. The same holds true for the average number of paper and realized gains and losses in
individuals' portfolios at the time of their sales.

[Insert Table 5 about here]

Figure 6 shows the average amounts of all fund liquidations per year. We can see that the average

¿ to 10,000¿.

amounts are quite substantial ranging from 6,000

Clearly, the fund liquidation do

not represent a wealth shock, but they are quite substantial liquidation shocks.

[Insert Figure 6 about here]

¿ with a median of 4,027¿. We have 6 observations with
liquidation amounts of more than 100,000¿, where the 99th percentile is at 60,000¿. We drop these
The average reimbursement is at 7,452

1 Note

that, for the average number of securities held by investors, we assume that all funds hold 100 securities.

10

6 outliers to mitigate outlier issues. That said, all our results hold for the full sample of observed
liquidations.
Furthermore, Figure 7 shows all sales in the period before the fund closures. We do not nd
heightened sales activity at the announcement dates of the fund closures or a run-up before the
fund closures. Funds that are domiciled in Luxembourg, which is 58% of our closed fund sample,
have to announce their closure at least 1 month in advance in their semi-annual report. German
funds, comprising 34% of our closed fund sample, have to announce the closure at least 6 months
in advance in their semi-annual annual report. Note that we see the funds arrive in the individual
settlement accounts and when the sales booking date is on or after the closure date, we consider
the sale a forced sale. Otherwise we consider it a voluntary or deliberate sale. Depending on the
time and day of week of the fund closure as well as the speed of the clearinghouse, the funds arrive
on the closure day or up to a few days later in individual settlement accounts.

[Insert Figure 7 about here]

In contrast to the announcement of the fund closure, the actual fund closure is unlikely to be
missed by individuals because they receive a sales receipt by email and mail that they are supposed
to notice as the sales receipt is relevant for tax purposes. Figure 8 displays a scan of a sales receipt.
One can see that the purchase price (Ausführungswert), the sales price (Kurswert), and the absolute
capital gain or loss in this case (Veräuÿerungsverlust) are clearly indicated. It is thus fairly salient
to the individuals if they lost money and how much.

[Insert Figure 8 about here]

11

3

Methodology

Specications
We consider two approaches, one conditional cross-sectional regression and one unconditional
panel regression. The conditional cross-sectional regression is specied as follows:

i
i
∆Yj,t,t+τ
= α + βFj,t
+ ψJj + γmy t + ij,t

where

i
∆Yj,t,t+τ

forced sale event

is the sum of the outcome variable of interest for investor

j

on day

sale aecting investor
liquidation event
bandwidths

τ:

(1)

j,

i

and

t

to

t + τ, α

is an intercept,

who invested in fund

myt

j

at time

i

at the time of the

i
Fj,t

is the currency amount of the forced

t, Jj

are fund (ISIN) xed eects for each

are time controls, i.e., month-by-year xed eects. We consider two

5 or 30 days since the day that the money arrives in individual's accounts. Because

the forced sale is exogenous to individual investors, other control variables are not necessary but
may increase precision.
The unconditional panel regression is specied as follows:

i
i
i
∆Yj,t,t+τ
= α + βFj,t
+ ηSj,t
+ ψJj + γmy t + ij,t

where

i
Fj,t

i
∆Yj,t,t+τ
, α, Jj ,

and

myt

are specied as above for any fund

is the currency amount of the forced sale of fund

currency amount of any other sale of fund

j

j

by investor

j

and time

aecting investor

i at time t.

(2)

i

at time

t.
t

Furthermore,
and

i
Sj,t

is the

In this specication, we consider

all individuals who at some point held the aected funds and all of their liquidations rather than
only the forced ones.
We adjust standard errors for heteroskedasticity. Alternatively, we can cluster standard errors at
the month-by-year or ISIN level. However, we do not think that standard errors are uncorrelated
across time or ISINs and thus consider robust standard errors more appropriate.

12

Outcome variables
When investors make a trade or a position gets liquidated, then there occurs a transfer to the settlement account (Verrechnungskonto). The settlement account is an account dedicated for making
trades and automatically opened when individuals open a portfolio. It pays some interest and is
federally insured. We thus consider the following primary outcome variable: (1) net transfers to
the portfolio through purchases or sales of securities, i.e., reinvestment; (2) the risk class of each
bought security as the outcome variable or the reinvested funds times their risk class; (3) a dummy
for the rst reinvestment going into a mutual fund as opposed to other security classes, a dummy
for not reinvesting at all within 30 days, or a dummy for being invested into equity at all 6 months
after the forced sale event; 4) the currency amount that the settlement balance is increased after
30 days, i.e., the money staying in the settlement account; (5) net transfers to the savings account
at the bank, i.e., savings; (6) the increases or decreases in the currency amount of all accounts, i.e.,
all net inows or outows out of the bank. All the variables are transfers or balance increases or
decreases and thus ow variables.

4

Results

4.1 Main results
Table 6 shows the estimation results for the conditional cross-sectional regression design, i.e., Equation 1.

Here, we simply regress the share of liquidity that is reinvested in the 30 days after the

forced sale event on the individual liquidation amount for just the 2,222 cases where individuals
get back their investments (excluding the 6 outliers). The coecient simply represents the average
share of funds that individuals reinvest out of the forced sales. In the rst column of Table 6, we
only include a regression constant, whereas in columns 2 and 3, we also include month-by-year and
fund or ISIN xed eects.

In turn, while we display robust standard errors in columns 1 to 3,

column 4 displays standard errors that are clustered at the month-by-year level.

[Insert Table 6 about here]

13

We nd that, on average, individuals reinvest 70% of their newly found liquidity within 30
days and this result is robust to the inclusion of controls or clustering standard errors instead of
correcting for heteroskedasticity. Note that, the column showing the results for clustered standard
errors displays fewer observations as all singleton observations, that would have single clusters, are
dropped.
Furthermore, Table 6 shows the same regression specication results for the share of liquidity
reinvested but including an interaction with a dummy of whether individuals realized a loss relative
to their initial investment at the point of the forced sale. Again, we show our results for dierent
sets of controls and calculations of standard errors. It can be seen that individuals are much more
likely to reinvest a gain than a loss. Strikingly, in the baseline specication, the reinvestment share
is approximately 83% for gains but only 40% for losses and this result is robust across specications.
We now turn to the unconditional panel regression to compare all individuals who invested
in the aected funds and sold deliberately or were forced to sell in one specication.

The panel

estimation results paint a picture similar to the simple cross-sectional results. Individuals reinvest
approximately 70% on average after 30 days, and they reinvest less if they sell voluntarily before
or after the announcement of the forced sale event. This makes sense because individuals liquidate
voluntarily when they decide to rebalance or consume part of their funds. We again report results
including dierent sets of controls and calculated standard errors which can be found in Table 7.

[Insert Table 7 about here]

Moreover, if individuals are forced to liquidate at a loss, they reinvest only half of their newly
found liquidity relative to their reinvestment if they are forced to liquidate at a gain. If they liquidate
deliberately after the announcement, our results are driven by very few observations because we do
not have many individuals liquidating during the announcement period, which is only one month
for Luxembourg funds that comprise the majority of our sample.

When we look at deliberate

liquidations before the announcement, our results in some specications show that individuals also
reinvest less in response to a loss. Of course, however, their baseline reinvestment is much smaller.
The results with loss interactions can also be found in Table 7.

14

We thus nd less reinvestment and therefore less risk taking at the external margin in response
to forced sales at a loss. We can also look at the internal margin of risk taking and ask whether
individuals not only reinvest less into stocks or bonds, but also whether they reinvest in a lower
or higher risk class. For almost all securities in our sample, we observe the ocially established
risk classication going from 1 (for instance, savings accounts) to 5 (for instance, stocks, options,
and futures). We simply run the same specication but use the rst reinvestment value times the
risk class as the outcome variable and the liquidation value times the risk class (most funds have
risk classes of 3 or 4) as the regressor. Results can be found in Table 8 and line up nicely and are
internally consistent as well as in accordance with our previous results. Individuals take less risks,
on the internal and external margins, after losses. Furthermore, we run a linear probability model
to estimate the likelihood that individuals reinvest into funds as an asset class or the likelihood that
individuals do not reinvest any liquidity at all after 30 days. The results can be found in Table 8
and also line up nicely with our previous results. Individuals are less likely to reinvest into funds
after a loss and more likely to not reinvest at all.

[Insert Table 8 about here]

Furthermore, we can specically look at stock market participation. When we use a dummy of
whether individuals are invested in equities at all 6 months after the forced sale as the outcome
variable, we nd that the experience of being forced out of a losing fund causes a 3.62% reduction
in the likelihood of participating in the stock market.
Table 9 shows the estimation results for other potential destinations of the individual funds:
First, we observe the balance in the settlement account to estimate the share of liquidity that stays
in the settlement account. Second, we also observe all transfers into savings accounts that we net
out, i.e., if an individual transfers money in and out of the savings account within 30 days that is
a net transfer of 0. Third, we can look at all transfers out of the bank minus all transfers into the
bank to understand whether the funds leave the bank.

[Insert Table 9 about here]

When individuals sell deliberately before the funds' closure announcements, they tend to reinvest

15

a smaller share of their liquidity immediately. Presumably, this is because they decided to rebalance
or consume part of their funds. In line with this presumption, we see some transfers into savings
accounts and some transfers out of the bank as well as some liquidity simply remaining in the
settlement account. Overall, however, our results appear to be noisy. After all we cannot earmark
a

¿ to make conclusive statements about what individuals do with their funds.
The results for deliberate sales after the announcement look very similar to the sales before the

announcement though our estimates are noisier for the few trades we see after the announcement
of the fund closures. We thus do not nd consistently signicant dierences for the deliberate sales
pre- and post-announcement; neither do we nd additional sales activity around the announcement
date nor a large run-up in sales before the closing date in Figure 7. Both of these ndings make us
believe that most individuals miss the announcement of the fund closure that is only reported in
the half-year investment prospectus.

4.2 Robustness
We nd consistent eects throughout specications and sample splits that line up sensibly for
individuals who are forced to sell versus those that sell before versus after the announcement of the
fund closure.

The simple cross-sectional specication basically conducts an experiment in which

2,228 individuals are chosen at some point in time to receive their investment back. In the simple
cross-sectional specication, we thus identify a pure cross-sectional eect of individuals receiving
more versus less funds back.

In the specication with fund xed eects, within each fund, we

identify o of individuals trading at a loss versus a gain.

On the other hand, the unconditional

cross-sectional regression identies the eect by also comparing individuals investing in the same
fund and selling deliberately or being forced to sell, again conditional on having invested into the
same funds. We now address a number of concerns and present robustness checks. The results of
all robustness checks can be found in Table 10.

[Insert Table 10 about here]

16

Transfers to other brokerage accounts
In principle, it could be the case that individuals transfer their funds to a dierent brokerage
account.

However, we do not observe large or signicant coecients on the variable measuring

outows out of the bank in Table 9. Furthermore, we can look at customers who are agged as
clients without other banking relationships by the online bank. For these clients, the eect is even
more pronounced.

Reasons for 2017 fund closures
While our results may be specic to the year 2007 because many of our forced sale events happen in
that year, it is important to note that the nancial crisis did not hit before the end of 2008. In that
sense, our results are unlikely to be aected by the nancial crisis. Furthermore, we include monthby-year xed eects in our regressions and thus do not identify o of individuals being forced out
of funds in year 2007 versus other years. Finally, in our preferred specication, we control for fund
xed eects and thus identify o of individuals being invested in the same fund, say one that closes
in 2007, and selling deliberately versus not as well as at a gain versus a loss. Furthermore, the fund
xed eects control for the closure date and thus eectively for all market or other contemporaneous
conditions at the time of the fund closure.
Most of the forced sales in 2007 are due to the closures of a few funds that the customers
of this particular bank were invested in. These funds closed because a large German investment
bank shut down an arm of its operations that white-labeled funds for our online bank.
white-labeled funds were marketed by our bank to its clients.

These

Thus, most of the variation in

our sample is generated by fund closures that are not due to the closure of small niche funds or
underperformance. In any case, while we acknowledge that underperformance is probably a main
driver of fund closures, we do not think individuals would choose to invest into a fund because they
expect it to underperform and then close, which is our identifying assumption.

17

Selection into holding a closing fund
We estimate an average treatment eects of the population under consideration, a randomly selected
sample of German retail clients of an online bank who hold a portfolio, trade at least once per
year, and chose to invest in a fund that happens to close.

Individuals could select into keeping

(i.e., to be eventually forced out) or selling the fund either before or after the announcement of
the closure. While we argue that most individuals do not notice the fund closure announcement
(because it is only reported in the fund report, the pre- and post-announcement individuals behave
not signicantly dierent, and there is no sales activity around the announcement date or before
the closure date), we still want to control for this selection to ensure our treatment is exogenous
conditional on the controls. When we compare individual characteristics of our overall sample versus
our aected sample, we do not nd relevant dierences. This can be seen in Table 4. Additionally,
we can simply control for each individual's fund return over his or her holding period of the fund.
The holding period return is the only fund characteristic that may aect individual behavior and
is observable to both the individual and the econometrician, which makes our treatment exogenous
conditional on the controls. Our results are unaected by that and can be found in Table 10.

Selection into holding a winning or losing fund
Moreover, individuals holding the aected funds may select into keeping (i.e., to be eventually
forced out) a winning or losing fund such that the eect for individuals holding a losing fund
may be dierent than for those holding a winning fund.

We can include a dummy indicating

that individuals hold a to-be-closed loser in our specication.

The dummy for holding a losing

versus holding a winning fund that is to be closed also controls for all time-invariant observable or
unobservable characteristics of individuals holding a losing fund versus individuals holding a winning
fund (results can also be found in Table 10). However, in our data, both groups of individuals, those
getting closed out of losing funds as well as those getting closed out of winning funds, hold both
winners and losers. Given that we argue that our sample of closed funds are chosen exogenously to
individual investor characteristics, if we pick a fund that happens to be a loser for some individuals
and a winner for others and both of these groups hold winners and losers, the assignment into being

18

closed out at a loss is exogenous and the loss coecient can be given a causal interpretation.
As can be seen in Table 5, the groups of investors being forced out at a gain versus a loss do
not dier substantially in most dimensions. Most importantly, individuals forced out at a loss do
not have substantially less risky portfolios or trade in less risky securities generally, which would
explain their hesitation to reinvest a loss. Moreover, both groups of individuals hold winning and
losing funds as described.

While the group holding losing funds tends to have a longer holding

period, they do not buy or sell substantially less than individuals holding the winning funds and
while they have a lower propensity to sell winners and a higher propensity to hold losers, overall
their holdings of paper winners and losers are similar (as captured by the variables called sum
of paper and realized winners/losers at all sale dates). Furthermore, when we run a kitchen-sink
regression of the dummy for being closed out at a loss on all our other observables, we only nd the
holding period to be statistically signicant, which, given the number of regressors, could represent
estimation error.

Furthermore, note that our preferred specication with fund xed eects does

not compare the groups of individuals holding any losing or winning funds but rather compares
individuals having invested into the same fund at dierent points in time.
Finally, we may worry that individuals react dierently to the announcement of the fund closure
depending on holding a loser or a winner. To the extent that the decision to hold a loser versus a
winner is not aected by the announcement of the fund closure, which we address by controlling for
the loser dummy or individual fund returns over their holding period, our treatment is exogenous.
Furthermore, we can address all concerns about behavior after the fund closure announcement by
using the amount invested in the fund at announcement and a loss at announcement as instruments
for the liquidation amount and loss at closure indicator.

Regression discontinuity design
As an alternative econometric specication, we could consider a type of regression discontinuity
(RD) design by only comparing individuals who happen to have a slightly positive arithmetic
return at the time of the forced sale to individuals with a slightly negative return. Restricting the
sample to individuals with arithmetic returns in the range of plus or minus 10%, and rerunning

19

specication 2 with those 7,998 observations, month-by-year, and ISIN xed eects, we nd that
individuals reinvest 81% in response to a forced liquidation with a loss interaction coecient of
-22% which is signicant at the 5% level.

This simple RD design thus conrms our results and

lends additional credibility to the causal interpretation of the loss coecient.

Time-varying omitted variables
We argue that the liquidation event is exogenous to the retail investors that happen to invest into
that fund. We think that it is unlikely retail investors would deliberately choose to invest into a
certain fund because they expect it to be closing. Moreover, we think that the liquidation amount, as
determined by the initial investment in the fund, is unrelated to the fact that the fund later happens
to close. However, the return of the initial investment is potentially jointly determined by market
factors that also determine whether individuals want to reinvest at a higher or lower rate at the time
of the fund closure. Thus, while the initial investment and the closure date is exogenous, the return
of the initial investment may be subject to an omitted variables problem that also determines an
individual's propensity to reinvest (for instance, sentiment or market conditions). When we control
for fund xed eects in the unconditional cross-sectional regression, we also eectively control for
the time and market as well as all other contemporaneous conditions at the time of the fund closures.
Moreover, the month-by-year xed eects control for all time-varying macroeconomic trends such
as market sentiment. Still, we can additionally control for the market return, in the past 3 or 12
months, and obtain the same result, as well as control for the individual portfolio returns, in the

2

past 3 or 12 months, and obtain the same result.

The econometric application has the following features: (1) there is cross-sectional variation in
the experimental implementation, i.e., individuals are aected to varying degrees or not at all; (2)
the relevant variables are available at a high frequency over a long period before and after each
experiment; and (3) there exist potential time-varying confounds, but they must be assumed to
change smoothly across the date of the experiment. We address the latter two concerns by using
transaction-level data that is measurement-error free with homogeneous time bands around each

2 The

performance of the individuals' portfolios is calculated following Bhattacharya et al. (2012).

20

event. Moreover, we are interested in relatively short-run eects, from the day of the announcement
to approximately one month after, we use many events rather than just one, and we exibly control
for time using calendar xed eects. For these reasons, we are not concerned about other timevarying confounds.
Theoretically, our framework can be interpreted as good as a local randomized experiment
solving selection concerns by randomly assigning subjects to control and treatment status.

The

running variable is time itself, which, cannot be randomly assigned. However, we can safely argue
that the forced sale date is randomly assigned to our investors as it is not chosen with individuallevel investor characteristics in mind. Thus, whether a given investor at a given date is aected
by a forced sale event can be thought of as good as random.

Nevertheless, covariates that are

discontinuous in time, such as year and month eects can be included as controls and to improve
precision (Lee and Lemieuxa, 2010).
Estimates may be aected if the time-series properties of the data are ignored, for instance in
the presence of autoregressive processes.

Whenever a potential liquidation of funds itself would

cause further liquidations, our estimates may be biased upward.

While such autoregression is a

potential concern in many applications, it is not a concern here.

After all, there are no wealth

eects associated with the liquidation or the act of reinvesting the liquid funds (the wealth eects
from potential fee payments can safely be seen as very small).
strategic behaviors around the threshold.

Finally, one may worry about

Clearly, using time as an assignment variable makes

such tests logically irrelevant. However, one may worry about a type of sorting when individuals
change their behavior to avoid the treatment, in our setting, by selling before the forced sell, which is
announced either one month (for funds domiciled in Luxembourg) or six months (for funds domiciled
in Germany) in advance. However, those individuals are automatically excluded from the simple
cross-sectional analysis because they are not actually forced to sell. Furthermore, as we discussed,
we do not observe sorting or bunching of sales near the announcement or forced liquidation date
and the voluntary sales before and after the announcement of the fund closure look similar.

21

5

Mechanisms and implications

5.1 Tax considerations and rebalancing
In Germany, capital gains were un-taxed before 2009 and since 2009 are un-taxed until individuals

¿ for singles and 1.602¿

reach their initial allowance (Freibeträge). The initial allowances are 801

for married couples. Individuals can specify their main brokerage such that the capital gains tax will
not be subtracted unless the initial sum is exceeded (Freistellungsauftrag) and we observe customers
agged by the bank as main customers who have set up the Freistellungsauftrag. For stocks and
funds that were bought before the 1st of January 2009, capital gains are still tax-free. For these

¿

funds, any capital gains will remain tax free until the end of 2017 and tax free up until 100,000

from January 2018 on. When capital gains are taxed, the tax is the same rate as dividends and
interest payments and it is subtracted at the source. Thus, in the event of a taxed capital gains
realization, the funds that arrive in the settlement account are already after tax funds. Since 2009,
the capital gains tax (Abgeltungssteuer) is 25% plus solidary addition (Solidaritätszuschlag) (5.5%
of the capital gains tax) and church tax (Kirchensteuer) (8 or 9% of the capital gains tax) which
amounts to approximately 28% in total.

In contrast, capital losses are carried over and applied

to following capital gains at the source.

Thus, if capital losses are realized before capital gains,

then the capital gains tax will be automatically lowered by the realized losses. In summary, for all
practical purposes, the capital gains are either un-taxed or the tax is taken at the source, and all
reimbursements individuals receive are after-tax funds.
Our results on gains and losses are not consistent with tax considerations as a reason for why
individuals do not hold optimally rebalanced portfolios before the forced sale event, which would
imply that they would not optimally reinvest 100% of their liquidation. If this were the case, then
capital losses should be reinvested at a higher rate than capital gains. While there exists a capital
gains tax and capital losses are carried over, individuals should be incentivized to harvest losses
because Germany does not have a wash sale rule.

While individuals could, in principle, harvest

losses, casual observation of online media suggests that this behavior is not common. In any case,
because no wash sale rule exists, it cannot explain the lack of reinvestment of losses.

22

Transaction costs are not very high for the online bank under consideration but they are positive.

¿ plus 0.25% of the order price times volume, a minimum

In particular, one trade costs a basis of 4.90

¿ and a maximum of 59.90¿. Additionally, the exchanges charge a small fee ranging from
0.0015% with a minimum of 1.50¿ and to 0.0025% with a minimum of 2.50¿. While in a standard
of 9.90

model, such fees would not majorly discourage an agent to rebalance optimally (Briggs et al.,
2015), it may cause some insucient rebalancing when individuals hold very small portfolios or
are averse to paying fees. These transaction costs may be a reason why individuals do not hold
optimally rebalanced portfolios before the forced sale event, which would imply that they would
not optimally reinvest 100% of their liquidation. However, individuals do not appear to actively
rebalance in the right direction.

If they would take the forced liquidation as an opportunity to

actively rebalance, potentially because they held a suboptimal portfolio initially due to transaction
costs, then they should reinvest the funds of a losing investment at a higher rate than those of
a winning investment.

If individuals rebalance at the stocks versus bonds level rather than the

individual fund level, then the individual portfolio performance should matter for rebalancing.
To address rebalancing and tax considerations, we can control for the individual fund return and
the individual portfolio returns over the fund investment or over the past 3 and 12 months. After
all, rebalancing needs as well as tax considerations should be determined by the fund or overall
portfolio return of the individual. Our results are unaected by that and can be found in Table 10.

5.2 Inattention
We know from the existing literature that investors are inattentive and we observe quite substantial
inertia, i.e., money staying in the settlement account especially in the rst 5 days after the forced
sale. A natural question is whether individuals notice the announcement and/or the forced sale.
Because the deliberate sales we observe before and after the closure announcement look very similar,
we believe that most individuals miss the closure announcement. Furthermore, we do not observe
heightened selling activity around the date of the announcement and only a small run-up in sales
prior to the announcement (approximately one tenth of the number of sales at the date of closure)
in Figure 7.

23

After deciding to close the fund, the investment company has to report to the supervisory
authority and responsible reserve bank. In turn, the closure is announced in the electronic federal
gazette, the Bundesanzeiger, as well as in the semi-annual report to inform investors.

More

specically, the company has to adhere to a notice period of 1 or 6 months after it informed the
investors in writing via the semi-annual investment report. We believe that many investors ignore
all fund reports and thus miss the closure announcement.

However, upon the liquidation of the

fund, the investor receives a sales receipt by email or mail as the one displayed in Figure 7. This
sales receipt is much less likely to remain unnoticed as it also states the tax implications as well as
whether the investor experienced a capital gain or loss.
Even if investors are inattentive, such inattention cannot explain our results because investors
have to choose to be more inattentive in the event of a loss than a gain. Therefore, investors must
know whether they incurred a loss or a gain in the rst place.

5.3 Mental accounting, realization utility, and eects
As an alternative theoretical explanation, we consider mental accounting. Clearly, the transfer of
money from the fund to the settlement account caused individuals to treat it dierently especially
when it represents a loss as opposed to a gain. We thus provide evidence for mental accounting, as
the transfer between accounts matters, even though the money is theoretically fungible (abstracting
from the transaction costs).

Thaler (1985) and Shefrin and Thaler (1988) were pioneering the

mental accounting literature and some other empirical evidence exists (Milkman and Beshears,
2009; Feldman, 2010; Choi et al., 2009; Abeler and Marklein, 2008; Human and Barenstein, 2005;
Karle et al., 2011).
We also think that investors may take the liquidation as an exogenous reason to close their
mental investment account, which leads them to not engage in the disposition eect (Odean, 1998).
That our investors are subject to the disposition eect, and thus treat unrealized capital gains

3 We argue that these

and losses very dierently, has been documented by Koestner et al. (2017).

3 In our sample of 113,031 German investors over the period 2003 to 2016, we nd an attenuated but still positive
and strongly signicant disposition to sell winning mutual funds. Chang et al. (2016) use the data from Odean (1998)
consisting of g 73,558 US households from January 1991 to November 1996 and document a reverse disposition eect

24

empirical observations provide evidence for the theoretical framework developed in Barberis and
Xiong (2012) who explain the disposition eect via a utility function in which individuals narrowly
frame utility over individual stock's sales or realizations. Because individuals dislike realizing losses
more than they like realizing gains, the utility specication explains the disposition eect. What we
observe is a reverse disposition eect after forced realizations and in a sense this is fully consistent
with the modeling assumptions put forward in Barberis and Xiong (2012). After all, Barberis and
Xiong (2012) postulate that liquidations or sales cause utility ows, and even though they do not
specify a change in risk aversion in response, that would be a natural next step. Our ndings are
also consistent with the empirical observation in Frydman et al. (2017) that individuals do not
display disposition eects because they may not close mental accounts when they reinvest again
quickly. After all, for our mutual fund liquidations, no equivalent reinvestment exists.
Whether losses increase or decrease risk-taking has been analyzed in a variety of settings, including choices over lotteries in laboratory experiments (Thaler and Johnson, 1990), trading decisions
of experienced market-makers (Coval and Shumway, 2005), IPO investors (Kaustia and Knüpfer,
2008; Anagol et al., 2015), and individuals receiving inheritances (Andersen et al., 2018).

This

research has produced contradictory results: some studies nd that individuals become more riskseeking following losses (Andrade and Iyer, 2009; Langer and Weber, 2008; Coval and Shumway,
2005), while other studies nd that they become more risk-averse (Shiv et al., 2005; Liu et al.,
2010). Imas (2016) reconciles this evidence by arguing that individuals become more risk averse
only after realized losses but not after paper losses (the realization eect).
Imas (2016) develops a theoretical framework of dynamic cumulative prospect theory with mental accounting.

After a paper loss, the mental account of prior outcomes remains open and the

loss is evaluated jointly with the outcome, causing the individual to take on more risk to recover
from it. A realized loss closes the associated mental account and resets the reference point. Closing
the mental account in the red causes the individual to be sensitized to the prospect of further
losses, leading him or her to take on less risk. In contrast, after a realized gain, the investor is not
sensitized, resulting in the prediction that realized gains should result in more reinvestment than

for delegated investments such as mutual funds.

25

realized losses. Imas (2016) presents evidence for this framework in a series of lab experiments. Our
results are unique in providing clean evidence from consequential investment decisions in the eld,
and our evidence can thus be seen as strong empirical support for the realization eect. Another
recent study analyzing risk-taking after realizations in the laboratory is Merkle et al. (2018), who
replicate the ndings in Imas (2016) for positively skewed lotteries and physical transfers of money.

5.4 Experiential learning
Our ndings are related to the literature on experiential learning and how personal experiences
shape preferences, such as Anagol et al. (2015), Andersen et al. (2018), and Kaustia and Knüpfer
(2008).

When individuals get forced out of a fund they have a bad experience, especially when

the fund investment is a loser.

Individuals may learn from this experience about their ability

to invest into the stock market. Such experiential learning is likely to be relevant for the stockmarket non-participation puzzle and the low portfolio shares we observe empirically (which has
been puzzling economists, Campbell, 2006). Furthermore, individuals appear to become more risk
averse in response to losses as documented in Koudijs and Voth (2016) and Malmendier and Nagel
(2011). In the context of stock market participation, Kuhnen (2015) nd that individuals learn less
rationally from losses in stock market investments because they form more pessimistic beliefs.
In terms of the time to response, when we look at the reinvestment after 5 versus 30 days, we
do not nd large dierences. Thus, it is not simply be a matter of an initial shock but persistent
learning which is also indicated by our result that individuals are more likely to exit the stock
market. To further understand how irrational learning from bad experiences in the stock market
aects individuals, we split the sample in a variety of ways to understand for which demographic
and other individual characteristics, such as income and nancial sophistication, the eects of bad
experiences are most pronounced. We do not nd signicantly dierent results when we split by
portfolio size, size of the initial investment, or length of the banking relationship, which may be
measures of nancial sophistication. We nd that the eect is more pronounced for female investors,
who constitute approximately 14% of our sample, as well as customers who are agged by the online
bank as clients without other banking relationships.

26

6

Conclusion

Using a large sample of transaction-level data on all asset holdings, trades, balances, spending, and
income from a German retail bank, this paper explores how the individual propensity to reinvest
responds to realized capital gains and losses.

Our identication strategy exploits mutual fund

closures, which are arguably exogenous to retail investors. We nd that individuals reinvest a large
part of their newly found liquidity immediately. However, even after a month, a portion of that
newly found liquidity remains uninvested because individuals leave it untouched or transfer some
of it into savings accounts. These ndings suggest that individuals do not hold perfectly optimized
portfolios and are partially inert.
Furthermore, individuals behave very dierently if a loss is realized instead of a gain relative
to their initial investment. If a gain is realized, individuals reinvest almost 83% of their funds. If,
however, a loss is realized, then individuals only reinvest 40% of their funds and tend to transfer
more into savings accounts.

This dierential treatment of gains and losses is inconsistent with

active rebalancing or tax considerations, but it is consistent with mental accounting, realization
utility, and the so-called realization eect (Imas, 2016). Furthermore, we provide particularly clean
evidence relating to the literature on experiential learning (Malmendier and Nagel, 2011; Koudijs
and Voth, 2016; Kuhnen, 2015) that individuals do not appear to learn rationally from experiences
in the stock market.

27

References
Abeler, J. and F. Marklein (2008, may). Fungibility, Labels, and Consumption. IZA Discussion
Papers 3500, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Agnew, J., P. Balduzzi, and A. Sunden (2003).
Plan.

Portfolio Choice and Trading in a Large 401(k)

American Economic Review 93 (1), 193215.

Alvarez, F., L. Guiso, and F. Lippi (2012).
Transaction and Observation Costs.

Durable Consumption and Asset Management with

American Economic Review 5 (102), 22722300.

Anagol, S., V. Balasubramaniam, and T. Ramadorai (2015). The eects of experience on investor
behavior: Evidence from india's ipo lotteries.

Andersen, S., T. Hanspal, and K. M. Nielsen (2018). Once bitten, twice shy: The power of personal
experiences in risk taking.

Journal of Financial Economics .

Andersen, S. and K. M. Nielsen (2011). Participation constraints in the stock market: Evidence
from unexpected inheritance due to sudden death.

Review of Financial Studies 24 (5), 16671697.

Andrade, E. B. and G. Iyer (2009). Planned versus actual betting in sequential gambles.

Journal

of Marketing Research 46 (3), 372383.
Baker, M., S. Nagel, and J. Wurgler (2006). The eect of dividends on consumption. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2000).

Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock

investment performance of individual investors.

Barberis, N., M. Huang, and T. Santos (2001).

The journal of Finance 55 (2), 773806.
Prospect Theory and Asset Prices.

Quarterly

Journal of Economics 116 (1).
Barberis, N. and W. Xiong (2012).

Realization Utility.

251271.

28

Journal of Financial Economics 104,

Bhattacharya, U., A. Hackethal, S. Kaesler, B. Loos, and S. Meyer (2012). Is unbiased nancial
advice to retail investors sucient? Answers from a large eld study.

The Review of Financial

Studies 25 (4), 9751032.
Bilias, Y., D. Georgarakos, and M. Haliassos (2010). Portfolio Inertia and Stock Market Fluctuations.

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42 (9), 715742.

Bonaparte, Y. and R. Cooper (2011). Costly Portfolio Adjustment.

NBER Working Paper 15227 .

Briggs, J. S., D. Cesarini, E. Lindqvist, and R. Östling (2015). Windfall gains and stock market
participation. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Brown, S. and W. Goetzmann (1995). Performance persistence.

Brunnermeier, M. and S. Nagel (2008).

Journal of Finance 50, 679698.

Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate Time-Varying Risk

Aversion? Micro-Evidence on Individuals' Asset Allocation.

American Economic Review 98 (3),

713736.

Bu, Q. and N. Lacey (2009). On understanding mutual fund terminations.

Journal of Economics

Finance 33, 8099.
Bundesbank, D. (2013). Statistik ueber Wertpapierinvestments, mimeo.

Calvet, L., J. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2009a). Fight or Flight? Portfolio Rebalancing by Individual
Investors.

Quarterly Journal of Economics 2, 301348.

Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2009b). Measuring the Financial Sophistication of
Households.

American Economic Review 99 (2), 393398.

Campbell, J. Y. (2006). Household nance.

The Journal of Finance 61 (4), 15531604.

Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance.
5782.

29

The Journal of nance 52 (1),

Chang, T. Y., D. H. Solomon, and M. M. Westereld (2016).
Delegation, cognitive dissonance, and the disposition eect.

Looking for someone to blame:

The Journal of Finance 71 (1), 267

302.

Chien, Y.-L., H. Cole, and H. Lustig (2012). Is the Volatility of the Market Price of Risk due to
Intermittent Portfolio Rebalancing?

American Economic Review 102 (6), 285996.

Choi, J., D. Laibson, and B. Madrian (2009). Mental Accounting in Portfolio Choice: Evidence
from a Flypaper Eect.

American Economic Review 99 (5), 20852095.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2009). Reinforcement learning and savings
behavior.

The Journal of nance 64 (6), 25152534.

Cole, S., A. Paulson, and G. K. Shastry (2014). Smart money? the eect of education on nancial
outcomes.

The Review of Financial Studies 27 (7), 20222051.

Coval, J. D. and T. Shumway (2005).

Do behavioral biases aect prices?

The Journal of Fi-

nance 60 (1), 134.
Dahlquist, M. and J. Martinez (2013). Investor Inattention: A Hidden Cost of Choice in Pension
Plans?

European Financial Management 9999, 119.

Dorn, D. and G. Huberman (2005). Talk and action: What individual investors say and what they
do.

Review of Finance 9 (4), 437481.

Evans, R. B. (2006). Does alpha really matter? Evidence from mutual fund incubation, termination
and manager change.

manuscript, Boston College .

Feldman, N. (2010). Mental Accounting Eects of Income Tax Shifting.

Review of Economics and

Statistics 92 (1), 7086.
Frydman, C., S. M. Hartzmark, and D. H. Solomon (2015). Rolling mental accounts.

of Financial Studies 31 (1), 362397.

30

The Review

Frydman, C., S. M. Hartzmark, and D. H. Solomon (2017). Rolling mental accounts.

The Review

of Financial Studies 31 (1), 362397.
Gabaix, X. and D. Laibson (2002). The 6D Bias and the Equity-Premium Puzzle.

NBER Macroe-

conomics Annual 16, 257312.
Human, D. and M. Barenstein (2005).

A Monthly Struggle for Self-Control?

counting, Mental Accounting, and the Fall in Consumption Between Paydays.

Hyperbolic Dis-

Working Paper

IZA Bonn .
Imas, A. (2016). The realization eect: Risk-taking after realized versus paper losses.

The American

Economic Review 106 (8), 20862109.
Karle, H., G. Kirchsteiger, and M. Peitz (2011). The Impact of Contextual Reference Dependence
on Purchase Decisions: An Experimental Study.

Working Paper .

Karlsson, N., G. Loewenstein, and D. Seppi (2009).
Information.

The Ostrich eect:

Selective Attention to

Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 38 (2), 95115.

Kaustia, M. and S. Knüpfer (2008). Do investors overweight personal experience? Evidence from
IPO subscriptions.

The Journal of Finance 63 (6), 26792702.

Kaustia, M. and E. Rantapuska (2012). Rational and behavioral motives to trade: Evidence from
reinvestment of dividends and tender oer proceeds.

Journal of Banking & Finance 36 (8), 2366

2378.

Koestner, M., B. Loos, S. Meyer, and A. Hackethal (2017). Do individual investors learn from their
mistakes?

Journal of Business Economics 87 (5), 669703.

Koudijs, P. and H.-J. Voth (2016).
margin lending.

Leverage and beliefs: personal experience and risk-taking in

American Economic Review 106 (11), 33673400.

Kuhnen, C. M. (2015).

Asymmetric learning from nancial information.

nance 70 (5), 20292062.
31

The Journal of Fi-

Langer, T. and M. Weber (2008). Does commitment or feedback inuence myopic loss aversion?:
An experimental analysis.

Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 67 (3), 810819.

Lee, D. S. and T. Lemieuxa (2010).

Regression discontinuity designs in economics.

Journal of

economic literature 48 (2), 281355.
Liu, Y.-J., C.-L. Tsai, M.-C. Wang, and N. Zhu (2010). Prior consequences and subsequent risk
taking:

New eld evidence from the Taiwan Futures Exchange.

Management Science 56 (4),

606620.

Maggio, M. D., A. Kermani, and K. Majlesi (2017).

Stock Market Returns and Consumption.

Technical report, Working Paper.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Aect
Risk Taking?

Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 373416.

Merkle, C., J. Müller-Dethard, and M. Weber (2018). Closing a mental account: The realization
eect for gains and losses.

Milkman, K. L. and J. Beshears (2009). Mental accounting and small windfalls: Evidence from an
online grocer.

Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 71 (2), 384394.

Mitchell, O., G. Mottola, S. Utkus, and T. Yamaguchi (2006). The Inattentive Participant: Portfolio
Trading Behavior in 401(k) Plans.

University of Michigan Working Paper

Odean, T. (1998). Are Investors Reluctant to Realize their Losses?

(115).

Journal of Finance 53,

1775

1798.

of Statistics, G. F. B. (2008). Einkommens- und Verbrauchsstichprobe (Einkommen, Einnahmen
& Ausgaben).

Pagel, M. (2018). A news-utility theory for inattention and delegation in portfolio choice.
491522.

Reis, R. (2006). Inattentive Consumers.

Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 17611800.
32

86 (2),

Shefrin, H. M. and R. H. Thaler (1988).

The Behavioral Life-Cycle Hypothesis.

Economic In-

quiry 26 (4), 609643.
Shiv, B., G. Loewenstein, A. Bechara, H. Damasio, and A. R. Damasio (2005). Investment behavior
and the negative side of emotion.

Psychological science 16 (6), 435439.

Strahilevitz, M. A., T. Odean, and B. M. Barber (2011).

Once burned, twice shy:

learning, counterfactuals, and regret aect the repurchase of stocks previously sold.

How naïve

Journal of

Marketing Research 48 (SPL), S102S120.
Thaler, R. (1985). Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice.

Marketing Science 4 (3), 199214.

Thaler, R. H. and E. J. Johnson (1990). Gambling with the house money and trying to break even:
The eects of prior outcomes on risky choice.

Management science 36 (6), 643660.

33

Figure 1: Distribution of the share of funds individuals reinvest after the forced sale event within 30
days in response to either a gain (left side) or a loss (right side) relative to their initial investment:
raw data

Figure 2: Share of funds individuals reinvest after the forced sale event within 30 days relative to
the simple arithmetic return of their individual fund investment: raw data including all observations
(left side) or observations with individual fund returns within 25% (right side)

34

Figure 3: Share of funds individuals reinvest after the forced sale event within 30 days relative
to the simple arithmetic return of their individual fund investment:

raw data binned averages

and standard deviations including all observations (left side) or observations with individual fund
returns within 25% (right side)

Figure 4: Number of mutual funds closures, as identied by the International Securities Identication Number (ISIN), per year over the period 2006 to 2016: raw data as obtained from the
BVI

35

Figure 5: Number of forced sale events, i.e., number of individuals aected by each fund closure,
per year over the period 2006 to 2016: raw data

Figure 6: Average amounts of funds received from the forced sale events, per year over the period
2006 to 2016: raw data

36

Figure 7: Average daily liquidation or sales activity over the period of 7 months before the fund
closures until a few days after: raw data

Figure 8: Sales receipt as received by mail showing the purchase price (Ausführungswert), the sales
price (Kurswert), and the absolute capital loss (Veräuÿerungsverlust)

37

Table 1: Summary statistics for the forced sale events of all fund closures
standard

25th

75th

deviation

percentile

percentile

686.76

618.63

361.00

1,324.25

56.93

46.19

245.29

35.59

56.34

62.32

50.25

223.98

49.60

60.58

7,452.21

4,027.21

11,573.78

1,456.00

8,691.14

0.21

0.13

0.35

0.01

0.38

mean

median

869.14

holding period
before closure
(in days)
purchase
share price
forced selling
share price
value of
forced sell
return of
fund investment
observations

2,228

38

Table 2: Summary statistics for all funds

mean

median

standard

25th

75th

deviation

percentile

percentile

fund characteristics
retaining

62.22%

domicile Luxembourg

61.99%

domicile Germany

13.70%

target fund

0.81%

currency Euro

71.76%

fund age (in months)

14.47

13.46

6.79

9.59

17.29

total expense ratio

1.62%

1.72%

0.76%

1.10%

2.03%

initial charge

2.95%

3.50%

2.09%

0.00%

5.00%

annual charge

1.19%

1.25%

0.50%

0.80%

1.50%

costs and fees

asset classes
alternatives
bonds

16.80%

commodity

0.14%

equity

61.33%

balanced

20.28%

money market

0.50%

other

0.73%

fund size before deletion dates (mio Euro)
1 month

871.00

41.20

21,000.00

11.50

152.00

6 months

860.00

41.40

19,800.00

11.50

153.00

12 months

838.00

41.20

17,400.00

11.30

152.00

24 months

807.00

40.30

15,400.00

11.00

150.00

48 months

803.00

41.70

14,100.00

11.20

154.00

fund returns before deletion dates
6 months

1.60%

4.78%

32.26%

-6.02%

16.91%

12 months

2.82%

4.93%

21.96%

-2.91%

13.97%

24 months

4.11%

4.81%

14.56%

-0.61%

12.07%

Notes: The fund data is obtained from Lipper in Datastream. All statistics are annualized. To make the
return statistics in Tables 2 and 3 comparable, for each closed fund, we consider a matched sample of
funds by asset class and regional focus.

39

Table 3: Summary statistics for all closed funds

mean

median

standard

25th

75th

deviation

percentile

percentile

fund characteristics
retaining

59.59%

domicile Luxembourg

57.54%

domicile Germany

33.90%

target fund

8.26%

currency Euro

87.03%

fund age (in months)

15.40

14.61

6.64

10.50

18.41

total expense ratio

1.50%

1.40%

0.84%

0.89%

1.92%

initial charge

3.27%

4.00%

1.81%

2.00%

5.00%

annual charge

1.11%

1.10%

0.48%

0.75%

1.50%

costs and fees

asset classes
alternatives

1.27%

bonds

19.42%

commodity

1.03%

equity

43.18%

balanced

20.33%

money market

3.74%

other

11.04%

fund size before deletion dates (mio Euro)
1 month

92.00

18.40

633.00

5.42

57.20

6 months

113.00

22.40

805.00

7.08

65.20

12 months

123.00

26.30

845.00

8.43

73.10

24 months

134.00

31.40

788.00

10.40

84.00

48 months

169.00

35.50

1,130.00

12.20

106.00
10.86%

fund returns before deletion dates
6 months

-1.23%

1.73%

30.75%

-6.57%

12 months

-0.13%

1.97%

20.11%

-3.95%

8.89%

24 months

1.58%

2.29%

13.55%

-2.05%

7.37%

Notes: The fund data is obtained from Lipper in Datastream. All statistics are annualized. To make the
return statistics in Tables 2 and 3 comparable, for each closed fund, we consider a matched sample of
funds by asset class and regional focus.

40

Table 4: Summary statistics for all individuals, all aected individuals, and aected individuals
who were ultimately forced to sell

mean

median

standard

25th

75th

deviation

percentile

percentile

all individuals
male

0.86

1.00

0.35

1.00

1.00

age

54.36

53.00

13.22

46.00

63.00

PhD educated

0.09

0.00

0.29

0.00

0.00

account tenure (in years)

13.42

11.00

3.50

11.00

18.00

wealth

54,071.87

45,000.00

100,459.70

20,000.00

45,000.00

income

54,111.35

50,000.00

24,834.21

30,000.00

80,000.00

number of purchases

433.26

68.00

2,328.30

20.00

182.00

number of sales

337.11

65.00

1,990.79

24.00

169.00

portfolio value

72,181.24

40,895.82

182,344.30

20,450.42

78,654.24

number of securities

49.29

47.05

28.13

25.98

71.44

HH index

0.13

0.08

0.14

0.03

0.17

observations

113,031

aected individuals
male

0.86

1.00

0.35

1.00

1.00

age

53.53

52.00

12.75

45.00

61.00

PhD educated

0.09

0.00

0.28

0.00

0.00

account tenure (in years)

13.39

11.00

3.49

11.00

18.00

wealth

54,198.54

45,000.00

112,619.10

20,000.00

45,000.00

income

54,893.84

50,000.00

24,996.56

30,000.00

80,000.00

number of purchases

564.73

62.00

3,082.28

18.00

168.00

number of sales

498.62

58.00

2,986.00

22.00

158.00

portfolio value

65,846.31

38,095.46

118,288.40

18,801.00

74,595.34

number of securities

52.10

50.50

28.03

29.38

74.17

HH index

0.12

0.07

0.13

0.03

0.16

observations

38,135

aected individuals forced to sell
male

0.84

1.00

0.37

1.00

1.00

age

52.55

51.00

11.82

45.00

59.00

PhD educated

0.10

0.00

0.30

0.00

0.00

account tenure (in years)

12.78

11.00

3.35

11.00

13.00

wealth

55,281.76

45,000.00

139,413.00

20,000.00

45,000.00

income

54,733.93

50,000.00

24,020.95

30,000.00

80,000.00

number of purchases

118.64

23.00

1,023.37

6.00

65.00

number of sales

104.56

21.00

1,059.39

9.00

53.00

portfolio value

60,589.54

36,732.08

123,922.30

19,709.69

63,516.90

number of securities

51.34

48.08

28.52

27.09

73.65

HH index

0.10

0.07

0.11

0.02

0.14

observations

2,228

Notes: Aected individuals hold closed funds at some point over the sample period. Wealth, income, and
risk aversion are self-reported statistics in brackets. HH index is the Herndahl-Hirschman index measure
of diversication ranging from 0 to 1.

Table 5: Summary statistics for individuals being forced to sell at a gain or a loss
standard

25th

75th

deviation

percentile

percentile

4.00

3.00

1.40

5.00

3.98

3.67

1.71

4.36

790.73

686.15

296.15

585.82

1,290.00

2,266.82

416.50

139.50

13,316.89

1,154.00

1,915.89

315.50

93.00

8,019.62

1,067.00

12.00

6.00

3.00

16.50

14.00

24.09

12.00

5.00

37.51

27.00

0.46

0.43

0.17

0.31

0.74

0.36

0.26

0.09

0.30

0.59

5.00

mean

median

risk class of portfolio

3.41

risk class of trades

4.29

average holding period (in days)

individuals forced to sell at a gain

sum of paper and realized
winners at all sale dates
sum of paper and realized
losers at all sale dates
average of paper and realized
winning funds at all sale dates
average of paper and realized
losing funds at all sale dates
propensity to realize
winning funds
propensity to realize
losing funds
observations

1,712

individuals forced to sell at a loss
risk class of portfolio

3.22

4.00

1.00

1.58

risk class of trades

4.33

4.01

3.69

1.65

4.42

average holding period (in days)

1,129.26

1,173.50

618.50

653.10

1,764.00

1,932.08

370.00

93.00

5,829.46

1,254.00

1,953.12

355.50

108.00

6,245.63

1,228.50

11.86

7.00

3.00

15.85

14.00

14.49

8.00

3.00

19.52

19.00

0.22

0.13

0.04

0.24

0.30

0.24

0.16

0.08

0.24

0.32

sum of paper and realized
winners at all sale dates
sum of paper and realized
losers at all sale dates
average of paper and realized
winning funds at all sale dates
average of paper and realized
losing funds at all sale dates
propensity to realize
winning funds
propensity to realize
losing funds
observations

516

Notes: Risk class of portfolio (the risk classication is established by German regulation going from 1 (for
instance, savings accounts) to 5 (for instance, stocks, options, and futures)) refers to the overall portfolio
and risk class of trades to the traded securities and is value weighted. The propensity to realize winning
and losing funds is calculated as in Odean (1998).

42

Table 6: Estimation results from forced liquidations of fund closures after 30 days (interacted with
losses)
net buys in portfolio
liquidation

0.7030***

0.7308***

0.8084***

0.8084***

(0.0733)

(0.0686)

(0.0303)

(0.0918)

X

X

X

X

X

month-by-year
xed eects
ISIN xed eects
month-by-year

X

clustering
observations

2,222

2,222

2,222

2,137

R-squared

0.1847

0.2975

0.3943

0.3489

net buys in portfolio
liquidation

liquidation*loss

0.8325***

0.8359***

0.8855***

0.8855***

(0.0604)

(0.0587)

(0.0327)

(0.0136)

-0.5362***

-0.4485***

-0.4137***

-0.4137*

(0.1403)

(0.1493)

(0.0691)

(0.2234)

X

X

X

X

X

month-by-year
xed eects
ISIN xed eects
month-by-year

X

clustering
observations

2,222

2,222

2,222

2,137

R-squared

0.2140

0.3135

0.4048

0.3602

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Entries in the table represent the coecient β of regression
specication 1, i.e., the ¿ amount of net buys in the portfolio regressed on the ¿ amount of the
liquidiation at the individual level. The controls month-by-year and ISIN xed eects indicate dummies
for each month over the entire sample period and each closed fund. Standard errors are computed using
the robust White method or clustered at the month-by-year level. The column with clustered standard
errors drops all singleton observations to be conservative.
Signicance levels are *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

43

Table 7: Estimation results from forced liquidations as well as deliberate liquidations pre and post
announcements of fund closures after 30 days (interacted with losses)
net buys in portfolio
forced liquidation

0.7030***

0.6985***

0.7562***

(0.0732)

(0.0807)

(0.1124)

(0.1351)

post announcement liquidation

-0.8245***

-0.8698***

-0.8783***

-0.8783***

(0.1912)

(0.1897)

(0.1765)

(0.2400)

pre announcement liquidation

-0.5289***

-0.5010***

-0.6361***

-0.6361***

(0.1337)

(0.1333)

(0.1183)

(0.1986)

X

X

X

X

X

month-by-year
xed eects
ISIN xed eects
month-by-year

0.7562***

X

clustering
observations

38,042

38,042

38,042

37,758

R-squared

0.0025

0.0155

0.0652

0.0494

net buys in portfolio
forced liquidation

0.8619***

0.8489***

0.8873***

(0.0535)

(0.0571)

(0.1174)

(0.0465)

post announcement liquidation

-0.8378***

-0.8225***

-0.9196***

-0.9196***

(0.2415)

(0.2413)

(0.1981)

(0.2982)

pre announcement liquidation

-0.7975***

-0.7631***

-0.8566***

-0.8566***

(0.1231)

(0.1235)

(0.1261)

(0.1062)

-0.5791***

-0.5888***

-0.6124***

-0.6124***

(0.1121)

(0.1466)

(0.2320)

(0.2201)

-0.0255

-0.1138

0.0315

0.0315

(0.2615)

(0.2891)

(0.2271)

(0.3261)

-0.2717

-0.2914

-0.3219***

-0.3219

(0.1808)

(0.1840)

(0.0633)

(0.2324)

X

X

X

X

X

forced liquidation*loss
post announcement liquidation*loss
pre announcement liquidation*loss
month-by-year
xed eects
ISIN xed eects
month-by-year

0.8873***

X

clustering
observations

38,042

38,042

38,042

37,758

R-squared

0.0035

0.0150

0.0516

0.0485

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Entries in the table represent the coecient β of regression
specication 2, i.e., the ¿ amount of net buys in the portfolio regressed on the ¿ amount of the
liquidiation at the individual level. The controls month-by-year and ISIN xed eects indicate dummies
for each month over the entire sample period and each closed fund. Standard errors are computed using
the robust White method or clustered at the month-by-year level. The column with clustered standard
errors drops all singleton observations to be conservative.
Signicance levels are *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 8: Estimation results from forced liquidations as well as deliberate liquidations pre and post
announcements of fund closures after 30 days interacted with losses

forced liquidation
times riskclass

net buys

reinvestment

times riskclass

into funds

no reinvestment

participation

0.4024***

0.1074***

0.7845***

(0.0396)

(0.0280)

(0.0820)

-0.0342

0.0021

-0.2656***

(0.0281)

(0.0264)

(0.1025)

0.0269

-0.0610***

-0.1894**

(0.0210)

(0.0194)

(0.0833)

-0.2578***

0.2490***

-0.0362***

(0.0304)

(0.0301)

(0.0127)

-0.0772***

0.0582**

-0.0065

(0.0271)

(0.0257)

(0.0140)

-0.0486***

0.0272***

-0.0113***

(0.0062)

(0.0054)

(0.0038)

X

X

X

0.8034***
(0.0586)

post announcement liquidation
times riskclass

-0.4668***
(0.1181)

pre announcement liquidation
times riskclass

0.0390
(0.0964)

forced liquidation
times riskclass*loss

-0.5223**
(0.2157)

post announcement liquidation
times riskclass*loss

0.0233
(0.1498)

pre announcement liquidation
times riskclass*loss

-0.2036**
(0.0992)

forced liquidation
post announcement
liquidation
pre announcement
liquidation

forced liquidation*loss
post announcement
liquidation*loss
pre announcement
liquidation*loss
month-by-year
xed eects

X

ISIN xed eects

X

X

X

X

observations

37,982

38,042

38,042

38,042

R-squared

0.2342

0.1212

0.1159

0.2102

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Entries in the table represent the coecient β of regression
specication 2 with alternative outcome variables, i.e., the ows into investments multiplied by their risk
class, a dummy for reinvesting into funds, a dummy for not reinvesting at all, or a dummy for not being
invested in equity after 6 months. The controls month-by-year and ISIN xed eects indicate dummies for
each month over the entire sample period and each closed fund. Standard errors are computed using the
robust White method.
Signicance levels are *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 9: Estimation results from forced liquidations as well as deliberate liquidations pre and post
announcements of fund closures after 30 days interacted with losses

forced liquidation
post announcement
liquidation
pre announcement
liquidation

forced liquidation*loss
post announcement
liquidation*loss
pre announcement
liquidation*loss
month-by-year
xed eects

balance increase

net transfers

net transfers out

in settlement account

into savings account

minus into the bank

0.0409

0.0650

-0.0685

(0.0379)

(0.0611)

(0.0440)

0.9640**

-0.2788

0.3115**

(0.4414)

(0.3461)

(0.1381)

0.0571

0.1733*

0.2587***

(0.0810)

(0.0988)

(0.0693)

0.5652***

0.0858

0.1092

(0.1937)

(0.1203)

(0.0806)

-0.7333*

0.4797

0.1358

(0.4188)

(0.3539)

(0.1914)

-0.1021

0.2309**

0.4042***

(0.1042)

(0.1046)

(0.1179)

X

X

X

ISIN xed eects

X

X

X

observations

38,042

38,042

38,042

R-squared

0.0600

0.0823

0.1215

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Entries in the table represent the coecient β of regression
specication 2 with alternative outcome variables, i.e., the ¿ amount increase in the balance of the
settlement account, the net transfers into the savings account, and the net transfers out of the bank. The
controls month-by-year and ISIN xed eects indicate dummies for each month over the entire sample
period and each closed fund. Standard errors are computed using the robust White method.
Signicance levels are *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

46

Table 10: Robustness estimation results from forced liquidations of fund closures after 30 days
net buys into portfolio
liquidation
liquidation*loss

0.8927***

0.8834***

0.8833***

0.8847***

(0.0642)

(0.0642)

(0.0643)

(0.0643)

0.8848***
(0.0643)

-0.6809***

-0.6361***

-0.6372***

-0.6380***

-0.6381***

(0.2118)

(0.2111)

(0.2111)

(0.2113)

(0.2113)

announcement

0.9307***

announcement*loss

-0.6824***

(0.0679)
(0.2126)
dummy for
investment loss

X

fund return

X

over investment
portfolio return

X

over fund investment
three months

X

portfolio return
twelve months

X

portfolio return
month-by-year
xed eects

X

X

X

X

X

X

ISIN xed eects

X

X

X

X

X

X

observations

38,135

38,125

37,975

37,994

37,994

31,446

R-squared

0.0693

0.0692

0.0691

0.0693

0.0693

0.0713

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Entries in the table represent the coecient β of regression
specication 2, i.e., the ¿ amount of net buys in the portfolio regressed on the ¿ amount of the
liquidiation at the individual level with dierent control variables, a dummy for holding a losing fund, the
return of the fund investment, the portfolio returns over the time of the fund investment, the 3 months
before fund closure, or the 12 months before fund closure or using announcement value and loss as an
instrument regressor instead of the value of the liquidation. The controls month-by-year and ISIN xed
eects indicate dummies for each month over the entire sample period and each closed fund. Standard
errors are computed using the robust White method.
Signicance levels are *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

47

