                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MARKET EXPECTATIONS ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE

                                       Wolfram Schlenker
                                       Charles A Taylor

                                       Working Paper 25554
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25554


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Wolfram Schlenker and Charles A Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Market Expectations About Climate Change
Wolfram Schlenker and Charles A Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 25554
February 2019
JEL No. G17,Q54

                                          ABSTRACT

An emerging literature examines how agents update their beliefs about climate change. Most
studies have relied on indirect belief measures or opinion polls. We analyze a direct measure:
prices of financial products whose payouts are tied to future weather outcomes. We compare
these market expectations to climate model output for the years 2002 to 2018 as well as observed
weather station data across eight cities in the US. All datasets show statistically significant and
comparable warming trends. Nonparametric estimates suggest that trends in weather markets
follow climate model predictions and are not based on shorter-term variation in observed weather
station data. When money is at stake, agents are accurately anticipating warming trends in line
with the scientific consensus of climate models.


Wolfram Schlenker
School of International and Public Affairs (SIPA)
Columbia University
420 West 118th St
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wolfram.schlenker@columbia.edu

Charles A Taylor
Columbia University
cat2180@columbia.edu
Scientists overwhelmingly agree that the climate is changing because of human activity. The
American Association for the Advancement of Science (December 9, 2006) reported that “the
scientific evidence is clear: global climate change caused by human activities is occurring
now.” On the other hand, Oreskes & Conway (2010) argue that a handful of scientists
with strong ties to particular industries are “keeping the controversy alive” by spreading
doubt. Certain politicians in the US have questioned the evidence on climate change, with
some famously calling it an “elaborate hoax.” As a result, personal beliefs about climate
change have been shown to vary across geography, political affiliation, educational status,
and economic sector (Leiserowitz et al. 2016). Given the divergent beliefs about climate
change, the debate surrounding the accuracy of climate change predictions and whether
agents incorporate these predictions when deciding on their actions persists.
   Economists have estimated the benefits and costs from a changing climate (Auffhammer
2018). Many of the recent micro-level estimates relate outcomes of interest to random
exogenous year-to-year weather fluctuations to obtain unbiased damage estimates (Dell,
Jones & Olken 2014). While random and exogenous year-to-year variation is preferable from
a statistical perspective, adaptation to a permanent change in climate might mitigate some
of the weather sensitivity that is observed in response to unknown random weather shocks.
Agents should undertake adaptation investments in response to anticipated permanent shifts
in the climate that are either unprofitable or even infeasible for a one-time unknown weather
shock. However, before agents can adapt, they first need to realize that the climate is
changing. Again, there is uncertainty regarding how well climate models predict the future
and whether agents base their decisions on model forecasts.
   We address these questions by examining how market participants update their beliefs
about future weather. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) offers futures contracts for
eight cities on two main weather products: cooling degree days, which measure how much
cooling is necessary during hot temperatures in summer, and heating degree days, which
measure how much heating is required during cold temperatures in winter. The payoffs
from these contracts depend on the observed temperatures over the course of a month. The
contracts are traded before the month in which the weather is realized, and thus provide a
direct measure of the market’s view on future climate.
    First, we show that the futures market capitalizes weather shocks, i.e., deviations from
historical averages, in the two weeks before an unexpected weather deviation occurs. This
is consistent with an earlier finding that for longer horizons of 8-10 days, “the nature of
temperature dynamics simply makes any point forecast of temperature unlikely to beat the


                                             2
climatological forecast at long horizons, because all point forecasts revert fairly quickly to
the climatological forecast” (Campbell & Diebold 2005). Therefore, futures prices more than
10 days before the start of a month therefore reflect expectations about a month’s weather
before a particular year’s outcomes are known.
   Second, we find that market expectations as measured by futures prices when weather
outcomes are unknown have been trending at the same rate as temperature forecasts in the
CMIP5 archive, the latest repository where various climate modeling groups made predic-
tions for 2006 onward, as well as observed temperatures from weather station data. All find
significant warming, i.e., an increase in cooling degree days in summer and a decrease in
heating degree days in winter. Predictions of climate models have materialized, at least on
average, validating model forecasts, and financial speculators with money on the line have
fully internalized these forecasts.
    Third, while climate models correctly predicted average trends in degree days, the spatial
heterogeneity among the eight cities does not match the observed distribution. This is
likely due to the limited duration of our time series and the influence of outliers that would
otherwise average out over space. It has also been argued that predicting average warming
is easier as it relies on a simple balance of energy (radiative forcing), while predicting spatial
heterogeneity requires predicting shifts of the atmospheric system like the jet stream (Hsiang
& Kopp 2018). There is an active discussion whether a shift in the jet stream will reduce
February temperatures as it allows for cold air from the arctic to influence weather on
the East Coast. The futures market seems to agree with this theory, as there has been a
significant increase in expected heating degree days in February.
    Fourth, market expectations have been trending up smoothly in line with climate model
predictions and do not seem to respond to year-to-year fluctuation in weather outcomes. In
other words, market participants do not myopically update based on weather outcomes in
the previous year, but proactively anticipate a warming climate.
   Finally, we employ LASSO regressions to examine how oceanic oscillation indices affect
temperatures across the eight cities in our sample. Removing these large-scale effects reduces
the year-to-year variability, but does not change the observed trend. The observed warming
trend is hence not driven by the major oceanic drivers of the natural variability, but rather
caused by increased greenhouse gas emissions.




                                                3
1    Background and Model
Recent research has shown how weather fluctuations affect the corporate sector. The prof-
itability of the food industry responds to fluctuations in the Palmer drought index with
direct implications for the sector’s valuation (Hong, Li & Xu 2019). More broadly, corpo-
rate earnings of several sectors of the US economy are sensitive to temperature fluctuations
(Addoum, Ng & Ortiz-Bobea 2019). Weather markets offer companies a hedge against such
fluctuations as well as a direct measure of the market expectation of future climate.
    A second strand of literature has emphasized how climate change policy that is designed
to limit emissions affects the profitability of various companies. Meng (2017) shows how the
stock market incorporates changes in the likelihood of US carbon regulation as measured
by betting markets. Furthermore, limiting emissions may render a company’s marginal
reserves, i.e., the most costly ones, worthless as they can no longer be extracted (McGlade
& Ekins 2015). Thus future climate expectations are key to the sector’s profitability.
    A third strand of the literature focuses on how agents adjust their behavior in response to
environmental forecasts (Rosenzweig & Udry 2014, Neidell 2009). Shrader (2017) finds that
fishermen update their beliefs using El Niño medium-range weather forecasts in order to make
optimal fishing decisions. Before El Niño forecasts were available, the cost of weather shocks
was much higher because fisheries could not adapt. On the other hand, Burke & Emerick
(2016) find that yield changes in response to observable long-term temperature trends are
not significantly different from yield changes in response to random weather shocks.
   What is common to most of the previous studies is that researchers infer indirectly how
agents update their beliefs on climate. Some authors have modeled how market participants
learn about and adapt to changing weather conditions. For example, Kala (2017) examines
how Indian farmers dependent on monsoon precipitation update their beliefs. Twitter reac-
tions show that people become habituated to extreme weather events as they become more
frequent over time (Moore, Obradovich & Lehner 2018). On the other hand, public opinion
surveys ask respondents to self-report their beliefs. We know there is significant variation
in public opinion about climate change across the U.S., which varies by location and demo-
graphic characteristics (Howe et al. 2015). Public opinion on climate change also seems to
be driven by recent weather events, especially extremes. Observed periods of cooling can
translate into climate skepticism (Kaufmann et al. 2017). It is also possible that agents
hold differing private and public beliefs about climate change, especially if certain views on
climate change are perceived as more expedient.
    We add to this literature by using a different approach to directly measure beliefs about

                                              4
climate change in financial markets. It is possible to observe the market expectations about
climate by looking at the price of futures contracts that are linked to weather outcomes.
The predominant contracts are based on heating and cooling degree days which are indexed
to 65◦ F, the temperature considered the most comfortable for humans on average. It is also
a common standard for utility companies because heating and cooling systems tend to be
turned on that level, respectively.
    Cooling degree days (CDD) measure by how much and for how long temperatures exceed
65◦ F and thus require cooling, hence the name cooling degree days. The exact formula to
derive CDD (CDDik ) for day k in location i with average temperatures equal to τik is

                                 CDDik = max{τik − 65, 0}                                 (1)

    These daily measures are then summed over all k = 1...K days of a week w, month m,
or season of the year y to derive the total number of cooling degree days per time interval t

                                  K
                                  X               K
                                                  X
                        CDDit =         CDDik =         max{τik − 65, 0}                  (2)
                                  k=1             k=1


    Likewise, heating degree days (HDD) measure by how much and for how long temperature
fall below 65◦ F and thus require heating. The exact formula to derive HDD (HDDik ) for day
k in location i with the daily average temperature equal to τik is

                                 HDDik = max{65 − τik , 0}                                (3)

   The daily measures are again summed over all K days of a week w, month m, or season
of the year y to derive the total number of heating degree days per time interval t

                                  K
                                  X               K
                                                  X
                       HDDit =          HDDik =         max{65 − τik , 0}                 (4)
                                  k=1             k=1


    In the first step, we estimate the timing of when the market updates its beliefs, i.e.,
capitalizes information into prices, by running a weekly regression of changes in futures
prices on the weather of that week and the weeks that follow. Weekly aggregation addresses
the discontinuous pricing given weekends, market closures, etc. We approximate the baseline
expectations of the seasonality in degree days by regressing the daily observed degree days on



                                              5
a flexible restricted cubic spline1 using data from 1950-2018. This gives us the average weekly
w degree days for each location i: DD iw . We then obtain weather shocks by subtracting this
average baseline from the observed weather outcome DDit . We regress weekly price changes
[pit − pi[w−1] ] on these weather shocks. Since markets are forward looking and should only
respond to news, we include up to L = 3 leads, and vary the set of fixed effects αikw as
described in the regression table.

                                                   L
                                                   X
                      [piw − pi[w−1] ] = αikw +          βl [DDi[w+l] − DDi[w+l] ] + ǫiw                      (5)
                                                   l=0


In our baseline specification we set leads beyond the end of a month equal to zero. A
weather derivative on the number of cooling degree days in June should not respond to
weather outcomes in July. For example, price changes in the last week of June should only
respond to what happened in that week, while leads on future weeks fall outside the month.
In a sensitivity check we limit the analysis to weeks that are at least L = 2 weeks from a
month’s end and find similar results.2
   Confirming earlier findings that weather predictions beyond a narrow 10-14 day window
are not better than climatic normals, we argue that futures prices at least 10 days before
the start of a month represent ex-ante expectations. We estimate the annual time trends
in degree days from three different data sources: the market expectation as measured by
the price of weather contracts prior to when the random weather is known, predictions from
the CMIP5 archive of climate models, and the observed weather station data on which the
contracts are based. We aggregate the data by summer and winter season of each year y
and regress various contracts that are based on eight city-level weather stations on a simple
common time trend
                                    DDiy = αi + βy + ǫiy                                  (6)

In sensitivity checks we allow the time trend to vary by city and by each month within the
seasons.
    We next relax the linearity assumption and present lowess regression for the average
residual after removing location fixed effects, i.e., the mean for each location. Mathemati-
cally, we derive the residuals DDit − DD it for each year and location, then obtain the annual
   1
     Our specification uses 5 knots in the day of the year, subject to the constraint that the effect at the first
day of the year and the last day of the year are the same.
   2
     The more leads that we include, the more weeks we have to drop.




                                                         6
average residual riy
                                           8
                                       1 X              
                                 riy =       DDiy − DDiy                                    (7)
                                       8 i=1

before we run lowess regression on the annual observations for y = 2002 . . . 2018.
   While we find consistent evidence in warming trends across various data sources, one
concern may be that oceanic oscillations, which have been shown to be strong predictors of
temperatures (Zebiak & Cane 1987), might have driven the trend in observed warming. To
rule this out we link the monthly observed station level data DDim in the 17 years 2002-2008
to the six oceanic indices for the same months as well as a linear time trend.
                                                   K
                                                   X
                          DDim = αim + βim y +           γikm okm + ǫim                     (8)
                                                   k=1


Given the small degrees of freedom, we rely on machine learning to pick the optimal model,
specifically LASSO regression using the Extended Bayesian Information Criteria (EBIC). We
then partial out the effect of the observed oceanic oscillation indices, i.e., the γikm chosen
under the LASSO regression.


2     Data
2.1    Futures Data
Weather futures contracts are traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). The
products were first launched in the fall of 2001 and became fully operational for the first
full year in 2002. Contracts are available for eight geographically-distributed cities across
the US in 2018. Each city is linked to a specific weather station in the city at one of
the airports. These are: Atlanta (ATL), Chicago O’Hare (ORD), Cincinnati - Northern
Kentucky (CVG), Dallas Fort Worth (DFW), Las Vegas (LAS), Minneapolis - Saint Paul
(MSP), New York LaGuardia (LGA), and Sacramento (SAC). The location across the US is
displayed in Figure 1. In the past there were more cities with weather markets, but trading in
several cities was halted due to a lack of liquidity. Therefore, we focus on the eight US cities
for which contracts are still available in 2018. We have data ranging from the 2001/2002
winter through the 2018 summer. When we present seasonal aggregates, winter months are
assigned to the new year, i.e., November 2001 - March 2002 is recorded as winter 2002.
Our data ranges from November 2001- September 2018, but is aggregated as winter 2002 -


                                               7
summer 2018.
   Contracts are priced based on cumulative monthly heating degree days (HDD) in winter
months and cooling degree days (CDD) in summer months. Degree days are a measure
of how much a day’s average temperature, calculated as the mean of the day’s high and
low temperature, deviates from a baseline. The CME temperature product uses the same
baseline of 65◦ F (18◦ C). Thus, heating degrees for a given day are the number of degrees
that the average temperature of that day is below 65◦ F, and cooling degrees are the number
of degrees that the average temperature is above 65◦ F. The accumulation period of each
contract begins on the first calendar day of the contract month and ends on the last calendar
day of the contract month. Trading volume of contracts generally increases in the last two
months before the start of a month, and is more infrequent before then.
    The final settlement price is based on the respective weather station HDD or CDD Index
for the month as reported by MDA Federal Information Systems, Inc. Each degree day in
a contract is $20. For example, if a customer buys one July CDD contract for 300 cooling
degree days, the cost would be $6,000. If the realized cumulative CDD for the month of
July settled at 330 cooling degree days, the clearance value would be $6,600, and the trader
would reap a profit of $600 ($20 times the increase of 30 degree days).
   The main participants in the weather market are firms seeking to offset risk. For example,
an energy company may sell an HDD contract to mitigate the risk of lower demand for
heating oil due to a mild winter. Likewise, a citrus company may purchase a HDD contract
to mitigate the risk of a winter freeze. The other market participants are speculators who
take contract positions based on their expectations of future weather (i.e., private beliefs on
climate).
    Daily futures prices (end of day) were obtained from Bloomberg terminals. In the absence
of market activity, prices are simply carried forward. For example, if there is a recorded trade
on June 17 at a price of 300 cooling degree days for the July contract, followed by no trade
on June 18, the Bloomberg data will show a price of 300 again. Unfortunately, the volume
data only includes contracts traded via the exchange and not privately over the counter,
and it is missing for most days. More generally, volumes in this market decreased in recent
years due to the entry of reinsurance firms offering bespoke weather-based hedging services
to market participants.
  One concern that we will return to in our empirical analysis is the liquidity of the market.
CME has a process in place to update prices on days in which no transacted volume occurs.
Prices are updated based on the mid-point of outstanding but non-converging bids and offers


                                               8
that are registered on the exchange. In the absence of live bids and offers, price changes can
be derived from option prices linked to the relevant month’s contract and/or the seasonal
strip contract (the aggregated contract for the entire winter or summer months). We can
infer that there was market activity, i.e., either a market clearing trade or a new bid/offer,
when prices change over time. Such price changes are a sufficient but not necessary condition
for market activity, as trades might happen at the previous day’s price. Price fluctuations
tend to increase the closer one gets to the contract live month. In our baseline we exclude
city-year observations if city-month contract prices did not vary over the roughly 45-day
period ranging from 14 days prior to the start of the contract month and the end of the
contract month for any of the months of the season. We find similar results when they are
included.
    Some data cleaning was necessary because of “sticky fingers,” e.g., sudden price jumps by
a factor of 10. For example, a price series was 91, 91, 910. We contacted Bloomberg about
whether these were data entry errors, but they assured us that the data had been cleaned.
The last trade might reflect an erroneous entry by a trader.3


2.2       Weather Station Data
Daily temperature data come from airport station monitors that are linked to each city’s
futures contract. We obtained the station ID of the weather station underlying the contract,
and downloaded the data on minimum and maximum temperature from the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration’s FTP server. A very small number of days have missing
values, in which case we replace the missing value with the previous’ day value. We then
computed the daily mean by averaging the minimum and maximum temperature before
calculating the degree days for the 65◦ F bound as given in equations 1 and 3 above.


2.3       Oceanic Oscillation Indices
Oceans exert strong influences on weather. One of the strongest and most famous is the El
Niño - Southern Oscillation, warming in the eastern Pacific Ocean that has been linked to
periodic climate shifts across the globe (Zebiak & Cane 1987). To rule out that recent trends
in observed weather are driven by trends in oceanic oscillations, we estimate monthly models
linking temperature data in a city to six monthly oceanic oscillation indices: ENSO (El Niño
- Southern Oscillation), NAO (North Atlantic Oscillation), PNA (Pacific/ North American
  3
      The exact adjustments are listed in the online appendix A1.


                                                     9
Teleconnection Pattern), AO (Arctic Oscillation), and AAO (Antarctic Oscillation). These
oscillations were downloaded from a FTP server of NOAA.4


2.4     Climate Model Data
The Coupled Model Comparison Project (CMIP) asks various modeling groups to simulate
changing temperatures under comparable assumptions. We rely on the 5th round, i.e., the
CMIP5 archive where these groups predicted trends in climate from 2006 onwards. These
runs were done only using observed climate data prior to 2006 in the calibration. We obtain
daily values from NASA NEX-GDDP, a dataset of 21 models that were spatially downscaled
to a common grid of 0.5◦ latitude and longitude. We pick the grid cell in which the weather
station is located.
    NASA NEX-GDDP is bias corrected. There is a well-documented literature describing
how climate models can get the baseline averages wrong for various grids because the models
are primarily designed to simulate how shocks, i.e., deviations from the average, promulgate
through the system. NASA NEX-GDDP therefore adjusts for possible biases by ensuring
the baseline average match those observed for the grid cell. Regardless, subtracting the same
constant every year will not affect predicted changes in temperature, the relevant factor in
this and other trend analyses.
    NASA NEX-GDDP has data for two scenarios: Representative Concentration Pathway
(RCP) 4.5, assuming an additional energy flux of 4.5 watts per meter square. This is a
moderate warming scenario in which greenhouse gas emissions are reduced and radiative
forcing stabilizes such that the global mean temperature increases by 1.8◦ C (3.2◦ F) by 2100.
There is large spatial heterogeneity, and warming in the US is usually projected to be higher
than the global average by a factor or two, i.e., 6.4◦ F. RCP 8.5, on the other hand, simulates
major warming where emissions continue to rise such that there will be additional radiative
forcing of 8.5 Watts per square meter. This results in a global mean temperature increase
of 3.7◦ C by 2100. However, in the short term (2005-2018) that includes our study period,
both models give very similar projections. They are only predicted to diverge towards the
end of the century as carbon emissions accumulate over time.
   Figure 2 shows box plots for the number of cooling degree days by month for the eight
cities with weather futures contracts. The red line displays the weather station data and
   4
     Monthly ENSO values were downloaded from ftp://ftp.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/cwlinks/, while daily values
for the remaining indices was obtained from ftp://ftp.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/cwlinks/ and averaged over all days
of a month.



                                                    10
the blue line shows the climate model data. Both use data from 1950-2005, which was the
historical baseline period in the CMIP5 archive.5 There is close alignment in the mean values
as well variance around the means in both datasets. Recall that the climate models predict
average temperature over the entire grid, and hence it might differ from the observed tem-
perature at any given point (weather station) if there is spatial heterogeneity. For example,
a city close to a mountain might have a lower temperature than the temperature of the
surrounding area when averaged over the entire grid.
   Figure 3 shows the analogous plot for heating degree days. Both plots show strong
seasonality: more cooling degree days in the summer, and more heating degree days in the
winter. As expected, more northerly cities (Chicago, Minneapolis, New York) have relatively
more HDD and less CDD, while more southerly cities (Atlanta, Dallas, Las Vegas) have less
HDD and more CDD. Across the eight cities, there are very few occurrences of HDD in the
summer months and CDD in winter months, which is why HDD futures contracts are not
traded in summer and CDD contracts are not traded in winter.
   While Figures 2 and 3 compare the historic baseline period in the climate models, Figure 4
compares station level data on cumulative degree days for a given city-month with the settled
prices of the city-month’s futures contract (averaged over the seven days after the month’s
close). These data have been cleaned using the process described earlier. As expected, there
is close alignment between futures prices and observed weather station data at the month’s
end, at which point all uncertainty has been resolved, i.e., the weather has been realized.
The correlation of the two series is above 0.999. The scatter plot reveals a small number of
deviations from the 45-degree line, which may be explained if the futures did not trade at
the end of the month and hence the price may not reflect the final tally of observed degree
days.


3       Empirical Results
3.1     Market Capitalization of Weather Shocks
We start by analyzing the timing of when weather shocks are capitalized into futures prices,
which is akin to the market updating a particular year’s weather shock. Forecasting and pre-
diction skill of weather (short-term) and climate (medium to long-term) are closely connected
    5
    Some of the 21 climate models do not account for leap years, i.e., February 29. For consistency, we
rescale February in both station and climate model data to 28 days, i.e., if a weather station or climate
                                                                                         28
model reports 29 days for February, we multiple the cumulative number of degree days by 29  .


                                                   11
(Auffhammer et al. 2013). Climate models build on a foundation of short-term weather dy-
namics, and the same underlying physical laws apply to the predictions of both weather
and climate models. If market participants are accurately updating their longer-term beliefs
based on climate warming trends, it would be expected that they also accurately update
their short-term beliefs based on weather forecasts.
   Weather forecasts are widespread and freely available sources of information, and un-
der efficient markets, we would expect that prices of weather futures to adjust based on
these forward expectations. Forecast skill is a function of forecast range. There has been
a sustained improvement in weather forecasting across all prediction ranges over the past
decades. Forecasting skill seems to have plateaued in the early 2000s when the weather
futures market was launched. At present, 5-day forecasts are very accurate with 90% skill,
7-day forecasts are good with 75% skill, and 10-day forecasts are poor with less than 50%
skill (Bauer, Thorpe & Brunet 2015). Given this, we would expect an inverted U-shape in
terms of the impact of weather shocks on current prices since long-term forecasts beyond 10
days have quickly diminishing value and since very short-term forecasts should have already
been incorporated into prices given their certainty. As such, anticipated changes in weather
around one week out should have the largest impact on current prices in an efficient weather
market.
   To test this, we regress changes in weekly futures prices (Friday to Friday) on actual
weekly deviations in degree days from historical averages over the contemporaneous week
(Saturday to Friday), as well as the three leading weeks as given in equation 5. For CDD, we
include the four summer contract months (June to September), the months that showed the
highest average number of cooling degree days in Figure 2. The results are shown in Panel
A of Table 1. We find that the majority of price updating is driven by weather shocks that
occur one week out, when 41-47% of a weather shock (deviation from seasonal average) is
priced into futures. The concurrent week follows with an estimate of 17-22%, while shocks
two weeks ahead only get reflected 6-8% in the futures price. Leads three weeks into the
future have no significant coefficients. The sum of the coefficients for these three weeks
l = 0 . . . 2 implies that 78% of a weather shock gets capitalized into futures prices during
those three weeks, as shown in the most flexible model in column (7). Results are insensitive
to the fixed effects included in the regression, which range from no fixed effects in column
(1) to city by year by contract month fixed effects as well as week till settlement fixed effects,
e.g., a fixed effect for the June 2017 contract in Atlanta as well as fixed effects for the week’s
position relative to the contract’s maturity in column (7).


                                               12
   Panel B of Table 1 presents the regression results for heating degree days during the
winter season from November to March. The coefficient for the period one week into the
future again has the largest magnitude, being reflected 35% in the current week’s price
change. HDD contract prices are also driven by weather shocks two weeks into the future,
which are capitalized 23-25%. Together they account for 60% of price changes, as shown in
column (7). Neither the contemporaneous week nor the one three weeks out are significant.
The insignificant coefficient on the contemporaneous week suggests that short-term weather
forecasting skill is better in winter months than summer months in the US.
   Earlier we discussed how weather futures are sometimes not traded and hence might
not reflect the latest information and the market expectations. Our baseline regression
excluded week-on-week price changes if te prices remained constant throughout the entire
week. Table A1 includes all the available data, even when no price change occurred during
any of the trading days in a week (not just Friday to Friday). This increases the total
number of observations by roughly 10%. The resulting coefficients are slightly smaller in
magnitude, but not significantly different. The inclusion of these observations may induce
attenuation bias as the prices do not reflect true market expectations (the market price has
not adjusted). Excluding these observations has its own drawbacks, as the occurrence of
a trade is endogenous and might signal extreme weather events that might be easier (or
harder) to predict and hence have different forecast skill. However, the results are consistent
either way.
    In another sensitivity check in Table A2 we exclude weeks where the leads fall beyond
the end of the contract month. In the baseline model, these weather shocks were set to zero
as they fall outside the time range for which the weather contract is based. We skip the
third lead as it was not significant, which allows for an extra week of data. The results are
again consistent.


3.2    Linear Trends in Expectations
We now turn to our main analysis of market expectations and climate change. With weather
futures contracts, we must be careful to separate price changes driven by short-term weather
forecasts and those that reflect longer-term market beliefs on climate change. Some shocks
are partially forecastable over the course of months based on oceanic-atmospheric phenomena
like El Niño - Southern Oscillation (ENSO) or the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). Ideally
we would like to use futures prices well before the contract’s delivery month to ensure that we
are capturing market expectations of climate and not short-term weather forecasts. However,

                                              13
precisely because weather is hard to forecast far in advance, trading does not pick up until
one is getting closer to the delivery month. Early dated prices may not be representative of
the market’s true expectation given the illiquidity.
    Balancing these two tradeoffs, our baseline model uses average futures prices between 30
to 10 days prior to the start of each contract month, e.g., the average price between June 1 and
June 20 for a July CDD contract, which ensures that prices reflect future expectations and
not contemporaneous weather as confirmed in the previous section. For the CDD contracts,
this average price for each contract-month is again summed over the summer months from
June to September, and for the HDD contracts, it is again summed over the winter months
from November to March. To capture overall trends, Table 2 regresses the total degree days
for each city and season, e.g., annual summer cooling degree days from June to September,
on an annual time trend as shown in equation 6.
    Column (1a)-(1d) all use the same set of observations where futures data are non-missing.6
Column (1a) uses the baseline average of futures prices traded 30 to 10 days prior to the
start of the contract month. Panel A shows cooling degree days in summer and Panel B
shows heating degree days in winter. Both show statistically significant warming in the US
with anticipated cooling degree days increasing by about 10 per year during the summer and
anticipated heating degree days declining by about 8 per year during the winter. Column
(1b) uses weather station data. The observed trends are larger in magnitude with an increase
of 12 cooling degree days per year during the summer and a decrease of 17 heating degree
days during the winter. The standard errors are much larger given the greater year-to-
year swings due to random weather fluctuations, e.g., cold spells during the so-called Polar
Vortex. Given these larger standard errors, they are not significantly different from the
trends anticipated by the futures market as shown in (1a). The smaller standard errors in
the futures data relative to the station level data suggest that we are correctly measuring
market expectations over the longer term and not annual weather realizations, which are
much noisier. Finally, columns (1c)-(1d) give the predicted trends that climate models had
forecast for the same time period in the CMIP5 archive under the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5
model, respectively. Recall that these forecasts were made using climate data from 2005 and
before, i.e., the modeling groups had no chance to match their forecast to observed trends.
These annual warming trends closely mirror the trend in the futures data, i.e., the markets
seem to have fully internalized the projections of climate scientists.
   6
     For some cities, the futures contracts were established in later years and hence have a shorter time span.
In addition, we excluded contracts that had a constant price over the entire contract month and leading up
to it as further outlined in Section A1.


                                                      14
    While columns (1a)-(1d) purposefully keeps the set of city-year observations constant,
columns (2a)-(2d) replicate the analysis with different subsets of the data. Column (2a)
excludes seasons where any of the monthly contracts did not experience a price change
between 30 to 10 days before the start of a delivery month, an indication that no trading
activity occurred. This exclusion has a very limited effect on the estimated coefficients.
Next we address concerns about the endogeneity of this market, e.g., contracts are especially
traded in cold or hot years as firms realize they need a hedge. Columns (2b)-(2d) use
all available months with weather station and climate model data (even if no futures data
existed) and again find very similar trends.


3.3       Nonlinear Trends in Expectations
Figure 5 relaxes the linearity assumption of the time trend and instead plots lowess regres-
sions of the average annual residuals, i.e., after city fixed effects have been removed to account
for different average climates (Atlanta is hotter than Minneapolis) and residuals have been
averaged over the eight cities. The exact formula is given in equation (7) above. The lines
in green, red, cyan, and blue are the same as in columns (1a)-(1d) of Table 2, respectively.
All of them show a steady upward trend for cooling degree days and a downward trend
for heating degree days. The year 2017/2018 was especially warm, leading to a sharp drop
for that winter.7 The observation for summer 2018 is missing because data for June 2018
contracts were not available. Figure A2 replicates the analysis for the summer months from
July to September and finds comparable results. Mirroring the heating degree day trend,
there is an accelerated increase in warming in 2018.
   Next, we look at variability in the non-linear warming trends. The red line showing
actual weather outcomes from station data is the most variable as it is influenced by annual
and city-level weather anomalies. The magenta line, an additional trend from those included
in Table 2, partials out the effects of the ocean oscillation indices that we obtained from
the LASSO regression in equation (8) that are summarized in Table 3. Several monthly
degree day totals are influenced by the phase of various oceanic oscillation indices. The
trend is less variable than the one based on the raw weather station data, i.e., the standard
deviation around the trend is lower for the magenta line than the red line, both for cooling
and heating degree days. But the overall trend is rather unchanged. In other words, the
warming trend observed from station data is not due to the natural variability of oceanic-
atmospheric phenomena.
  7
      Recall that the 2017-2018 winter is coded as 2018.


                                                     15
    Lastly, the smooth green line, which is the trend in futures market expectations, closely
follows the cyan and blue line of climate projections, and is not influenced by the red or
magenta line, suggesting that the beliefs are not myopically updated based on recently
experienced weather but rather tied to the smooth warming trend projected by climate
models. Financial markets seem to fully incorporate this scientific consensus.


3.4    Sub-seasonal Trends in Expectations
Tables 4 and 5 separate the aggregate seasonal analysis into months for cooling and heating
degree days, respectively. Not surprisingly, there is more variability in these coefficient
estimates when the data is summed over a smaller time frame given that anomalous weather
shocks at the individual city-level are not being averaged over the course of a season. One
unique feature is that futures prices for the month of February show a significant positive
trend, i.e., an increase in HDD, which would be consistent with cooling and not warming.
All other winter months either show a significant negative trend or insignificant trend with a
negative point estimate. This may be explained by recent literature suggesting that melting
ice sheets destabilize the jet stream, leading to an increased frequency of stable weather
patterns that bring cold arctic air to Europe and North America (Francis & Vavrus 2015).
Another paper concludes that “Arctic polar vortex shifted persistently towards the Eurasian
continent and away from North America in February over the past three decades. [...]
Our analysis reveals that the vortex shift induces cooling over some parts of the Eurasian
continent and North America which partly offsets the tropospheric climate warming there in
the past three decades.” (Zhang et al. 2016). Kim et al. (2014) note that “the mechanism
that links sea-ice loss to cold winters remains a subject of debate.” So while there remains an
active scientific debate, the futures market seems to anticipate cooling in February consistent
with the recent literature. This is striking because observed station level data has exhibited
a February warming trend across cities, as predicted by the climate models in the CMIP5
archive that preceded this recent debate of the shift in the polar vortex.
    Since the polar vortex is expected to mainly influence the East Coast, we provide another
nonlinear regression based on the February futures prices for the six cities in the eastern half
of the US (excluding Las Vegas and Sacramento) in Figure 6. The figure shows a clear uptick
in the expected number of heating degree days around 2006, which started to plateau around
2013. The futures market seems to have shifted to an expectation of colder Februarys.
    Such a shift in the polar vortex is likely to aggravate the estimated economic impacts
of climate change. A myriad of studies find that moderate temperatures are optimal for

                                              16
energy use (Auffhammer & Mansur 2014), labor productivity (Graff Zivin & Neidell 2014),
mortality (Barreca et al. 2016), migration (Feng, Krueger & Oppenheimer 2010, Missirian
& Schlenker 2017), GDP growth (Burke, Hsiang & Miguel 2015), and agriculture (Schlenker
& Roberts 2009, Auffhammer & Schlenker 2014). Warming usually results in damages from
higher summer temperatures while yielding benefits from milder winter temperatures. A shift
in the polar vortex with colder February temperatures would hence accentuate damages, as a
result of the hotter summers and colder winters. Overall, winters on average are still getting
warmer and hence yielding benefits, but a shift in the polar vortex with colder February
temperatures will offset some of those benefits.


3.5    Spatial Heterogeneity in Warming
We examine spatial heterogeneity in the warming trends in Figure 7. While climate models
correctly predicted average annual trends in degree days, the predicted spatial heterogeneity
among the eight cities in our sample does not match the observed distribution from station
data. A regression of trends in city-level warming expectations derived from futures data on
city-level warming trends from the climate models does not provide a significant estimate
for spatial patters in cooling degree days in summer. For heating degree days, the coefficient
is negative under the RCP4.5 scenario, suggesting that cities that were predicted to see
higher-than-average winter warming in the climate models actually had lower-than-average
warming in the futures data. There are two possible explanations.
    First, as discussed in the previous section, it is much harder to predict spatial heterogene-
ity in warming than it is to predict average trends because of all the localized feedback loops
of the climate system. The average trend is given by a simple balance of energy calculation.
For example, if one increases the burner under a pot of water the average temperature will
increase, but it is much harder to predict where this extra energy will show up and how it
will spread across the volume of water. Similarly, changes in wind patterns might lead to
higher warming in some areas while reducing it in others (Hsiang & Kopp 2018). February
cooling due to the polar vortex over eastern North America goes hand-in-hand with higher-
than-expected warming in the Arctic. Cooling in East Coast cities does not refute that the
globe is warming, which it is in total, but rather reflects the uncertainty on where the extra
energy manifests as jet streams shift.
   Second, the futures market only came into existence in the fall of 2001 which might be
too short a time frame to pick up city-level warming trends that are heavily influenced by
city-level outliers that would otherwise average out over space.

                                               17
3.6    Trends Prior to 2002 and Post 2018
Given the drawbacks of a limited time series of 17 years, we contrast the trend from 2002
to 2018 in our analysis to nonparametric trends in weather station data from 1950 to 2018
in Figure 8, which aer available before the futures data started in 2002. Residuals, i.e.,
deviations in city-level seasonal totals compared to the historic average, are again color-
coded by each city’s airport and the nonparametric lowess regression is added as a black
line. As other authors have emphasized (Burke & Emerick 2016, e.g.,), observable warming
trends become apparent in the data around 1980. We find the same for the eight cities in
our sample: from 1950 to 1980 the nonparametric black line is rather flat. Starting around
1980 there is a clear uptick in warming over the last four decades as manifested by a higher
number of cooling degree days and a lower number of heating degree days.
   This warming trend is predicted to intensify in the future as shown in Figure 9, which dis-
plays the output from the climate models to the end of the century. The top row again shows
cooling degree days, while the bottom row shows heating degree days. The left column shows
nonparametric warming paths under the RCP4.5 scenario, while the right column shows it
for RCP8.5. Our sample period (2002-2018) is indicated by dashed grey lines. While the
models accurately predicted the initial trend from 2002 to 2018, which are comparable in
both RCP scenarios, there is greater uncertainty about what will happen towards the end of
the century as greenhouse gases accumulate in the atmosphere. Note the policy-driven diver-
gence in warming trends projected under the two different climate model scenarios, i.e., much
stronger warming under RCP8.5 (right column) than under RCP4.5 (left column). There is
also spatial heterogeneity in predicted warming, albeit subject to the caveat discussed in the
previous section about the uncertainty around the impact of shifting circulation patterns.


4     Conclusion
This paper contributes to the literature on belief formation and expectations about climate
change. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to utilize a direct measure of climate
change expectations as derived from weather-based futures contracts. The evidence shows
that financial markets fully incorporate climate model projections. We find that the market
has been accurately pricing in climate change, largely in line with global climate models, and
that this began occurring at least since the early 2000s when the weather futures markets
were formed.
   This has relevance for the corporate sector. Recent studies have highlighted how the val-

                                             18
uations of companies and entire industries are sensitive to weather fluctuations. Efficient and
profit-maximizing behavior requires an accurate assessment of predicted warming. Weather
markets can provide companies with pertinent information on future weather and climate
trends, as well as a hedge against potential lost profit.
   There are also policy implications of our findings, especially since some politicians still
question the existence and extent of climate change. Anyone doubting the observed warming
trend can make a significant profit by betting against it in weather markets. However, the
observed annual trend in futures prices shows that the supposedly-efficient financial markets
agree that the climate is warming. At least so far, climate models have been very accurate
in predicting the average warming trend that’s been observed across the US. When money
is on the line, it is hard to find parties willing to bet against the scientific consensus.




                                               19
References
Addoum, Jawad M., David T. Ng, and Ariel Ortiz-Bobea. 2019. “Temperature
   Shocks and Earning News.” Review of Financial Studies.

American Association for the Advancement of Science. December 9, 2006. “AAAS
    Board Statement on Climate Change.”

Auffhammer,     Maximilian. 2018. “Quantifying Economic Damages from Climate
    Change.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(4): 33–52.

Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Erin T Mansur. 2014. “Measuring climatic impacts on
    energy consumption: A review of the empirical literature.” Energy Economics, 46: 522–
    530.

Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2014. “Empirical studies on agri-
    cultural impacts and adaptation.” Energy Economics, 46: 555–561.

Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon M. Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam
    Sobel. 2013. “Using Weather Data and Climate Model Output in Economic Analyses
    of Climate Change.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 7(2): 181–198.

Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschênes, Michael Greenstone, and
    Joseph S. Shapiro. 2016. “Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline
    in the U.S. Temperature-Mortality Relationship over the 20th Century.” Journal of
    Political Economy, 124: 105–159.

Bauer, Peter, Alan Thorpe, and Gilbert Brunet. 2015. “The quiet revolution of
   numerical weather prediction.” Nature, 525: 47–55.

Burke, Marshall, and Kyle Emerick. 2016. “Adaptation to Climate Change: Evidence
   from US Agriculture.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(3): 106–140.

Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. 2015. “Global Non-linear
   Effect of Temperature on Economic Production.” Nature.

Campbell, Sean D., and Francis X. Diebold. 2005. “Weather Forecasting for Weather
    Derivatives.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 100(469): 6–16.



                                           20
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2014. “What Do We
    Learn from the Weather? The New Climate-Economy Literature.” Journal of Economic
    Literature, 53(3): 740–798.

Feng, Shuaizhang, Alan B. Krueger, and Michael Oppenheimer. 2010. “Linkages
    among climate change, crop yields and MexicoUS cross-border migration.” Proceedings
    of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States, 107(32): 14257–14262.

Francis, Jennifer A., and Stephen J Vavrus. 2015. “Evidence for a wavier jet stream
    in response to rapid Arctic warming.” Environmental Research Letters, 10: 014005.

Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. 2014. “Temperature and the Allocation of
    Time: Implications for Climate Change.” Journal of Labor Economics, 32(1): 1–26.

Hong, Harrison, Frank Weikai Li, and Jiangmin Xu. 2019. “Climate risks and market
   efficiency.” Journal of Econometrics, 208(1): 265–281.

Howe, Peter D., Matto Mildenberger, Jennifer R. Marlon, and Anthony Leis-
    erowitz. 2015. “Geographic variation in opinions on climate change at state and local
    scales in the USA.” Nature Climate Change, 5: 596603.

Hsiang, Solomon, and Robert E. Kopp. 2018. “An Economist’s Guide to Climate
    Change Science.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(4): 3–32.

Kala, Namrata. 2017. “Learning, Adaptation, and Climate Uncertainty.” Working Paper.

Kaufmann, Robert K., Michael L. Mann, Sucharita Gopal, Jackie A. Lieder-
   man, Peter D. Howe, Felix Pretis, Xiaojing Tang, and Michelle Gilmore.
    2017. “Spatial heterogeneity of climate change as an experiential basis for skepticism.”
    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(1): 67–71.

Kim, Baek-Min, Seok-Woo Son, Seung-Ki Min, Jee-Hoon Jeong, Seong-Joong
    Kim, Xiangdong Zhang, Taehyoun Shim, and Jin-Ho Yoon. 2014. “Weakening
    of the stratospheric polar vortex by Arctic sea-ice loss.” Nature Communications, 5: 4646
    EP.

Leiserowitz, Anthony, Edward Maibach, Connie Roser-Renouf, Seth Rosenthal,
    and Matthew Cutler. 2016. Climate Change in the American Mind: November 2016.
    Yale University and George Mason University.

                                            21
McGlade, Christophe, and Paul Ekins. 2015. “The geographical distribution of fossil
   fuels unused when limiting global warming to 2C.” Nature, 517: 187–190.

Meng, Kyle C. 2017. “Using a Free Permit Rule to Forecast the Marginal Abatement Cost
    of Proposed Climate Policy.” American Economic Review, 107(3): 748–784.

Missirian, Anouch, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2017. “Asylum Applications Respond to
    Temperature Fluctuations.” Science, 358: 1610–1614.

Moore, Frances, Nicholas Obradovich, and Flavio Lehner. 2018. “Rapidly-Adjusting
   Perceptions of Temperature in a Changing Climate.” Working Paper.

Neidell, Matthew. 2009. “Information, Avoidance Behavior, and Health: The Effect of
    Ozone on Asthma Hospitalizations.” Journal of Human Resources, 44(2): 450–478.

Oreskes, Naomi, and Erik M. Conway. 2010. Merchants of Doubt. Bloomsbury Press.

Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Christopher Udry. 2014. “Rainfall Forecasts, Weather,
   and Wages over the Agricultural Production Cycle.” American Economic Review,
    104(5): 278–283.

Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear Temperature Effects
    Indicate Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change.” Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Sciences, 106(37): 15594–15598.

Shrader, Jeffrey. 2017. “Expectations and adaptation to environmental risks.” Working
    Paper.

Turkey, J. W. 1977. Exploratory Data Analysis. AddisonWesley.

Zebiak, Stephen E., and Mark A. Cane. 1987. “A Model El Niño-Southern Oscillation.”
    Monthly Weather Review, 115: 2262–2278.

Zhang, Jiankai, Wenshou Tian, Martyn P. Chipperfield, Fei Xie, and Jinlong
   Huang. 2016. “Persistent shift of the Arctic polar vortex towards the Eurasian conti-
   nent in recent decades.” Nature Climate Change, 6: 1094–1099.




                                          22
                                              Figure 1: Location of Eight Airports in Sample
23




     Notes: Figure displays the location of the eight airports for which weather derivatives were traded in 2018. They are from north to south:
     Minneapolis - Saint Paul (MSP), Chicago O’Hare (ORD), New York LaGuardia (LGA), Cincinnati - Northern Kentucky (CVG), Sacramento
     (SAC), Las Vegas (LAS), Atlanta (ATL), and Dallas Fort Worth (DFW).
                                                                                          Figure 2: Cooling Degree Days by Month and Weather Dataset for Eight Airports
                                                                  New York La Guardia                                                                                                     Atlanta                                                                                  Cincinnati / Northern Kentucky                                                                                             Chicago O’Hare
                                    1,000




                                                                                                                                                 1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1,000
      Cooling Degree Days Above 65F




                                                                                                                   Cooling Degree Days Above 65F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cooling Degree Days Above 65F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cooling Degree Days Above 65F
                              800




                                                                                                                                           800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     800
                       600




                                                                                                                                    600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              600
               400




                                                                                                                            400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      400
       200




                                                                                                                    200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              200
                         0




                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                            Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                         Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr    May   Jun   Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                         Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                          Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec

                                                              Station−level data            NEX−GDDP data                                                                  Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                   Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                    Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data



                                                                  Minneapolis / St. Paul                                                                                           Dallas / Fort Worth                                                                                              Las Vegas                                                                                                    Sacramento
                                   1,000




                                                                                                                                                 1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1,000
     Cooling Degree Days Above 65F




                                                                                                                   Cooling Degree Days Above 65F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cooling Degree Days Above 65F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cooling Degree Days Above 65F
24


                             800




                                                                                                                                           800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      800
                      600




                                                                                                                                    600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               600
              400




                                                                                                                            400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       400
      200




                                                                                                                    200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               200
                       0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                            Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                         Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr    May   Jun   Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                         Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                          Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec

                                                              Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                   Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                   Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                    Station−level data            NEX−GDDP data




     Notes: Figure displays boxplots of cooling degree days, i.e., the amount average daily temperatures exceed 65F, summed over all days of a
     month. The box plots show the variation for the calendar month across years in 1950-2005. Blue bar graphs use station level data from the
     airport, while the red bar graph uses the daily data from NASA NEX-GDDP of the grid cell in which the airport is located. Boxes indicate
     the 25-75% range, with the median shown by a horizontal bar. Whiskers extend to the lower and upper adjacent value using STATA’s default
     parameter from Turkey (1977).
                                                                                         Figure 3: Heating Degree Days by Month and Weather Dataset for Eight Airports
                                                                 New York La Guardia                                                                                                   Atlanta                                                                                Cincinnati / Northern Kentucky                                                                                           Chicago O’Hare
                       1,200 1,600 2,000




                                                                                                                                  1,200 1,600 2,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1,200 1,600 2,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1,200 1,600 2,000
       Heating Degree Days Below 65F




                                                                                                                  Heating Degree Days Below 65F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Heating Degree Days Below 65F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Heating Degree Days Below 65F
                800




                                                                                                                           800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 800
        400




                                                                                                                   400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         400
                         0




                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                           Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                       Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr    May   Jun   Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                       Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                        Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec

                                                             Station−level data            NEX−GDDP data                                                                Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                 Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                  Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data



                                                                 Minneapolis / St. Paul                                                                                         Dallas / Fort Worth                                                                                            Las Vegas                                                                                                  Sacramento
                      1,200 1,600 2,000




                                                                                                                                  1,200 1,600 2,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1,200 1,600 2,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1,200 1,600 2,000
      Heating Degree Days Below 65F




                                                                                                                  Heating Degree Days Below 65F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Heating Degree Days Below 65F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Heating Degree Days Below 65F
25


               800




                                                                                                                           800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  800
       400




                                                                                                                   400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          400
                       0




                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                           Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                       Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr    May   Jun   Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                       Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec                                        Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec

                                                             Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                 Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                 Station−level data           NEX−GDDP data                                                                  Station−level data            NEX−GDDP data




     ; Notes: Figure displays boxplots of cooling degree days, i.e., the amount average daily temperatures exceed 65F, summed over all days of a
     month. The box plots show the variation for the calendar month across years in 1950-2005. Blue bar graphs use station level data from the
     airport, while the red bar graph uses the daily data from NASA NEX-GDDP of the grid cell in which the airport is located. Boxes indicate
     the 25-75% range, with the median shown by a horizontal bar. Whiskers extend to the lower and upper adjacent value using STATA’s default
     parameter from Turkey (1977).
                                              Figure 4: Observed Cooling Degree Days versus Futures Prices
                  1000




                                                                                                                     2000
                               800




                                                                                                                               1500
   Futures Price at End of Month




                                                                                                      Futures Price at End of Month
                     600




                                                                                                                  1000
           400




                                                                                                      500
 200              0




                                                                                                                     0




                                     0   200           400          600           800     1000                                        0      500              1000            1500         2000
                                         Observed Cooling Degree Days (Weather Station)                                                   Observed Heating Degree Days (Weather Station)


Notes: Left graph displays a scatter plot of the 513 observed monthly cooling degree day (CDD) totals
against the average futures price the week following the end of the summer months June-September. Right
graph displays a scatter plot of the 630 observed monthly heating degree day (HDD) totals against the
average futures price the week following the end of the winter months November-March. Both graphs use
data from winter 2001/2002 through summer 2018 across the eight airports. Graphs exclude 8 CDD (12
HDD) futures contracts where prices did not move in the 14-day window spanning between 7 days before the
end of the month or seven days after the end of the month, as it is not clear that they reflect final totals.




                                                                                                 26
                                                                                Figure 5: Nonparametric Futures Prices and Weather
                   75 100




                                                                                                                         200
                                                                                                                         100
                   50
      −125−100 −75 −50 −25 0 25




                                                                                                                                0
                     CDD Residual




                                                                                                                    HDD Residual
                                                                                                                  −200 −100
                                                                                                                         −300
27




                                                                                                                         −400
                                    2002      2004   2006     2008       2010     2012    2014     2016    2018                     2002      2004   2006     2008       2010    2012    2014     2016    2018
                                                                         Year                                                                                            Year

                                           Station   Excl. Circulation      Futures      RCP 4.5      RCP 8.5                              Station   Excl. Circulation      Futures     RCP 4.5      RCP 8.5


     Notes: Figure estimates nonparametric trends using lowess regression on the average annual residual among the eight airports, i.e., the
     annual residuals after taking out airport fixed effects (means) are averaged by year before running lowess on the annual observations. Red line
     shows the results for the observed station data, the magenta line partials out ocean oscillation indices that affect weather. The green line uses
     futures prices before the weather is realized, and the blue and cyan lines use model output from NASA NEX-GDDP. The left column shows
     the results for summer (June-September) CDD and the right column for winter (November-March) HDD.
                                   Figure 6: Nonparametric Futures Prices for February Futures in Eastern US
                  100
                  75
   Residual of HDD Futures Price
                            50




                                                                                                        Airport:
                      25




                                                                                                        ATL
                                                                                                        CVG
                                                                                                        DFW
                 0




                                                                                                        LGA
   −50 −25




                                                                                                        MSP
                                                                                                        ORD
                  −100 −75




                                   2002   2004    2006    2008    2010     2012   2014   2016    2018
                                                                  Year

Notes: Figure estimates nonparametric trends using lowess regression on the average annual residual among
the six eastern airports, i.e., the annual residuals after taking out airport fixed effects (means) are averaged
by year before running lowess on the annual observations. Residuals are color coded by airport and the
lowess regression line is added in black.




                                                                      28
   Figure 7: Spatial Heterogeneity of Trends in Station, Futures, and Climate Model Data
  6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22




                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                −30 −27 −24 −21 −18 −15 −12 −9 −6 −3
  Trend in CDD by Airport




                                                                                                            Trend in HDD by Airport
              4
              2
              0




                             MSP   ORD        LGA     CVG      SAC      LAS    ATL   DFW                                               MSP   ORD        LGA     CVG      SAC      LAS    ATL   DFW
                                                         Airport                                                                                                   Airport

                                         Futures    Station   NEX 4.5     NEX 8.5                                                                  Futures    Station   NEX 4.5     NEX 8.5



Notes: Graphs show scatter plots of trends in station, futures, and climate model data by airport as shown
in Figure 1. Airports are sorted from north to south. Left column shows the results for summer (June-
September) CDD and the right column for winter (November-March) HDD.




                                                                                           29
                                                      Figure 8: Nonparametric Trends in Station Weather
                                                                                             Study Period
                             750         500
             CDD Residual at Weather Station




                                                                                                               Airport:
                                                                                                               ATL
                               250




                                                                                                               CVG
                                                                                                               DFW
                                                                                                               LAS
                                                                                                               LGA
                       0




                                                                                                               MSP
                                                                                                               ORD
             −250




                                                                                                               SAC
                             −500




                                               1951     1960   1970   1980     1990   2000      2010    2018
                                                                          Year
                             1000




                                                                                             Study Period
                                         500
             HDD Residual at Weather Station




                                                                                                               Airport:
                                                                                                               ATL
                                                                                                               CVG
                                 0




                                                                                                               DFW
                                                                                                               LAS
                      −500




                                                                                                               LGA
                                                                                                               MSP
                                                                                                               ORD
             −1000




                                                                                                               SAC
                             −1500




                                               1951     1960   1970   1980     1990   2000      2010    2018
                                                                          Year


Notes: Figure plots residuals from a regression on airport fixed effects are color-coded by airport. The lowess
nonparametric regression line is added in black. Top row shows the results for summer (June-September)
CDD and the bottom row for winter (November-March) HDD.




                                                                             30
                                                          Figure 9: Nonparametric Predicted Trends in Climate Data Weather
                                                                 Study Period                                                                                                            Study Period
                                     1500




                                                                                                                                                             1500
 CDD Residual for NEX GDDP − RCP 4.5




                                                                                                                         CDD Residual for NEX GDDP − RCP 8.5
                            1200




                                                                                                                                                    1200
                                                                                                         Airport:                                                                                                                Airport:
                                                                                                         ATL                                                                                                                     ATL
                                                                                                         CVG                                                                                                                     CVG
                     900




                                                                                                                                             900
                                                                                                         DFW                                                                                                                     DFW
                                                                                                         LAS                                                                                                                     LAS
                                                                                                         LGA                                                                                                                     LGA
            600




                                                                                                                                    600
                                                                                                         MSP                                                                                                                     MSP
                                                                                                         ORD                                                                                                                     ORD
                                                                                                         SAC                                                                                                                     SAC
   300




                                                                                                                           300
                      0




                                                                                                                                              0



                                            1951   1970   1990      2010     2030   2050   2070   2090                                                              1951   1970   1990      2010     2030   2050   2070   2090
                                                                           Year                                                                                                                    Year


                                                                 Study Period                                                                                                            Study Period
                      0




                                                                                                                                              0
 HDD Residual for NEX GDDP − RCP 4.5




                                                                                                                         HDD Residual for NEX GDDP − RCP 8.5
                             −400




                                                                                                                                                     −400




                                                                                                         Airport:                                                                                                                Airport:
                                                                                                         ATL                                                                                                                     ATL
                                                                                                         CVG                                                                                                                     CVG
                     −800




                                                                                                                                             −800




                                                                                                         DFW                                                                                                                     DFW
                                                                                                         LAS                                                                                                                     LAS
           −1200




                                                                                                                                   −1200




                                                                                                         LGA                                                                                                                     LGA
                                                                                                         MSP                                                                                                                     MSP
                                                                                                         ORD                                                                                                                     ORD
                                                                                                         SAC                                                                                                                     SAC
  −1600




                                                                                                                          −1600
                      −2000




                                                                                                                                              −2000




                                            1951   1970   1990      2010     2030   2050   2070   2090                                                              1951   1970   1990      2010     2030   2050   2070   2090
                                                                           Year                                                                                                                    Year



Notes: Graphs show lowess nonparametric trend by airport for the 21 climate models in the NASA NEX-
GDDP data base. Top row shows the results for summer (June-September) CDD and the bottom row for
winter (November-March) HDD. Left column uses the predictions under the RCP4.5 scenario, while the right
column uses RCP8.5.




                                                                                                                    31
              Table 1: Market Updates: Futures Returns on Weather Shocks
                         (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)
                             Panel A: Cooling Degree Days June - September
                            ∗∗∗
 Shock in week t      0.170     0.185∗∗∗ 0.170∗∗∗ 0.183∗∗∗ 0.194∗∗∗ 0.212∗∗∗ 0.221∗∗∗
                      (0.025) (0.025) (0.024) (0.025) (0.026) (0.031) (0.032)
 Shock in week t+1 0.413∗∗∗ 0.424∗∗∗ 0.416∗∗∗ 0.427∗∗∗ 0.433∗∗∗ 0.446∗∗∗ 0.470∗∗∗
                      (0.024) (0.024) (0.024) (0.024) (0.024) (0.027) (0.028)
 Shock in week t+2 0.058∗∗ 0.067∗∗ 0.061∗∗ 0.065∗∗ 0.076∗∗ 0.072∗∗ 0.087∗∗∗
                      (0.029) (0.028) (0.028) (0.028) (0.029) (0.032) (0.032)
 Shock in week t+3 -0.039        -0.028   -0.041   -0.037   -0.027   -0.047   -0.044
                      (0.028) (0.029) (0.028) (0.029) (0.030) (0.034) (0.037)
 Observations           3344      3344     3344     3344     3344     3344     3344
 Clusters                67        67       67       67       67       67       67
 Fixed Effects                      4       17       67      133      513      520

                         Panel B: Heating Degree Days November - March
 Shock in week t    0.050    0.057    0.048    0.051    0.045    0.049    0.045
                   (0.045) (0.045) (0.045) (0.047) (0.048) (0.060) (0.061)
 Shock in week t+1 0.347∗∗∗ 0.354∗∗∗ 0.347∗∗∗ 0.348∗∗∗ 0.349∗∗∗ 0.348∗∗∗ 0.352∗∗∗
                   (0.038) (0.038) (0.039) (0.039) (0.040) (0.044) (0.043)
 Shock in week t+2 0.244∗∗∗ 0.252∗∗∗ 0.243∗∗∗ 0.242∗∗∗ 0.242∗∗∗ 0.231∗∗∗ 0.230∗∗∗
                   (0.048) (0.048) (0.048) (0.048) (0.048) (0.051) (0.050)
 Shock in week t+3  0.058    0.068    0.057    0.053    0.058    0.042    0.047
                   (0.042) (0.042) (0.042) (0.043) (0.044) (0.050) (0.052)
 Observations        4199     4199     4199     4199     4199     4199     4199
 Clusters             85       85       85       85       85       85       85
 Fixed Effects                 5        17       85      134      642      649
 Fixed Effects         -       M        Y       YM        AY     AYM     AYM,W
Notes: Table regresses weekly cooling (CDD) and heating (HDD) degree day future returns (Friday-Friday)
on deviations in degree days from seasonal averages. Both the contemporaneous week as well as three
leads are included. Errors are clustered at the delivery month (e.g., November 2010). Columns control for
different fixed effects across the 17 years in our sample (2002-2018), months (June-September for CDD and
November-March for HDD) and 8 airports for which contracts are available. Fixed effects are: monthly
(M), yearly (Y), year-month (YM), airport-year (AY), airport-year-month (AYM), as well as AYM plus
week relative to contract maturity fixed effects (AYM,W). Tables excludes observations that did not see a
price change during the entire week.




                                                   32
                                                       Table 2: Trends in CDD and HDD

                                       (1a)         (1b)          (1c)     (1d)     (2a)     (2b)                     (2c)         (2d)
                                                                  Panel A: CDD June-September
            Time trend (years)      10.282∗∗∗     12.085∗∗∗     9.134∗∗∗ 9.957∗∗∗ 8.995∗∗∗ 10.626∗∗∗                9.374∗∗∗    10.668∗∗∗
                                     (0.804)       (3.357)      (0.593)  (0.569)  (1.206)   (2.853)                 (0.513)      (0.471)
            Observations               117           117          117      117       90       136                     136          136

                                                                 Panel B: HDD November-March
            Time trend (years)      -8.472∗∗∗     -16.743∗∗    -8.133∗∗∗ -7.875∗∗∗ -9.429∗∗∗  -9.827               -8.971∗∗∗    -9.223∗∗∗
                                     (1.995)       (8.398)      (1.340)   (1.379)   (2.997)  (7.189)                (1.173)      (1.173)
            Observations               115           115          115       115        87      136                    136          136
33




            Airport FE                 Yes           Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes                    Yes          Yes
            Data                     Futures       Station      RCP4.5 RCP 8.5 Futures       Station                RCP4.5      RCP 8.5
            Years                   Common        Common       Common Common Traded             All                   All          All

     Notes: Panel A regresses cooling degree days (CDD) for the summer months June-September on a linear time trend, while panel B looks at
     heating degree days for November-March in the years 2002-2018. Column (a) uses the average futures price 30 to 10 days before the start of
     each contract month, e.g., the average price between June 1 and June 20 for a July contract. Column (b) uses observed station level data
     for the month, while columns (c) and (d) use climate change forecasts in the NASA NEX-GDDP database under the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5
     scenarios. Columns (1a)-(1b) estimate the trends for a consistent set of observations where futures data are available. Columns (2a)-(2b)
     conduct sensitivity checks to the included years. Columns (2a) exclude years where the price did not change over that time frame as the
     contract might not have been traded and hence not reflect changes in market expectations. Columns (2b)-(2d) include all years even if futures
     data is not available.
                                 Table 3: LASSO Regression of Monthly Weather on Oceanic Oscillation

                                                         Panel A: Cooling Degree Days
                             ENSO                      NAO             PNA                                  AO                       AAO
        Month            6    7 8 9                6   7 8 9        6 7 8 9           6                     7 8      9           6   7 8 9
        ATL                     X X                      X                 X X                                X      X                 X
        CVG                     X                        X                 X                                  X                        X
        DFW              X                                          X                 X
        LAS
        LGA                                                                                            X
        MSP                       X    X                         X
        ORD                                                      X
        SAC                                             X

                                                    Panel B: Heating Degree Days
34




                         ENSO                   NAO             PNA              AO                                              AAO
        Month     11    12 1 2         3    11 12 1 2 3 11 12 1 2 3 11 12 1 2                                        3    11    12 1 2         3
        ATL                                 X X
        CVG              X                  X X
        DFW                                 X
        LAS                       X                 X                 X             X                                                     X
        LGA                                    X
        MSP        X                        X              X       X         X                                            X
        ORD              X                     X
        SAC                       X                 X

     Notes: Table summarizes LASSO regression (STATA package lassopack) of monthly cooling and heating degree days on six Oceanic Oscillation
     indices: ENSO (El Niño - Southern Oscillation), NAO (North Atlantic Oscillation), PNA (Pacific/ North American Teleconnection Pattern),
     AO (Arctic Oscillation), AAO (Antarctic Oscillation). regressions are done separately for each month while linking it to the values of the six
     oscillations for the same month as well as a linear time trend. Variables that are selected based on the Extended Bayesian Information Criteria
     (EBIC) are marked with an X.
                                                       Table 4: Trends in CDD by Month

                                         (1a)         (1b)          (1c)     (1d)     (2a)     (2b)                  (2c)        (2d)
                                                                        Panel A: CDD June
             Time trend (years)        3.377∗∗∗     5.022∗∗∗     1.587∗∗∗  1.989∗∗∗ 3.612∗∗∗ 4.425∗∗∗              1.574∗∗∗    1.834∗∗∗
                                       (0.361)      (1.089)      (0.225)   (0.257)  (0.434) (0.965)                (0.193)     (0.228)
             Observations                119          119          119       119      105      136                   136         136

                                                                         Panel B: CDD July
                                             ∗∗∗                        ∗∗∗
             Time trend (years)        2.351          1.920      2.635      3.086∗∗∗ 2.194∗∗∗           1.681      2.765∗∗∗    3.199∗∗∗
                                       (0.311)       (1.333)     (0.208)    (0.219)  (0.375)           (1.260)     (0.198)     (0.207)
             Observations                131           131         131        131      110               136         136         136

                                                                       Panel C: CDD August
                                             ∗∗∗                        ∗∗∗
             Time trend (years)        2.550          1.413      2.532     3.118∗∗∗ 2.227∗∗∗ 1.192                 2.667∗∗∗    3.147∗∗∗
                                       (0.292)       (1.239)     (0.221)   (0.217)  (0.340) (1.171)                (0.211)     (0.205)
             Observations                131           131         131       131      114     136                    136         136
35




                                                                      Panel D: CDD         September
                                             ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
             Time trend (years)       2.602        3.912         2.353∗∗∗   2.491∗∗∗       2.579∗∗∗ 3.327∗∗∗       2.368∗∗∗    2.487∗∗∗
                                       (0.291)      (1.017)       (0.225)   (0.218)         (0.339) (0.981)        (0.214)     (0.208)
             Observations                132          132           132       132             114     136            136         136
             Airport FE                  Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes             Yes     Yes            Yes         Yes
             Data                     Futures       Station      RCP4.5 RCP 8.5            Futures Station         RCP4.5      RCP 8.5
             Years                    Common       Common        Common Common              Traded     All            All         All

     Notes: Table replicates Panel A of Table 2 but estimates a separate trend for each month. It regresses cooling degree days (CDD) for the
     summer months June-September on a linear time trend in the years 2002-2018. Column (a) uses the average futures price 30 to 10 days
     before the start of each contract month, e.g., the average price between June 1 and June 20 for a July contract. Column (b) uses observed
     station level data for the month, while columns (c) and (d) use climate change forecasts in the NASA NEX-GDDP database under the RCP4.5
     and RCP8.5 scenarios. Columns (1a)-(1b) estimate the trends for a consistent set of observations where futures data are available. Columns
     (2a)-(2b) conduct sensitivity checks to the included years. Columns (2a) exclude years where the price did not change over that time frame as
     the contract might not have been traded and hence not reflect changes in market expectations . Columns (2b)-(2d) include all years even if
     futures data is not available.
                                                        Table 5: Trends in HDD by Month

                                         (1a)          (1b)          (1c)      (1d)      (2a)   (2b)                     (2c)         (2d)
                                                                        Panel A: HDD November
             Time trend (years)        -4.229∗∗∗      -0.287       -1.018∗∗ -1.053∗∗∗ -4.663∗∗∗ 0.708                 -1.169∗∗∗    -1.104∗∗∗
                                        (0.535)      (1.746)       (0.452)    (0.362)  (0.644) (1.704)                 (0.430)      (0.347)
             Observations                 131          131           131        131      113     136                     136          136

                                                                        Panel B: HDD December
                                                ∗             ∗
             Time trend (years)        -1.033        -4.985        -1.135∗∗  -0.900∗∗  -1.085  -1.932                 -1.222∗∗∗    -1.650∗∗∗
                                       (0.613)       (2.621)       (0.498)   (0.453)  (0.674) (2.193)                  (0.454)      (0.446)
             Observations                115           115           115       115      108     136                      136          136

                                                                          Panel C: HDD January
                                                                         ∗∗∗
             Time trend (years)         -0.242        -0.583       -1.838    -2.784∗∗∗  -0.391  0.008                 -1.851∗∗∗    -2.844∗∗∗
                                       (0.661)       (2.414)        (0.405)   (0.438)  (0.793) (2.381)                 (0.394)      (0.427)
             Observations                134           134            134       134      114     136                     136          136

                                                                         Panel D: HDD February
36




                                             ∗∗∗              ∗∗
             Time trend (years)        1.927         -6.275        -1.945∗∗∗ -1.575∗∗∗ 1.974∗∗∗ -5.388∗∗              -1.980∗∗∗    -1.757∗∗∗
                                       (0.612)       (2.437)        (0.421)   (0.456)  (0.652) (2.322)                 (0.394)      (0.428)
             Observations                131           131            131       131      122      136                    136          136

                                                                           Panel E: HDD March
             Time trend (years)       -5.290∗∗∗       -1.551       -2.483∗∗∗ -1.615∗∗∗ -5.531∗∗∗ -3.222               -2.749∗∗∗    -1.868∗∗∗
                                       (0.679)       (2.247)        (0.427)   (0.420)   (0.737) (2.148)                (0.410)      (0.403)
             Observations                131           131            131       131       123     136                    136          136
             Airport FE                  Yes           Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes                    Yes          Yes
             Data                      Futures       Station        RCP4.5 RCP 8.5 Futures Station                     RCP4.5      RCP 8.5
             Years                    Common        Common         Common Common Traded            All                   All          All

     Notes: Table replicates Panel B of Table 2 but estimates a separate trend for each month. It regresses heating degree days (HDD) for the winter
     months November-March in the years 2002-2018. Column (a) uses the average futures price 30 to 10 days before the start of each contract
     month, e.g., the average price between June 1 and June 20 for a July contract. Column (b) uses observed station level data for the month,
     while columns (c) and (d) use climate change forecasts in the NASA NEX-GDDP database under the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios. Columns
     (1a)-(1b) estimate the trends for a consistent set of observations where futures data are available. Columns (2a)-(2b) conduct sensitivity checks
     to the included years. Column (2a) excludes years where the price did not change over that time frame as the contract might not have been
     traded and hence not reflect changes in market expectations. Columns (2b)-(2d) include all years even if futures data is not available.
A1      Data Appendix
Some data cleaning was necessary for the futures data because of “sticky fingers,” e.g.,
sudden price jumps by a factor of 10. For example, a price series was 91, 91, 910. We
contacted Bloomberg about whether these were data entry errors, but they assured us that
the data had been cleaned. Specifically, we rescaled
                                                1
  1. The January 2011 contract in DFW by        10
                                                     if its price exceeded 6000.
                                           1
  2. The July 2011 contract for CVG by    10
                                               if its price exceeded 4000.
                                                                               1
  3. The September 2011 contract for ATL, LAS, LGA and SAC by                 10
                                                                                   if its price exceeded
     1000.
                                                      1
  4. The September 2011 contract in MSP by           10
                                                          if its price exceeded 300.

  5. The January, February, and March contracts in 2002 and 2003 for SAC by 10 if their
     price was below 60.

  6. The November and December contracts in 2002 for SAC by 10 if their price was below
     100.

  7. The December 2016 contracts for SAC by 10 if their price was below 100.

Furthermore, we excluded observations

  1. Where the price was zero

  2. Where prices were missing for 30 days before the start date of a month. This occurred
     for some December contracts in 2003 and 2005.

  3. Where prices never changed between two weeks (14 days) before the start of the month
     and the end of the month, i.e., there was no price change over the 45-day period.




                                               A1
                                         Figure A1: Observed Cooling and Heating Degree Days versus Futures Prices
                  1000




                                                                                                                         2000
                               800




                                                                                                                                   1500
   Futures Price at End of Month




                                                                                                          Futures Price at End of Month
                     600




                                                                                                                      1000
           400




                                                                                                          500
 200              0




                                                                                                                         0




                                     0       200           400          600           800     1000                                        0      500              1000            1500         2000
                                             Observed Cooling Degree Days (Weather Station)                                                   Observed Heating Degree Days (Weather Station)


Notes: Figure replicates Figure 4, but includes the additional 8 CDD (12 HDD) futures contracts where
prices did not move in the 14-day window spanning between 7 days before the end of the month or seven
days after the end of the month. Left graph again displays a scatter plot of the 513 observed monthly cooling
degree day (CDD) totals against the average futures price the week following the end of the summer months
June-September. Right graph displays a scatter plot of the 642 observed monthly heating degree day (HDD)
totals against the average futures price the week following the end of the winter months November-March.
Both graphs use data for the 18 years (2001-2018) across the eight airports. Some months have missing
data.




                                                                                                     A2
                                Figure A2: Nonparametric Futures Prices and Weather for July-September
               75 100
               50
  −125−100 −75 −50 −25 0 25
                 CDD Residual




                                2002      2004   2006      2008        2010     2012    2014     2016    2018
                                                                       Year

                                       Station    Excl. Circulation        Futures     RCP 4.5      RCP 8.5


Notes: Figure replicates the left column of Figure 5 for CDD in the months July-September as data for June
was not available in 2018. It estimates nonparametric trends using lowess regression on the average annual
residual among the eight airports, i.e., the annual residuals after taking out airport fixed effects (means)
are averaged by year before running lowess on the annual observations. Red line shows the results for the
observed station data, the magenta line partials out ocean oscillation indices that affect weather. The green
line uses futures prices before the weather is realized, and the blue lines use model output from NASA
NEX-GDDP.




                                                                      A3
 Table A1: Futures Returns on Weather Shocks - Including Weeks with no Price Change
                       (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)
                           Panel A: Cooling Degree Days June - September
                          ∗∗∗
 Shock in week t    0.156     0.168∗∗∗ 0.158∗∗∗ 0.170∗∗∗ 0.178∗∗∗ 0.193∗∗∗ 0.203∗∗∗
                    (0.021) (0.022) (0.021) (0.022) (0.022) (0.026) (0.027)
 Shock in week t+1 0.372∗∗∗ 0.381∗∗∗ 0.373∗∗∗ 0.381∗∗∗ 0.386∗∗∗ 0.392∗∗∗ 0.418∗∗∗
                    (0.024) (0.024) (0.023) (0.024) (0.024) (0.026) (0.028)
 Shock in week t+2 0.048∗     0.057∗∗   0.048∗    0.051∗  0.059∗∗   0.051∗    0.065∗∗
                    (0.026) (0.026) (0.026) (0.026) (0.027) (0.030) (0.029)
 Shock in week t+3 -0.046∗     -0.037  -0.045∗ -0.047∗     -0.033 -0.062∗∗ -0.060∗
                    (0.024) (0.024) (0.024) (0.025) (0.026) (0.030) (0.032)
 Observations         3778      3778     3778      3778     3778     3778      3778
 Clusters              67        67       67        67       67       67        67
 Fixed Effects                    4       17        67      133      513        520

                         Panel B: Heating Degree Days November - March
 Shock in week t    0.053    0.060    0.052    0.055    0.051    0.054    0.049
                   (0.041) (0.041) (0.041) (0.043) (0.044) (0.053) (0.054)
 Shock in week t+1 0.325∗∗∗ 0.330∗∗∗ 0.324∗∗∗ 0.323∗∗∗ 0.324∗∗∗ 0.320∗∗∗ 0.328∗∗∗
                   (0.035) (0.035) (0.035) (0.036) (0.036) (0.039) (0.038)
 Shock in week t+2 0.232∗∗∗ 0.239∗∗∗ 0.231∗∗∗ 0.228∗∗∗ 0.230∗∗∗ 0.219∗∗∗ 0.220∗∗∗
                   (0.046) (0.046) (0.046) (0.046) (0.046) (0.048) (0.047)
 Shock in week t+3  0.056    0.065∗   0.055    0.048    0.054    0.033    0.039
                   (0.038) (0.038) (0.038) (0.039) (0.040) (0.044) (0.046)
 Observations        4694     4694     4694     4694     4694     4694     4694
 Clusters             85       85       85       85       85       85       85
 Fixed Effects                  5       17       85      134      642      649
 Fixed Effects         -       M        Y       YM        AY     AYM     AYM,W
Notes: Tables replicates Table 1, but also includes weeks that did not see any price change. It regresses
weekly cooling (CDD) and heating (HDD) degree day future returns (Friday-Friday) on deviations in degree
days from seasonal averages. Both the contemporaneous week as well as three leads are included. Errors are
clustered at the delivery month (e.g., November 2010). Columns control for different fixed effects across the
17 years in our sample (2002-2018), months (June-September for CDD and November-March for HDD) and
8 airports for which contracts are available. Fixed effects are: monthly (M), yearly (Y), year-month (YM),
airport-year (AY), airport-year-month (AYM), as well as AYM plus week relative to contract maturity fixed
effects (AYM,W).




                                                    A4
Table A2: Futures Returns on Weather Shocks - Excluding Weeks Were Leads Fall Beyond
the End of the Contract Month
                        (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)
                            Panel A: Cooling Degree Days June - September
                           ∗∗∗
 Shock in week t     0.163     0.178∗∗∗ 0.161∗∗∗ 0.170∗∗∗ 0.186∗∗∗ 0.219∗∗∗ 0.220∗∗∗
                     (0.027) (0.028) (0.027) (0.028) (0.030) (0.036) (0.037)
 Shock in week t+1 0.418∗∗∗ 0.434∗∗∗ 0.420∗∗∗ 0.438∗∗∗ 0.444∗∗∗ 0.469∗∗∗ 0.472∗∗∗
                     (0.024) (0.024) (0.024) (0.025) (0.025) (0.030) (0.030)
 Shock in week t+2    0.025     0.043∗   0.024    0.030   0.053∗∗   0.049     0.047
                     (0.024) (0.024) (0.024) (0.025) (0.026) (0.031) (0.031)
 Observations          2743      2743     2743     2743     2743     2743      2743
 Clusters               67        67       67       67       67       67        67
 Fixed Effects                     4       17       67      133      513       518

                         Panel B: Heating Degree Days November - March
 Shock in week t    0.016    0.031    0.011    0.023    0.002    -0.004   -0.008
                   (0.046) (0.047) (0.047) (0.050) (0.050) (0.067) (0.067)
 Shock in week t+1 0.345∗∗∗ 0.356∗∗∗ 0.341∗∗∗ 0.338∗∗∗ 0.340∗∗∗ 0.314∗∗∗ 0.316∗∗∗
                   (0.040) (0.040) (0.040) (0.041) (0.041) (0.046) (0.045)
 Shock in week t+2 0.207∗∗∗ 0.215∗∗∗ 0.200∗∗∗ 0.189∗∗∗ 0.192∗∗∗ 0.145∗∗∗ 0.139∗∗∗
                   (0.035) (0.035) (0.035) (0.037) (0.035) (0.045) (0.045)
 Observations        3493     3493     3493     3493     3493     3493     3493
 Clusters             85       85       85       85       85       85       85
 Fixed Effects                 5        17       85      134      642      647
 Fixed Effects         -       M        Y       YM        AY     AYM     AYM,W
Notes: Tables replicates Table 1, but does not include weeks were the leads fall beyond the end of the
contract months (they were previously set to zero). It regresses weekly cooling (CDD) and heating
(HDD) degree day future returns (Friday-Friday) on deviations in degree days from seasonal averages.
Both the contemporaneous week as well as two leads are included. Errors are clustered at the delivery
month (e.g., November 2010). Columns control for different fixed effects across the 17 years in our sample
(2002-2018), months (June-September for CDD and November-March for HDD) and 8 airports for which
contracts are available. Fixed effects are: monthly (M), yearly (Y), year-month (YM), airport-year (AY),
airport-year-month (AYM), as well as AYM plus week relative to contract maturity fixed effects (AYM,W).
Tables excludes observations that did not see a price change during the entire week.




                                                   A5
