NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PAYING TO PROGRAM? ENGINEERING BRAND AND HIGH-TECH WAGES
Prasanna Tambe
Xuan Ye
Peter Cappelli
Working Paper 25552
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25552

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

We have greatly benefited from feedback from April Franco, Brad Greenwood, Damien Joseph,
Boyan Jovanavic, Chris Kemerer, Paul Osterman, Amanda Pallais, and Michael Roach as well as
seminar participants at the American Economic Association, the Academy of Management, the
American Sociological Association, the Wharton People and Organizations Conference, the
University of Minnesota, Temple University, the INFORMS Conference on Information Systems
and Technology, Purdue University, the Workshop for Information Systems and Economics, New
York University, the University of Washington, the Georgia Tech Sandra Slaughter Software
Conference, the University of Illinois-Chicago, the NYU CIRI Seminar series, Arizona State
University, Harvard Business School, the Federal Reserve Board, the Wharton School of
Business, Michigan State University, and the University of Pittsburgh. We are also grateful to
Andrew Chamberlain and Glassdoor for providing access to their data. Prasanna Tambe is
grateful to the Alfred P. Sloan foundation for financial assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Prasanna Tambe, Xuan Ye, and Peter Cappelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Paying to Program? Engineering Brand and High-Tech Wages
Prasanna Tambe, Xuan Ye, and Peter Cappelli
NBER Working Paper No. 25552
February 2019
JEL No. J24,J33,J41,L86
ABSTRACT
We test the hypothesis that IT workers accept a compensating differential to work with emerging
IT systems, and that employers that invest in these systems can, in turn, capture greater value
from the wages they pay. We show that much of the utility IT workers derive from these systems
is from skills acquired on the job. This is principally true for younger workers at employers where
skill development is encouraged, and the effects are stronger in thicker markets where workers
with newer skills have more outside options. An analysis of the text in online employer reviews
supports the notion that IT workers value access to interesting IT systems above most other
employer attributes. These findings are important because first, they provide evidence of how
worker preferences can influence corporate IT investment decisions; second, because they shed
light on factors influencing IT skill development; and third, because they point to a potentially
important explanation for returns from IT investments.
Prasanna Tambe
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street
558 Jon M. Huntsman Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
tambe@wharton.upenn.edu
Xuan Ye
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
Fulton Hall 460E
140 Commonwealth Ave
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
xuan.ye@bc.edu

Peter Cappelli
The Wharton School
Center for Human Resources
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6358
and NBER
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
As business process digitization becomes increasingly important for explaining corporate
performance, access to IT labor has become a critical differentiator for firms. The supply of trained workers
is increasingly seen as a key factor influencing investment in, and the use of, IT systems (e.g., National
Academy of Sciences, 2007). The notion that there might be shortfalls in IT labor that should be addressed
through immigration has led to public debate. Competition for high-tech workers has also received scrutiny
as employers have used aggressive tactics to manage employee hiring and retention—including allegedly
collusive measures—drawing attention from the US Department of Justice (Streitfeld, 2014). It has become
important therefore, to understand how firms attract and develop high-tech talent. In this study, we test the
hypothesis that IT workers accept a compensating differential to work with newer IT systems. 1 Employers,
therefore, compete both on the wages and the technologies they offer to prospective workers. These
arguments are consistent with evidence showing that some IT investments attract higher quality IT workers
(Ross, 1994; Fichman and Kemerer, 1997), and with a growing focus on the importance of a firm’s
“engineering brand” for recruiting tech talent. 2
IT workers may prefer working with newer technologies for a variety of different reasons. Human capital
theory predicts that workers pay to acquire skills that could be useful later in their careers (Becker, 1964; BenPorath, 1967). 3 Additionally, the research on motivation in the management literature has shown that
workers prefer jobs that have more task variety (Hackman and Oldham 1980). Because technology changes
quickly, it can increase task variety by generating new tasks or creating new ways of performing existing
tasks. Other factors, such as the meaningfulness of work, can also influence how workers feel about using

1 Anecdotally, it is not uncommon to hear the following types of suggestions exchanged among IT workers: “I would see working for
a cutting-edge company at lower pay worth it just to gain the experience and skills which could be used later on and result in a higher
billable rate” (Accessed at http://www.freemoneyfinance.com/2007/10/help-a-reader-a.html on July 24, 2015) or “To me, it may be
worth staying (temporarily) at a job where you feel that you are underpaid in money, if you are getting lots of opportunities to learn new
skills …. Think of it as similar to the time spent in an MBA or other post-graduate training program.” (Accessed at
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2309317 on July 24, 2015).
2 A body of academic work discusses the broader concept of employment brand (Aurand et al 2005; Kim 2012), and the press has more
recently discussed the concept of “engineering brand” for high-tech firms. For example, see http://blog.entelo.com/why-anengineering-employer-brand-is-crucial-to-recruiting-tech-talent. Accessed on Aug 14, 2015.
3 Popular websites such as Stackshare.io (https://stackshare.io/) exist principally to enable employers and developers to share
information about which technologies are used by employers.

2

new technologies. The goal of this paper is to provide evidence that employees accept a compensating
differential to work with newer technologies, and to emphasize the role of acquiring human capital as one key
factor shaping these preferences. Parsing out the relative importance of the various factors in motivating
workers to prefer one job over another is an important objective but it is a considerable exercise that is a
focus of fields like organizational behavior, and is left to specialists in job motivation.
Estimating compensating differentials associated with job characteristics, such as the use of specific
technologies on the job, is challenging. When workers pay for some of the costs of acquiring new skills, labor
market conditions can affect the extent to which employers and workers share these costs. If labor market
conditions are held constant, one could offer workers a schedule of wages and technologies to estimate the
partial effect of different technology choices on the worker’s wages. However, such an approach would be
difficult in a field setting. Few people simultaneously receive offers using multiple, identifiable technologies;
obtaining reservation prices for each one would be difficult, and it would lack realism unless job seekers were
prepared to say yes to each job. Moreover, offers are not exogenous: candidates are selected based on their
human capital.
An alternative approach, similar to the one used in this study, is to elicit the wage premium required
to entice workers away from a job in which they are using a new technology. The difference between this
figure and the worker’s wage can be partially accounted for by the value workers assign to non-wage
characteristics of their current job, and as with the notion of consumer surplus, this value can far exceed the
wages they are paid. This approach has the advantage that we can clearly measure whether they are using
a given IT system (as opposed to whether a potential job would use it if we observed multiple offers). Of
course, measuring the size of this premium is challenging, especially in a market setting where the responses
have consequences. It is perceptual in nature, only existing inside job seekers’ heads, and to our knowledge is
not collected by administrative agencies.
To measure this wage premium, we analyze data provided by a leading US jobs board that captures
job search behavior for a large cross-section of IT workers, including the wages they earn at their current
employers and the “target” wages they seek in the next job. This target measure is similar to the notion of a

3

reservation wage―in this case, the wage at which employed workers can be induced to provide their services
to another employer. 4 These figures are generated by actual job search activity, which is noteworthy for two
reasons. Prior data sources on reservation wages, when available, have been based on small samples. The data
used in our analysis are available for over 50,000 IT workers. Second, the data are reported in a context where
the stated target wages have real consequences: potential employers see them. From job seekers’ resumes, we
text-mine the technologies they use on the job. From Glassdoor employer reviews, we create measures of the
value employees place on the learning culture and IT offered by the company. Our final data set includes a
cross-section of employed workers’ wages and the wages required to leave their employer, the IT systems the
worker uses at the firm, measures of the firm’s engineering work environment, and other characteristics of
the employer and worker.
To understand the advantages of these data for our objectives, it is instructive to consider problems
that arise when using approaches that rely on wage observations for IT workers. In principle, we could
develop a proxy for the human capital workers derive from IT by assuming they learn more when working
with newer IT, but workers are also productive at different levels with these technologies. Moreover, there
may be ability bias, i.e., more attractive technology firms may employ higher-quality workers. In both cases,
when using cross-sectional data on wages alone, it becomes difficult to separate pay differentials associated
with getting to use newer IT from higher wages paid to more productive workers. Examining the wage
premium required to leave the firm, on the other hand, separates the amount workers derive from the IT
from the value provided to their employers by using this system. If IT were randomly assigned to workers, a
hedonic regression of IT on this premium reveals the value of working with newer IT systems.
Of course, random assignment in this context is infeasible, so our analysis is subject to two sources
of bias. First, our estimate of the value of IT can be biased upward if use of new IT systems strongly predicts
that the amenities of the current job (excluding human capital) are much higher than what workers expect in

4 Reservation wages have been a key parameter in job search models (Lancaster and Chesher, 1983; Feldstein and Poterba, 1984; Shimer
and Werning, 2007). Employed workers choose a reservation wage that maximizes their future income, striking a balance between higher
wages and the ability to secure job offers.

4

the next job. Workers cannot specify the non-wage characteristics they desire in future jobs, which limits the
number of job seekers looking to change industries or job contexts, but the potential for such bias is still
significant. A second source of bias is that unobservable factors, such as risk preferences, can influence both
technology choice and how workers set target wages. For example, workers with low risk aversion might seek
a higher target wage and be attracted to riskier, unproven technologies.
To assess the robustness of our estimates to these sources of bias, we first demonstrate that using
emerging IT systems is associated with higher target wages, after controlling for current wages and education,
job tenure, experience, race, and gender. We do not observe a similar relationship for mature or low-growth
technologies, and our estimates are robust to including employer and location fixed-effects, which suggests
that the differences in search behavior that we document are more closely related to technology than work
setting. Second, these effects are stronger for younger workers, and for workers in markets where there are
many other employers hiring for new technical skills, both of which are consistent with the argument that
some of this preference is due to workers placing value on gaining skills they can use in the future. Indeed, we
find that workers who use these technologies leave their jobs more quickly than other IT workers. When
considered alongside our wage results, these facts are striking. Among potential omitted variables, few lead
workers to set higher target wages and exit the firm more quickly, except human capital. Differences in
amenities or compensation that can bias estimates of IT use on target wages should induce workers to stay
longer with their employers, not leave faster.
Third, using the text from the Glassdoor review data, we demonstrate that a firm’s use of emerging
technologies is correlated with its technical employees valuing technology and learning as sources of value
derived from that employer, and it is negatively correlated with employees valuing compensation at the firm.
In contrast, using mature IT systems is positively correlated with technology and negatively with learning.
Employers using older, unpopular systems are mostly valued for their compensation practices. In other
words, the technical culture of the employer appears to be matched with the technologies it uses. Moreover,
direct analysis of the text data provides further evidence that our IT use measure is reflecting the learning
benefits of those organizations, not other job characteristics. We also conduct tests to show that potential

5

confounders of our target wage results must be correlated with IT investment and investments in employee
learning, but not either factor in isolation. This would suggest that new technologies are not a proxy for other
factors influencing whether IT workers value their jobs. Nor is the relationship we observe likely to be due to
other attributes correlated with new IT.
Finally, we demonstrate that our results on technology and job preferences are robust to tests of the
effects of differences in equity compensation, bonuses, benefits, and visa restrictions, and we use data on
employment flows to show that workers tend to move between firms that are similar in terms of non-wage
benefits. Along with the worker controls included in our regressions, these latter results provide supporting
evidence that unobserved, worker-specific differences related to IT use are not an important source of bias.
The evidence supports the notion that investments in emerging IT can engage more productive labor
to work on it at a given cost, in part because it workers have an opportunity to gain valuable skills. Our main
effect estimates range from 2% to 4% for workers in our sample, although in the sample of employers that
promotes skill development at work, the estimated magnitude is about 5%. This implies that workers who
make $100,000 require an additional $5,000 to leave employment where they use new technologies and this
figure is likely to be higher in some markets and for some technologies. For comparison, courses on topics
such as web development or python programming offered by coding boot camps normally cost about $4,000,
and the costs of immersive boot camps that cover a variety of technical topics average slightly less than
$12,000. 5 From an employer’s perspective, the value that its workers assign to these opportunities is offset by
other costs, such as higher churn rates, because employees who learn new skills tend to move on more
quickly, and the firm’s IT adoption decision must account for these costs as well. In this paper, we do not
make a direct comparison of these figures, but rather, demonstrate that, ceteris paribus, firms that invest in
these systems can attract higher quality technical labor for a given wage.
Our findings are important for three reasons. First, they document a relationship between labor
market competition and IT investment incentives that has not been explored in prior research; second, they

5https://www.coursereport.com/blog/coding-bootcamp-cost-comparison-full-stack-immersives.

December 13, 2018.

6

Last accessed on

provide evidence of how, in practice, newer IT skills are acquired and how they can be financed: employees
trade wages for the chance to use newer technologies. This has implications for explaining stylized facts
related to high-tech markets, such as those related to the difficulty in attracting IT employees with the
relevant skills in labor markets characterized by early IT adoption. Third, the findings suggest a missing factor
in current IT productivity estimates. Sources of returns from new technologies should include the possibility
that technical wages are lower, other things being equal, where new technologies are introduced (see Stern
2004 for a similar argument in an R&D context).
Our analysis sits between several literatures. First, how labor supply affects IT investment has not
been widely studied (a recent exception is Branstetter, et al, 2018), but is important for understanding how
labor policies influence IT diffusion. This gap is underscored by an existing literature linking R&D
investment to scientists’ preferences (Stern, 2004; Roach and Sauermann, 2010; Agarwal and Oyhama 2013),
and in our focus on skills can be viewed as being nested within a strategy and economics literature that argues
that workers exchange wages for acquiring valuable knowledge on the job (Stern, 2004; Franco and Filson,
2006). Second, IT labor markets themselves have been the subject of study (Ang, et al, 2002; Levina and Xin,
2007; Mithas and Krishnan, 2008; Mithas and Lucas, 2010; Tambe and Hitt, 2012; Joseph et al 2012; Bapna,
et al, 2013). This work has focused on how human capital, training, and employer characteristics (primarily
size and industry) affect IT wages and careers, but has been silent on how IT influences employment choices.
Third, our paper is connected to a literature on management practices in IT-intensive firms (Black and Lynch,
2001; Bresnahan, et al, 2002; Bartel, et al, 2007). To the best of our knowledge, it is among the first to discuss
management practices related to the firm’s technical human capital.
As with all empirical analyses, ours has caveats. Most importantly, there are sampling concerns with
these data because participants are actively seeking new jobs. Those who post their resume online are a
sizeable proportion of the US labor force―roughly eighteen million people in the United States did so on this
job board alone―but our results may not be representative of those who did not post their resumes.
However, much of the data used in prior work on IT wages suffer from similar or more severe selection
biases. Later in this paper, we report comparisons with administrative data (such as the Current Population

7

Survey and Occupational Employment Statistics from the Bureau of Labor Statistics) to assess how our
sample compares with that of the IT labor force at large.
II. BACKGROUND LITERATURE
A. Mobility, knowledge transfer, and wages
A key question in the academic literature on innovation, dating back to Arrow (1962, p.615), is how
labor mobility affects the appropriability of knowledge-based investments. If new knowledge is useful at
other firms, workers will pay to acquire it by accepting lower wages (Becker, 1964, Rosen, 1972). This, in turn,
can influence how much of their investment firms can appropriate, and what projects they choose. Much of
this literature is rooted in R&D investment. These studies demonstrate that the mobility of engineers is a
channel for R&D knowledge transmission among firms (Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong, 1998; Almeida and
Kogut, 1999). Scholars have shown that scientists accept a compensating differential for R&D experience,
such that “spillovers” from the transfer of R&D knowledge are offset by lower scientist wages. Moen
demonstrates that technical R&D staff exchange lower wages for gaining R&D experience (2005), and Franco
and Filson provide evidence that workers pay for the knowledge acquired from employers using data from
the rigid disk drive industry (2006).
A related literature investigates how R&D choices affect the firm’s ability to attract scientists. This
literature argues that scientists value R&D experience because they enjoy engaging with science and because
they acquire knowledge that is valuable for future opportunities. Stern finds that scientists accept
compensating differentials when permitted to engage with frontier science (2004). He notes the difficulty in
separating wage discounts that scientists accept to work with new science from the bias introduced by the fact
that higher-ability workers prefer such jobs. To remove this bias, he collects data on multiple job offers for
the scientists in his sample, and uses within-scientist comparisons to estimate wage effects. Recent work has
also shown that these preferences have implications for the sorting of R&D workers into industry vs.
academic jobs (Roach and Sauermann, 2010; Agarwal and Ohyama, 2013; Roach and Sauermann, 2014), and
for the locus of scientific innovation.
B. IT investment and technical careers

8

Because IT investments are also important for driving productivity, they have also attracted academic
attention. IT adoption decisions have been the focus of some of this attention (e.g., see Forman, 2005, or
McElheran, 2015). Another strand of this literature uncovers factors influencing IT returns (Brynjolfsson and
Hitt, 2000). The most important of these may be the adoption of specific work practices, such as
decentralized decision-making and high-powered incentives, which have been shown to complement IT
investment (Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt, 2002; Bloom, et al, 2014; Brynjolfsson and McElheran, 2016).
One factor that can influence IT outcomes but that has received less attention is access to labor that
can implement and use IT systems. Prior work connects the firm’s human capital to IT use (Mata, et al, 1995;
Bharadwaj, 2000; Fichman and Kemerer, 1997). Yet, despite the notable success of a literature on IT and
labor demand (Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt, 2002; Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003), how IT investment
is influenced by labor supply has only begun to attract attention, and to the best of our knowledge, no prior
work examines how IT investment affects which workers firms attract, although our arguments are closely
connected to economic theory linking technological change, human capital, and productivity (e.g., Chari and
Hopenhayn, 1991; Jovanovic and Nyarko, 1996).
Examining how IT workers’ preferences for skills influence their employment choices is also related
to the empirical literature on the IT labor force. Existing work in this area focuses on returns to firm-specific
and general human capital for IT workers and on institutional determinants of IT wages. These studies
analyze data sources such as the Current Population Survey (CPS) or the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth (NLSY) administered by the US government (e.g., Levina and Xin, 2007 or Joseph, et al, 2012), or
private survey data such as that collected by InformationWeek, a media publication targeted towards the IT
industry (e.g., Mithas and Krishnan, 2008). Due in part to the limitations of these data sources, which often
do not identify employers, these analyses have been constrained in their ability to examine workers’ skills or
employers’ IT investments.
Nevertheless, understanding employment preferences is particularly important for IT workers
because IT skills are often acquired on the job (see Ang, Slaughter, and Ng, 2002; Fong Boh, et al, 2007), so
the ability to acquire new skills is a determinant of inter-organizational IT career success (Barley and Kunda,

9

2006; O’Mahony and Bechky, 2006; Bidwell and Briscoe, 2010; Roberts, et al, 2006). More so than other
workers, IT employees may be responsible for maintaining and enhancing their own skills. It is likely,
therefore, that IT workers prefer employers that allow them to work with emerging IT systems, which is our
key hypothesis.
III. DATA SOURCES AND KEY MEASURES
The key variables and data sources we use are described below and summarized in Table 1.
III.A. Wage and human capital variables
The online job board that provided us with the target wage data is among the largest in the United
States. The context makes it clear that prospective employers will see the target wage and interpret it as a
statement about what individuals expect from a new employer.
Target wages are similar to reservation wages, which are the wage levels at which workers are indifferent
between accepting and rejecting job offers. Reservation wages have important implications for understanding
labor market outcomes related to job search, such as labor mobility. The empirical literature on reservation
wages has focused on the effects of reservation wage setting on labor outcomes such as unemployment duration,
or on factors that affect how workers set their reservation wages, such as unemployment insurance levels. The
literature in the latter area typically uses human capital variables such as experience, education, demographic
data, and especially employment status to explain reservation wage levels. Although reservation wages are of
interest for both employed and unemployed workers, the population of interest in most existing studies has
been unemployed workers due to the policy interests around unemployment (e.g., Prasad, 2003). Most empirical
work in this area has used surveys asking workers to report their reservation wages (Lancaster and Chesher,
1983; Feldstein and Poterba, 1984; Jones, 1988; Falk, et al, 2006; Hall and Krueger, 2012; Krueger, 2014). These
studies have varied in the definitions used. For example, the surveys used by these authors have asked survey
respondents for their “desired wage” or for their “asking wage.”
As such, the level at which workers set their target wages on the platform we study indicates
something important about the pay at which an individual is willing to accept a new job offer, other things
equal. These target wages are particularly notable because the consequences associated with answering the

10

question make respondents take the answer seriously. Respondents on this platform also report their current
wages, or if unemployed, their most recent wages. 6
Self-reported wage data of this type have many potential biases, although virtually all labor market
studies are based on self-reported data. Individuals may have incentives to inflate their current wages as doing
so can affect wage offers from employers. 7 However, there are sanctions against doing so in this context. For
instance, inflating one’s wages may reduce interest from other employers given that a surprising number of
job offers do not appear to allow for wage negotiations (see Hall and Krueger, 2012).
Target and current wages are available for workers who participated on the site through 2007. We
keep only employed IT workers who include information about technologies on their resumes, 8 which
generates a sample of slightly over 50,000 workers. Workers report their occupation using a drop-down
menu. We do not have access to panel data because we do not observe the same workers over multiple years.
We can, however, observe how workers differ in their behaviors depending on whether they post before or
after the firm adopts a new system. Participants also submit demographic, human capital, and past
employment information (i.e. prior jobs and employers) and information about the type of job they seek (e.g.,
annual or paid hourly, which corresponds to exempt or non-exempt status under the Fair Labor Standards
Act). They also identify their MSAs (Metropolitan Statistical Areas).
III.B. Data comparisons
Job board participants are active job seekers who may differ from passive candidates or from those not
interested in moving. They may be younger, more mobile, or less likely to be found in firms with developed
internal labor markets. On the other hand, job seekers are the principal group of interest for our hypothesis.
To characterize these differences, we compare our sample with IT workers in other datasets with known

6

To the best of our knowledge, the only paper that uses similar data is Eriksson and Lagerstrom (2012), which uses Swedish data to
examine the wage demands of unemployed workers.
7 If respondents inflate the value of their current wage, then our dependent variable – the gap between the target and current wage –
would be smaller, reducing the range and making it more difficult to find statistically significant effects. This problem is known as range
restriction. It is similar to censoring except that what drives the overstated current wage is not easily identified.
8 Although the data are also available for unemployed workers, we do not include unemployed workers in our sample because the
compensating differential is calculated based on how much employees are currently being paid. That being said, ours are reduced form
estimates and moving to a tighter labor market may be one reason workers acquire new skills. We cannot sort these explanations out
with these data.

11

sampling properties. For these comparisons, some flexibility was required because the classifications used by
government agencies do not fit neatly with the IT classification used on the jobs board. To bridge this gap,
we compared IT workers on the job board with workers in the government statistics who fall into “Computer
and Mathematical Occupations” (O-Net code 15). Workers in these occupations comprise the majority of
the IT workforce, and especially those in technical occupations, such as programmers, network
administrators, and database administrators.
Table 2 compares the demographic and human capital statistics of our sample with employed,
annually paid IT workers in the 2007 Current Population Survey (CPS), which is administered by the US
Census Bureau and designed to be representative of the US workforce. The educational distributions in the
two samples are similar. The job board has proportionately fewer white males, but this is difficult to pin down
because many respondents did not report their gender in the job board data.
Table 3 compares the wages of job board workers with the wages of workers collected through the
Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program. Like the CPS, data from the
OES are statistically representative of the US workforce. We compared wages along two dimensions relevant
for our analysis: geography and occupation. When comparing occupations or labor markets, the wages of IT
workers in the jobs board sample are not systematically higher or lower than the wages of IT workers
collected by the OES. They are close in value in most cases.
These comparisons suggest that the wages of the IT workers in our sample are similar to wages
reported in administrative data on IT workers, although they do exhibit important differences. Nevertheless,
the results reported below should be interpreted as providing evidence for IT workers who are seeking jobs
through online resources. That population appears to be considerable. There are many job boards in addition
to the one we access here, and while we do not know how many candidates use multiple job boards, there are
millions of individuals who list information on job boards. Kuhn and Skuterud (2000) report that as far back
as 1998, fifteen percent of unemployed job seekers, and half of all job seekers who had online access at home,

12

used job boards. A 2014 survey found that one in five individuals in the labor force used job boards (Jobvite,
2014). 9
III.C. IT use on the job
On their resumes, IT job seekers often include keywords related to programming languages or
software packages and the beginning and end dates for projects. Beginning with a list of information
technologies that was provided to us by this job board, we algorithmically identify those that appear on a
resume and the years in which the user reported working in this job. We also attach the age of each
technology, which was gathered by research assistants using online resources. 10 When workers report using
multiple technologies in a job, we choose the newest technology. Appendix A discusses some of the details of
this process, as well as selection issues that arise from non-reporting of skills.
The framework discussed above suggests that workers place higher value on IT experience that will
be of future use (Rosen, 1972), but we face the challenge of identifying the IT systems for which this is true.
To the best of our knowledge, no established taxonomy categorizes IT systems. Theoretically, workers derive
the greatest value from IT experience that is difficult to acquire through other channels (newer technologies)
and when demand is growing. Dying technologies offer less of a future for workers entering the market, and
for technologies that are popular and mature, employers expect workers to already possess the relevant skills.
For newer technologies, employers expect workers to learn these skills on the job, and for growing
technologies, workers are often willing to do so.
We classify technologies by 1) growth rate and 2) whether they are less than ten years old. Ten years
is an arbitrary threshold, but technologies are still early in their diffusion path at that point (e.g., even the
oldest “big data” technologies are close to within the ten-year window), and our results are not sensitive to
shifting this window by five years in either direction. Growth rates are computed from the job search data by
measuring the number of firms employing workers who report using that technology from year to year.
Further details of how we computed this measure are discussed in Appendix A. Growth rate and age form a

9

http://web.jobvite.com/rs/jobvite/images/2014%20Job%20Seeker%20Survey.pdf
For example, see: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_programming_languages.

10

13

2x2 matrix, and Table 4 presents examples of different technologies that, in 2007, fell into each of the
quadrants defined by this matrix. We test the hypothesis that workers derive the most utility from working
with technologies of the type in the first column--those that are less than ten years of age and with a growth
rate is above the median. We refer to these as “emerging” IT systems throughout our analysis.
III. D. Measures of employer attributes
We used online review data, provided by Glassdoor, to create measures of job amenities.
Glassdoor is a career intelligence platform where employees anonymously review current and past employers.
These reviews provide information about employees’ perceptions of their employers (i.e. employer “brand”).
In 2014, when we accessed the data, there were over 1.4 million reviews (700,000 for US firms) describing the
“pros” and “cons” of employers. To develop measures of what workers value about their employers, we
analyzed the text in the “pros” section of the reviews. We used two methods from the literature on textmining product reviews: 1) unsupervised methods that generate employer features by clustering key phrases,
and 2) by manually selecting phrases that indicate learning on the job. Details of these methods are discussed
in Appendix A.
There are two caveats. First, participants submitted reviews between 2008 and 2014, but we do not
know when they worked at the firms they review, so we build cross-sectional measures of employer
attributes. However, the nature of the review process suggests that the reviews describe attributes of a
reviewer’s employer during jobs ending between 2008 and 2014, so many of these jobs will have spanned
2007, which is year one of our job search data. Ignoring temporal changes in our short window is an
approximation. The work practices literature has argued that such practices are costly to adjust and may
remain quasi-fixed in the short run relative to changes in IT and labor (Bresnahan et al 2002), but the inability
to track changes in work practices is a limitation if employers change attributes quickly.
Another caveat associated with use of these measures is that the review text is constrained by the size
of the text entry box (this is similar to answers provided in open-ended survey questions, see Reja, Manfreda,
Hlebec, and Vehovar, 2003). Because reviewers have limited space, they list the most favorable employer
attributes. Therefore, these measures reflect the ranks of employer attributes, not absolute strengths, so negative

14

coefficient estimates do not indicate that the attributes provide negative utility to the worker, only that they
play less of a role than other attributes in target wage setting.
IV. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK
We test the idea that the chance to use new technologies in a job moves IT workers along the supply
curve for technical work; i.e. at a given price, a firm attracts more workers if they offer more interesting
technologies. An assumption is that the demand for IT workers during the period we study is fixed, which is
reasonable given that our analysis focuses on a single year. Our measure of interest is within-individual
differences between the worker’s wage and target wage.
To test the hypothesis that IT workers value working with emerging IT systems, we estimate a model
that explains variation in the target wages that employed IT workers post during job search, controlling for
current wages and including firm and worker characteristics as explanatory variables. The target wage is
equivalent to a reserve price in an online auction with multiple bidders (i.e. the potential employers). For a job
seeker i, the optimal target wage to post (r) is the worker’s private value (vs) for their current job (which
includes wages as well as sources of non-monetary value) plus an additional increment based on the
distribution of the bidders’ (employers’) private values (f(r)) for the worker’s services. It is assumed that job
seekers know this distribution. In general, the optimal reserve price solves the following equation, where f(r)
is the distribution from which employers’ valuations are drawn:
(1) r = vs + [(1 - F(r)) / f(r)]
The firm’s IT investment enters this relationship by increasing the worker’s value for the current job.
We assume Cobb-Douglas utility and that agents are risk neutral and have homogenous preferences,
which is consistent with much of the theoretical literature on job search that incorporates non-wage job
characteristics (e.g., see Blau, 1991). Under these assumptions, consider an empirical (target) wage equation of
the form:
(2) Log(TWi) = β0 + β1(EMERGINGi) + β2Log(CWi) + εi

15

i indexes the worker. TW is the target wage and CW is worker’s current wage, which along with benefits,
technology, and other sources of non-monetary value comprise the worker’s value for her current job. 11
EMERGING indicates the use of new rather than established technologies on the job. A positive and
significant coefficient on β1 indicates that workers derive value from using these technologies. Because the
dependent variable is in logs, the estimates should be interpreted as the percentage change in the target wage
associated with a change in the independent variable.
Various market, employer, or worker level attributes can bias β1. Placing current wages on the righthand side allows the target wage to be interpreted as a within-person measure: target wage relative to current
wage. Current wages absorb many of the factors affecting demand for these workers, except for differences
related to the most recent employment spell that can cause the target wage to deviate from the current wage.
Differences in the attributes of employers or workers using emerging IT matter only if they affect current or
target wages differently from one other.
Our most robust analyses include employer fixed-effects, which eliminates those attributes that are
common to all workers at a firm. Our goal is to estimate the partial effect of a worker’s choices across
different technologies. Across markets, there can be differences that influence how workers set target wages.
For instance, in tighter markets, workers may accept less of a pay cut for training (Acemoglu and Pischke
1999), although if firms absorb some of these training costs, our tests should be conservative ones because
the effect will disappear in markets for emerging technologies, which tend to be tighter. Nevertheless, to the
extent possible, we restrict our comparisons to workers within the same market who are making choices over
different technologies. Most of our regressions include MSA and industry fixed effects – to the extent that
MSAs and industries can capture the relevant labor market boundaries, these variables should address
systematic differences across markets.

11 There are alternative dependent variables we considered, such as measuring the gap as a percentage of current income, but we use
the model in (1) because it is most consistent with the existing literature on determinants of workers’ reservation wages. We also tested
models using ln(Target wage/Wage) as the dependent variable, which constrains the coefficient on the worker’s current wage to be one.
To some degree, this imposes a downward bias on the emerging IT variable, which is consistent with what we observe. The IT results
using this specification are still significant but smaller in magnitude and less precisely estimated.

16

We do not have multiple observations for each worker, so cannot remove the effects of worker level
unobservables, but we include a number of demographic controls: education, experience, job tenure, race,
gender, and ethnicity. The most robust specification we estimate is:
(3) Log(TWi) = β0 + β1(EMERGINGi) + β2Log(CWi) + µi + ϕi + δi + εi
where µ is a market fixed-effect, ϕ is an employer fixed-effect, and δ is a vector of demographic controls.
This specification controls for the worker’s current wage, the market in which they are engaging in job search,
their employer, and most demographic variables. The key assumption is that conditional on the current wage,
market or worker level differences that could otherwise influence target wage setting and are correlated with
the technology choice variable are absorbed by the demographic controls and the combination of market,
employer, and industry fixed effects. Under these assumptions, this equation estimates the partial effect of
using new IT rather than established IT. We assess these assumptions when discussing our results in the next
section.
Because we do not observe the job search outcome and cannot measure workers’ expectations about
future employers, we cannot control for the non-wage value of the current job and expectations about nonwage value at the next one. β1 is biased upwards if workers systematically expect greater non-wage value at
their current jobs than at future ones. This is not very plausible, and we provide evidence of this later in the
paper using employer flow patterns and data on employer attributes. Employment transition patterns do not
support the notion that workers using emerging IT are systematically moving to employers from which they
derive less non-wage value.
V. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
V. A. Descriptive statistics and figures
Table 5 presents key statistics. The average wage of IT workers in our sample is about $74,000 and
the average target wage is slightly less than $78,000, which is 5% higher than the mean current wage. The fact
that the target wage is not far removed from the current wage suggests that the former is not an unrealistic
expectation of the respondent’s market worth. It also suggests that it would not take much to get a typical IT
worker to move, which is consistent with the literature on IT mobility (Saxenian, 1996; Fallick, et al, 2006).

17

The average IT worker in our sample has about thirteen years of experience and 2.2 years of job tenure, and
about 20% of our sample works with emerging IT systems.
Figure 1 plots the percentage increase in wages required to induce IT workers using different IT
systems to leave their employers, and it plots illustrative programming languages on the chart. It suggests that
as technologies age, workers place progressively less value on hands-on experience with these technologies.
This may be because they become less valuable in the market, because they enjoy working with them less, or
because channels other than hands-on experience arise through which workers can obtain these skills. Figure
1 suggests that languages that were newer as of 2007, such as Java Servlets, Struts, and Eclipse, were
considered more interesting to work with than more mature technologies like Visual Basic. The former
languages were dot-com era technologies that were just beginning to spread through the workforce.
V.B. IT use on the job and job search
In Table 6, we report the results of estimating equation (3). In all regressions, the independent
variable measures characteristics of the IT systems workers use, and the dependent variable is the target wage.
All regressions include current wages and education, gender, experience, job tenure, and race. In addition to
IT use and current wages, the estimated coefficients for gender and education are shown in the table. The
omitted variable for education is vocational degree and for gender it is female. We first test the hypothesis
that IT workers are reluctant to leave employers when working with emerging IT systems. The estimates
from column (1) indicate that emerging IT use is associated with a 2% larger premium to leave an employer
(t=7.33). There is a higher target wage for males that rises with education levels. 12 This education effect may
suggest that more on-the-job learning occurs at higher education levels, or that education is a proxy measure
for job positions allowing for greater wage bargaining. The coefficient on emerging IT use remains of similar
magnitude in column (2) after including MSA effects (t=10.5), so our results are unlikely to be explained by
unobserved market-level factors, at least to the extent that the MSA can capture the relevant market.

12

We replicate this test dropping workers for whom gender is missing, but dropping these workers does not have much of an impact
on the magnitude of our key IT estimates.

18

Column (3) includes variables indicating to which of the four categories from Table 4 the IT systems
in use belong, where the omitted category is low growth, older technologies (column 4, Table 4), so the other
IT estimates should be interpreted relative to this base group. Of these, only emerging IT is positive and
statistically significant (t=7.33). IT workers do not appear less willing to leave their employers when using any
of the other IT groups, and these estimates remain similar after adding MSA effects in column (4).
Comparing the job seeker’s current wage with their target wage is powerful because this comparison
removes the effects of many unobserved worker-level variables, but it does not remove the effects of
unobserved characteristics of the current employer that are correlated with the firm’s IT choices and make it
less desirable for workers to leave. Because we have data from multiple workers for many employers in our
sample, we can introduce firm effects. This reduces our sample size because we only retain employers with at
least two workers,13 but the tables in Appendix B show that the sample characteristics of this reduced sample
are similar to that of our full sample of workers. After including employer and MSA fixed-effects in column
(5), the emerging IT coefficient remains of similar magnitude and statistically significant (t=2.86). With
employer fixed-effects, the estimated coefficient on male gender changes sign, suggesting that the positive
coefficient on male gender in the earlier analysis was reflecting heterogeneity across firms that was reflected in
the gender composition of its workers.
The last three columns test the sensitivity of the estimates to alternate formulations of our IT use
measure. The first column raises the threshold used to identify “high-growth” IT systems to those in the top
quartile of growth for all IT systems, rather than the top half, and the second uses the standardized value of
the growth rate, rather than placing the technologies into quartiles by growth rate. In both cases, the
coefficient estimates remain significant and consistent in size with those reported in prior columns. 14 A final
test uses a firm-level measure of emerging IT use constructed as the share of the firm’s workers using these
systems. The coefficient estimate on this measure rises slightly, to about 3.7% (t=7.40), which indicates that it

13 In the reduced sample of employers that have multiple workers, 66% of workers are from employers with between two and five
workers in our sample, 17% are from employers with between six and ten workers in our sample, 15% are from workers with between
eleven and fifty workers in our sample, and 1% are from employers with more than fifty workers in our sample.
14 These regression results are also similar when changing the definition of a new technology to being less than five years old or being
less than fifteen years old.

19

is a reasonable proxy measure for the activities of workers at the firm. We use this fact later in our analysis for
an analysis in which worker-level IT measures are unavailable.
V. C. Technology preferences, skills, and turnover
One important reason that workers may value working with newer technologies is because of the skills they
acquire, and both theoretical and empirical work shows that workers tend to invest in acquiring new skills
earlier in their careers (Ben-Porath 1967; Moen 2005).
Column (1) of Table 7 reports results from a model that is similar to the specification in Table 6,
column (1) but that only shows the estimates on IT main effects and a dummy variable indicating workers
with at least fifteen years of experience. 15 The IT estimates are similar to those reported in prior tables
(t=7.00), and the experience estimates suggest that experienced workers require less to leave employers (t=5.00), which is consistent with prior work on wage growth in the IT sector (Freedman 2008). These estimates
are similar after including MSA fixed-effects in column (2). Column (3) adds an interaction term between IT
and experience. The IT estimate is of the same magnitude as in prior regressions and is statistically significant
(t=9.00), but is offset by the interaction term (t=-4.2). This indicates that it is primarily less experienced
workers who accept lower wages to work with emerging IT. These effects change little after including
employer effects in column (4). These relationships are illustrated in Figure 2. The fitted lines indicate that IT
workers place greater value on using these systems early in their careers, and this value fades with experience.
Workers do not place a premium on mature IT, regardless of their experience levels.
A human capital explanation suggests that younger workers take these jobs on their way to higher
paying “destination” jobs, and field evidence suggests that high-tech labor markets are characterized by
learning and rapid turnover (Saxenian, 1996). The regressions in columns (5) through (9) of Table 7 analyze
the relationship between IT systems and the length of time workers stay on the job before exiting. For this
analysis, we do not require wage data, so we use archival data on employment histories from workers’

15 Moen (2005) uses twenty years as a threshold when analyzing a similar effect for R&D workers. In other regressions not shown, we
have used lower thresholds, such as ten years, with substantively similar results. Thresholds higher than fifteen years limit our sample
because older IT workers tend to disproportionately disappear from our sample.

20

resumes. Time until job exit is measured using each of the prior employment spells reported by workers in
our sample, and IT is measured by text-mining the worker’s resume for the technology used in each prior
employment spell. All regressions control for demographics and we estimate hazard models due to the nature
of the dependent variable. 16
The coefficient estimates in column (5) indicate that at any point during an employment spell, IT
workers using emerging technologies are 12% more likely to leave. A source of measurement error in column
(5) is that we include the job in which the worker is employed at the time we observe their job search. These
observations are right-censored because we observe these workers before their current job has concluded. In
column (6) we drop the most recent employment spell but obtain similar estimates.
There may be heterogeneity across markets, due to differences in job hopping rates in high-tech
clusters (Fallick, et al, 2006), but our estimates remain stable after adding MSA effects in column (7). After
adding employer effects in column (8), the estimate drops slightly, but continues to indicate a greater exit
hazard for workers using emerging IT systems. Column (9) also includes employer effects, but like column
(6), drops the most recent employment spell. This reduces the sample size, because it limits the sample to
prior employment spells for IT workers at firms that employ more than one person in our sample. Yet, with
this restriction, the estimate remains positive and significant. When comparing IT workers within the same
firm, the estimates indicate that emerging IT use increases exit likelihood by as much as 20%. Across
columns, the estimates suggest that workers are 10-20% more likely to exit the firm at any given time if using
emerging IT systems.
It is noteworthy that together, Tables 6 and 7 indicate that workers who use these IT systems i) seek
a higher wage increase to leave their employers and ii) leave more quickly. These findings are inconsistent
with the idea that our IT estimates are biased by other, unobserved job amenities that workers value at these

16 Average employment spells for workers in each of the four technology classes in Table 4 are 3.4 years (Growth >= Median,
Technology Age <= 10 years), 3.6 years (Growth < Median, Technology Age <= 10 years), 3.7 years (Growth >= Median, Technology
Age > 10 years), and 3.8 years (Growth < Median, Technology Age > 10 years).

21

firms. It is difficult to reconcile how job amenities simultaneously make it costlier to remove a worker from
their employer but also drive them to leave more quickly.
The results reported in the latter part of this analysis include fixed-effects for the labor market in
which the worker is searching for a job, but labor markets can differ significantly in terms of a worker’s ability
to transfer new technical skills to other employers, so we also investigate how labor market characteristics
influence these estimates. The results of these tests are reported and discussed in greater detail in Table 1 of
Appendix C. They should be interpreted cautiously because labor markets can differ along a number of
dimensions that cannot be easily measured, but can influence job search activity. Nevertheless, the results
from these tests are consistent with the argument that the effects are strongest in markets where workers who
use emerging IT have a larger number of outside options, in the form of employers who are hiring workers to
use these new technologies. These tests provide further support for the argument that workers are reluctant
to leave environments where they use newer IT systems because of factors, such as skills, that can be
transferred across employers, rather than factors such as non-wage compensation that are not portable.
V.D. Evidence from employer reviews
The analyses reported in the previous section provide circumstantial evidence that patterns of technology use
and mobility are consistent with the argument that one reason IT workers value working with new
technologies is because they gain new skills. An alternative and more direct approach to exploring this
relationship is to simply “ask” IT workers what they value in their employers. In this section, we analyze the
text reviews from Glassdoor.com to determine the employer features that IT workers emphasize and how
this corresponds with the technologies they use at that employer.
Dimensions of employer value. Using unsupervised methods on the Glassdoor review text, we generated
eight dimensions along which IT workers reported valuing employers: 1) LEARNING, 2) TECHNOLOGY,
3) COWORKERS, 4) FLEXIBILITY, 5) COMPENSATION, 6) CAREER, 7) INDUSTRY, and 8)
LOCATION. Details of the text-mining process and the workplace dimensions that were created can be
found in Appendix A. The strongest correlations in the sample are between LEARNING and
TECHNOLOGY, between LEARNING and CAREER, and between TECHNOLOGY and CAREER,

22

which supports the argument that IT access is highly valued by workers for acquiring new skills that lead to
future opportunities.17
In Table 8, we analyze correlations between a) the types of IT used by workers at various employers
and b) the workplace dimensions that were mined from the reviews submitted by IT workers from those
employers. In this table, each observation corresponds to a worker in our sample. The dependent variables
are indicators of whether the worker uses a particular type of technology at work, and the right-hand side
variables correspond to whether the worker’s employer is above or below the median with respect to the
sample in terms of the eight workplace dimensions listed in the paragraph above.
The regression estimates in column (1) suggest that emerging IT use by a worker is correlated with
LEARNING (t=2.18) and TECHNOLOGY (t=3.32) being highly valued by at that worker’s employer.
Emerging IT use is negatively correlated with COMPENSATION (t=-3.35), which is consistent with the
argument that workers accept lower pay to work with these systems. In column (2), we find that using high
growth but mature technologies is positively correlated with TECHNOLOGY (t=3.34) but negatively
correlated with LEARNING (t=-3.27). This is reasonable because employers expect workers to already have
the necessary skills when hired, so it may be less important to provide an environment where workers can
build human capital. Columns (3) and (4) analyze low growth technologies. TECHNOLOGY is negatively
correlated with the use of these systems (t=-3.24), and workers emphasize COMPENSATION at these
employers (t=3.02), which is consistent with requiring more pay to work with dying or less interesting
technologies. Column (5) in this table reports results from a regression of these features against target wages,
controlling for the current wage. The estimates are positive and significant for LEARNING (t=1.95),
TECHNOLOGY (t=2.79), and INDUSTRY (t=5.08). The coefficient estimate on LEARNING indicates
that a standard deviation higher value for this measure is associated with a 4% larger difference between the
target and current wage, and the TECHNOLOGY variable is positive and significant at the same magnitude.

17

Correlations among the full set of features are reported in Table 2 of Appendix C.

23

We also performed one additional set of tests intended to probe the robustness of the relationship
between skills development and technology investment, the results of which are shown and discussed in detail
in Table 3 of Appendix C. Specifically, we tested interactions between IT systems and whether the employer
is perceived by reviewers to be a good workplace in which to learn new skills. The statistical power of this
analysis is limited by the sample size, but it provides evidence that the measure of employer skills
development is positively correlated with using emerging IT and negatively correlated with using mature IT
systems, and that both employer skills development and the use of emerging IT must be present together for
employees to set a higher target. We do not observe a similar boost in the target wage premium when either
measure is high but the other is not, which suggests that sources of bias should act at the confluence of
workplace skills development and the use of emerging IT while not being correlated with either factor alone.
This narrows the list of omitted factors that can introduce bias into our key estimates.
In sum, the analyses discussed in this section suggest that the opportunity to learn valuable skills is an
important component of the value workers derive from using new technology.
V.E. Robustness tests
Finally, we conducted a variety of robustness tests to assess if our results were sensitive to other types of nonwage compensation or to employment patterns that can influence how workers set job search parameters.
Extensive use of bonuses, commissions, or equity-based compensation plans can increase a worker’s
compensation beyond what is reflected in their wages. Employers that use emerging IT systems may make
greater use of stock-based pay, which respondents might not be able to easily convert to an annual
compensation figure, in which case they may inflate their target wages to adjust. In this section, we analyze a
subsample of workers for whom we obtained data on both wage and non-wage compensation. These data
were only available for a sample of workers who searched for jobs in 2011. We do not have access to the
resume data for this sample, so could not use the methods used earlier to generate worker-level IT measures.
Instead, we use firm-level IT measures, which we showed in Table 6 to behave similarly to our individual IT
measures.

24

Column (1) of Table 10 suggests that 2-3% higher pay is required to induce workers to leave their
employers (t=3.00), and this estimate changes little in column (2) after including other forms of non-wage
compensation (t=2.89). The estimates on the other compensation variables are positive and statistically
significant, indicating that workers value these forms of compensation, but the IT estimate remains of similar
magnitude to prior estimates. The estimate falls in magnitude but remains significant in column (3), when
health and other benefits are added (t=2.44). There is a positive estimate on healthcare, but the coefficients
on vacation and retirement benefits are negative, which may be due to selection; older workers, who tend to
post lower target wages, may be more attracted to firms with retirement benefits. These estimates are similar
in sign and magnitude in subsequent columns after adding MSA effects (t=2.80 in column (4), t=2.40 in
column (5)). We cannot add employer effects because our IT variable for these tests is measured at the firm
level. This table suggests that the estimated IT coefficient is unlikely to be significantly biased by non-wage
compensation levels for workers using emerging IT systems.
Another source of concern is that high-tech markets have large numbers of skilled visa holders with
restricted mobility. It is possible they report high targets to offset the legal challenges of changing employers
and are more prevalent at companies using emerging IT. To test this explanation, we incorporate citizenship
information. Employees in this database report whether they are US citizens. Citizens compose about 78% of
the smaller 2011 sample. In column (6), including citizenship does not alter the IT estimates, so mobility
restrictions faced by non-US citizens as a group do not appear to be a significant source of estimation bias
(t=2.80). The estimates also remain similar in column (7) after limiting the sample to US citizens (t=2.45),
who do not face visa-related mobility restrictions.
Finally, if workers who use emerging IT tend to target employers with undesirable work
characteristics, it can bias our estimates upwards if they post higher target wages to offset undesirable
characteristics. Alternatively, if they target jobs with more desirable characteristics, it will bias our estimates
downward. The fact that the job board does not permit workers to set targets for non-wage characteristics
should discourage job switchers who are looking for a significant change in work context, but some workers
may be looking for such changes. We assessed the importance of this source of bias using the review data

25

along with the resume data to observe employment transitions among firms for which we have Glassdoor
data. These results, shown in Table 4 of Appendix C, suggest that i) workers tend to move between firms that
are similar in their non-wage attributes and ii) these patterns are similar for workers whether or not they are
using emerging IT systems. These patterns are inconsistent with the argument that our results are likely to be
sensitive to a large pool of workers who use emerging IT systems and are seeking to move to jobs with
undesirable non-wage characteristics.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper provides evidence that IT workers prefer employers that invest in emerging IT systems,
and this is in part because they can acquire valuable skills on the job. Although prior studies have examined
how IT assets affect performance, we show that those investments can influence firms’ competitiveness in
the market for high-tech labor. In fact, IT investment may derive some of its performance value because
workers are attracted to firms with a superior engineering brand. For a given wage, employers using new
technologies can attract higher-productivity technical labor.
These effects are large enough to be interesting. For a firm in which engineers account for a large
percent of the workforce, a 2% to 4% reduction in the wage bill is a powerful financial incentive. Results
from the productivity literature suggest that the total share of IT investment for Fortune 500 firms is 3% to
5% of total expenditures. Therefore, a reduction of a few percentage points in the wage bill (which can often
account for 70% to 80% of total spending) can offset a large fraction of a firm’s IT costs. Of course, this
does not imply that all firms should adopt emerging IT systems. These investments are associated with higher
churn, which is itself costly, and firms differ in the costs they face when first adopting these systems. Our
findings suggest only that ceteris paribus, firms with stronger engineering brands, in terms of technology and
culture, can attract higher quality technical labor for a given wage.
Our findings have several implications. Competition for IT labor has been a subject of policy
discussion for a generation. Firms’ IT choices can be an important determinant of retention, and may be one
reason why poaching in high-tech markets often requires higher wage premiums than other markets. Where
workers feel that their skills are depreciating, they may be harder to retain than in environments where they

26

learn new skills that will be valuable for their future careers. The argument that workers derive value from
acquiring transferable skills has additional implications. Because being rewarded for these skills requires
switching employers, workers may place greater value on IT experience in markets where mobility is
unfettered by non-compete policies. This implies, in turn, that firms have greater incentives to adopt
emerging IT in markets without mobility restrictions because they can capture more of the value they provide
to workers through this channel. Finally, the heterogeneity of our findings by experience level suggests that
IT factors can influence how different age workers sort across firms, which may be important given the many
diversity concerns that high-tech firms face.
There are caveats to our study. It would be valuable to know whether the results differ for workers
who are not actively seeking jobs. Our data are also from a short panel, so we do not take a position on
whether these effects are idiosyncratic to the time period we study or whether they are more broadly
generalized to IT-enabled change. A more encompassing test might analyze data from more than one IT
diffusion wave. Indeed, in the long run, firms and technology vendors may change the nature of their actions
in a way that changes these relationships.
There remains significant scope for work in this area. How firm characteristics, beyond IT
investment, influence IT learning and IT wage structure merits further study. Moreover, how IT workers
acquire skills, how these skills are rewarded, and how they depreciate all have implications for the IT labor
force. Those implications include who chooses to be an IT worker and the wages they earn. These questions
have received relatively little attention in the academic literature, but their answers are becoming important
for workforce policy and for managing technology in a competitive labor market.
REFERENCES
Acemoglu, D., & Pischke, J. S. (1999). Beyond Becker: training in imperfect labour markets. The Economic
Journal, 109(453), 112-142.
Agarwal, Rajshree, and Atsushi Ohyama. 2013. “Industry or Academia, Basic or Applied? Career Choices and
Earnings Trajectories of Scientists.” Management Science 59 (4): 950–70.
Almeida, Paul, and Bruce Kogut. 1999. “Localization of Knowledge and the Mobility of Engineers in Regional
Networks.” Management Science 45 (7): 905–17.

27

Ang, Soon, Sandra Slaughter, and Kok Yee Ng. 2002. “Human Capital and Institutional Determinants of
Information Technology Compensation: Modeling Multilevel and Cross-Level Interactions.” Management Science
48 (11): 1,427–45.
Archak, N., Ghose, A., & Ipeirotis, P. G. (2011). Deriving the pricing power of product features by mining
consumer reviews. Management Science, 57(8), 1,485-1,509.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1962. “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention.” In The Rate and
Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, 609–26. Princeton University Press.
Aurand, Timothy W., L. Gorchels, T. R. Bishop, (2005) "Human resource management's role in internal
branding: an opportunity for cross‐functional brand message synergy", Journal of Product & Brand
Management, Vol. 14 Issue: 3, pp.163-169.
Autor, D. H., Levy, F., & Murnane, R. J. (2003). The skill content of recent technological change: An
empirical exploration. The Quarterly journal of economics, 118(4), 1279-1333.
Bapna, Ravi, Nishtha Langer, Amit Mehra, Ram Gopal, and Alok Gupta. 2013. “Human Capital Investments
and Employee Performance: An Analysis of IT Services Industry.” Management Science 59 (3): 641–58.
Barley, Stephen R., and Gideon Kunda. 2006. Gurus, Hired Guns, and Warm Bodies: Itinerant Experts in a
Knowledge Economy. Princeton University Press.
Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw. 2007. “How Does Information Technology Affect
Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement, and Worker Skills.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4): 1,721–58.
Becker, Gary S. 1964. “Human Capital Theory.” Columbia, New York.
Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings.” Journal of Political
Economy 75 (4, Part 1): 352–65.
Bharadwaj, Anandhi S. 2000. “A Resource-Based Perspective on Information Technology Capability and Firm
Performance: An Empirical Investigation.” MIS Quarterly, 169–96.
Bidwell, Matthew, and Forrest Briscoe. 2010. “The Dynamics of Interorganizational Careers.” Organization
Science 21 (5): 1,034–53.
Black, Sandra E., and Lisa M. Lynch. 2005. “Measuring Organizational Capital in the New Economy.” In
Measuring Capital in the New Economy, 205–36. University of Chicago Press.
http://www.nber.org/chapters/c10622.pdf.
Blau, D. M. (1991). Search for nonwage job characteristics: a test of the reservation wage hypothesis. Journal of
Labor Economics, 9(2), 186-205.
Bloom, N., Garicano, L., Sadun, R., & Van Reenen, J. 2014. The distinct effects of information technology and
communication technology on firm organization. Management Science, 60(12), 2859-2885.
Branstetter, L. G., Drev, M., & Kwon, N. (2018). Get with the program: Software-driven innovation in
traditional manufacturing. Management Science.
Bresnahan, T. F., Brynjolfsson, E., & Hitt, L. M. 2002. Information technology, workplace organization, and
the demand for skilled labor: Firm-level evidence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), 339-376.
Brynjolfsson, E., and LM. Hitt. 2000. “Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational
Transformation and Business Performance.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (4): 23–48.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Kristina McElheran. 2016. “Digitization and Innovation the Rapid Adoption of DataDriven Decision-Making.” The American Economic Review 106 (5): 133–39.
Cappelli, P., & Chauvin, K. (1991). An interplant test of the efficiency wage hypothesis. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106(3), 769-787.

28

Chari, Varadarajan V., and Hugo Hopenhayn. 1991. “Vintage Human Capital, Growth, and the Diffusion of
New Technology.” Journal of Political Economy, 1,142–65.
Falk, Armin, Ernst Fehr, and Christian Zehnder. 2006. “Fairness Perceptions and Reservation Wages: The
Behavioral Effects of Minimum Wage Laws.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1,347–81.
Fallick, Bruce, Charles A. Fleischman, and James B. Rebitzer. 2006. “Job-Hopping in Silicon Valley: Some
Evidence Concerning the Microfoundations of a High-Technology Cluster.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
88 (3): 472–81.
Feldstein, Martin, and James Poterba. 1984. “Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages.” Journal of
Public Economics 23 (1): 141–67.
Fichman, Robert G., and Chris F. Kemerer. 1997. “The Assimilation of Software Process Innovations: An
Organizational Learning Perspective.” Management Science 43 (10): 1,345–63.
Fong Boh, Wai, Sandra A. Slaughter, and J. Alberto Espinosa. 2007. “Learning from Experience in Software
Development: A Multilevel Analysis.” Management Science 53 (8): 1,315–31.
Forman, Chris. 2005. “The Corporate Digital Divide: Determinants of Internet Adoption.” Management Science
51 (4): 641–54. doi:10.1287/mnsc.1040.0343.
Franco, April Mitchell, and Darren Filson. 2006. “Spin-Outs: Knowledge Diffusion through Employee
Mobility.” The RAND Journal of Economics 37 (4): 841–60.
Freedman, Matthew L. 2008. “Job Hopping, Earnings Dynamics, and Industrial Agglomeration in the Software
Publishing Industry.” Journal of Urban Economics 64 (3): 590–600.
Ghose, A., P. Ipeirotis, and B. Li. "Designing ranking systems for hotels on travel search engines by mining
user-generated and crowdsourced content." Marketing Science 31, no. 3 (2012): 493-520.
Hackman, J. Richard. & Oldham, Greg. R. (1980). Work redesign. (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA).
Hall, Robert E., and Alan B. Krueger. 2012. “Evidence on the Incidence of Wage Posting, Wage Bargaining,
and on-the-Job Search.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 56–67.
Hu, M., & Liu, B. 2004. Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 168-177). ACM.
Jones, Stephen RG. 1988. “The Relationship between Unemployment Spells and Reservation Wages as a Test
of Search Theory.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 741–65.
Joseph, Damien, Wai Fong Boh, Soon Ang, and Sandra Slaughter. 2012. “The Career Paths Less (or More)
Traveled: A Sequence Analysis of IT Career Histories, Mobility Patterns, and Career Success.” MIS Quarterly 36
(2): 427–52.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Yaw Nyarko. 1996. “Learning by Doing and the Choice of Technology.” Econometrica
64 (6): 1,299–1,310.
Kim, D. (2012). HR branding: How human resources can learn from product and service branding to improve
attraction, selection, and retention [Electronic article]. Cornell Hospitality Report, 12(14), 6-17.
Krueger, Alan B., and Andreas I. Mueller. 2014. “A Contribution to the Empirics of Reservation Wages.”
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kuhn, Peter, and Mikal Skuterud. 2000. “Job Search Methods: Internet versus Traditional.” Monthly Lab. Rev.
123: 3.
Lancaster, Tony, and Andrew Chesher. 1983. “An Econometric Analysis of Reservation Wages.” Econometrica
51 (6): 1,661–76.

29

Levina, Natalia, and Mingdi Xin. 2007. “Research Note-Comparing IT Workers’ Compensation across Country
Contexts: Demographic, Human Capital, and Institutional Factors.” Information Systems Research 18 (2): 193–210.
Marx, Matt. 2011. The Employer Strikes Back: Non-Compete Agreements and the Mobility of Technical
Professionals. American Sociological Review. 76(5): 695-712.
Mata, Francisco J., William L. Fuerst, and Jay B. Barney. 1995. “Information Technology and Sustained
Competitive Advantage: A Resource-Based Analysis.” MIS Quarterly, 487–505.
McElheran, Kristina. 2015. “Do Market Leaders Lead in Business Process Innovation? The Case(s) of EBusiness Adoption.” Management Science, January.
Mithas, Sunil, and Mayuram S. Krishnan. 2008. “Human Capital and Institutional Effects in the Compensation
of Information Technology Professionals in the United States.” Management Science 54 (3): 415–28.
Mithas, Sunil, and Henry C. Lucas Jr. 2010. “Are Foreign IT Workers Cheaper? US Visa Policies and
Compensation of Information Technology Professionals.” Management Science 56 (5): 745–65.
Møen, Jarle. 2005. “Is Mobility of Technical Personnel a Source of R&D Spillovers?” Journal of Labor Economics
23 (1): 81–114.
O’Mahony, Siobhan, and Beth A. Bechky. 2006. “Stretchwork: Managing the Career Progression Paradox in
External Labor Markets.” Academy of Management Journal 49 (5): 918–41.
Prasad, Eswar S. 2003. “What Determines the Reservation Wages of Unemployed Workers? New Evidence
from German Micro Data.”
Reja, U., Manfreda, K. L., Hlebec, V., & Vehovar, V. 2003. “Open-ended vs. close-ended questions in web
questionnaires.” Developments in applied statistics, 19(1), 160-117.
Roach, Michael, and Henry Sauermann. 2010. “A Taste for Science? PhD Scientists’ Academic Orientation and
Self-Selection into Research Careers in Industry.” Research Policy 39 (3): 422–34.
Roberts, Jeffrey A., Il-Horn Hann, and Sandra A. Slaughter. 2006. “Understanding the Motivations,
Participation, and Performance of Open Source Software Developers: A Longitudinal Study of the Apache
Projects.” Management Science 52 (7): 984–99.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1972. “Learning and Experience in the Labor Market.” Journal of Human Resources, 326–42.
Sauermann, Henry, and Michael Roach. 2014. “Not All Scientists Pay to Be Scientists: PhDs’ Preferences for
Publishing in Industrial Employment.” Research Policy 43 (1): 32–47.
Saxenian, AnnaLee. 1996. Regional Advantage. Harvard University Press.
Shimer, Robert, and Iván Werning. 2007. “Reservation Wages and Unemployment Insurance.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122 (3): 1,145–85.
Stern, Scott. 2004. “Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?” Management Science 50 (6): 835–53.
Tambe, Prasanna, and Lorin M. Hitt. 2012. “The Productivity of Information Technology Investments: New
Evidence from IT Labor Data.” Information Systems Research 23 (3-part-1): 599–617.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Jeff Armstrong. 1998. “Geographically Localized Knowledge:
Spillovers or Markets?” Economic Inquiry 36 (1): 65–86.

30

FIGURE 1: AGE OF TECHNOLOGY AND PREDICTED WAGE PREMIUM

Figure notes: This figure plots a linear fit (the black solid line) and a nonparametric polynomial fit (the blue dashed line) of technology age against the
predicted difference between target and current wages (in U.S. dollars). Green triangles denote examples of popular programming languages. The
predicted difference is computed as follows: we run a regression using a specification similar to the one used in Table 6, Column (1) except that we drop
the “Emerging” variable. We use the residual of this regression, which is interpreted as the percentage change in the current wage. We compute the
equivalent dollar value of this residual by evaluating it at the average current wage.

FIGURE 2: JOB EXPERIENCE, IT USE ON THE JOB, AND PREDICTED WAGE PREMIUM

Figure notes: This figure plots fitted lines (nonparametric polynomial fit) of job experience (year) on the predicted difference between the target and
current wage (in U.S. dollars) for emerging technologies and all other technologies. The predicted wage difference is computed by running a regression
with a specification similar to the one used in Table 6, Column (1) except that we dropped the IT variables. We use the residual of this regression, which
is interpreted as the percentage change in the current wage. We compute the equivalent dollar value of this residual by evaluating at the average current
wage.

31

TABLE 1: DESCRIPTION OF KEY MEASURES AND DATA SOURCES
Measure
CURRENT & TARGET
WAGES

EMERGING IT

EDUCATION
RACE AND GENDER
JOB TENURE AND
EXPERIENCE
YEAR
LOCATION
CULTURE

Description
Our sample includes 50,628 annually employed IT workers who posted current and target
wages on the job board and who identified their wages as being earned on annual basis. We
drop hourly workers and those who report earning less than $10,000 per year as their current
or target wage and those who report more than $1,000,000 per year as their current or target
wage.
Our IT measures are derived by text-mining employee resumes to find which technologies the
employee was working with at the employer they were with when participating on the job
board. For workers that list using a number of different technologies, we use the newest one
with which they report working.
Education is self-reported by workers. Workers report having one of the following seven
education levels: 1) High school and below, 2) vocational, 3) two-year degree, 4) four-year
degree, 5) graduate degree, 6) doctorate, or 7) other.
Race and gender are self-reported by workers by choosing values from drop-down boxes.
Reporting this information is voluntary.
These measures are computed from the job history (resume) of the employee. Job tenure is
the time starting from when they began their most recent job up until the time at which the
wage information was posted. Experience is computed beginning from the time they started
their first job to when they posted wage information.
The year in which the job seeker engaged in job search.
Workers report city, zip code, and state. Using these data, we assigned each worker to a
metropolitan statistical area (MSA).
Measures of employer features most valued by their IT workers were constructed by textmining reviews posted at the Glassdoor.com website, an online labor market intermediary
upon which employees review employers. Details of this process are provided in Appendix A.

32

TABLE 2: DEMOGRAPHIC COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR SAMPLE AND EMPLOYED, NON-HOURLY IT
WORKERS IN THE 2007 CURRENT POPULATION SURVEY (CPS)
(1)
CPS Sample
1,320

(2)
Job Board Sample
50,628

A. By Gender (%)
Female
Male
Not Specified

29.0
71.0
0.0

11.1
47.0
41.9

B. By Educational Degree (%)
High School & Below
Vocational School
Two Year Degree
Four Year Degree
Graduate Degree
Doctorate Degree
Other

8.0
4.7
5.4
45.5
19.1
1.9
15.5

2.4
2.3
11.8
44.7
22.9
0.9
15.0

C. By Ethnicity (%)
African American/Black
Asian
White
Other
Not specified

6.3
13.0
78.9
1.8
0.0

7.2
9.5
33.4
5.7
44.2

Year: 2007
Number of observations

Table notes: This table compares a sample of IT workers from the Current Population Survey (CPS), Labor Force Statistics
(Column (1)) with our job board sample (Column (2)). We keep workers from the CPS who report a job in a “Computer and
Mathematical Science Occupation”, their employment status as “Employed”, and their hourly status as “Non-Hourly”.
Comparing column (1) to column (2), the Pearson chi-square statistic for gender is χ2(1) =77.8 (p=0.00), for education is χ2 (5)
= 257.9 (p=0.00), and for ethnicity is χ2 (2) =114.4 (p=0.00). Workers with unspecified demographic information are dropped
when conducting these chi-square tests.

33

TABLE 3: COMPARISONS OF IT WAGES WITH WAGES REPORTED FOR IT WORKERS IN THE BUREAU OF
LABOR STATISTICS 2007 OCCUPATIONAL EMPLOYMENT SURVEY (OES)
(1)
2007 OES
Wages
3,191,360

(2)
Job board
Wages
50,628

A. By Detailed Occupation (Computer & Mathematical Occupations Only)
Computer Programmers
Software Engineers, Applications
Software Engineers, Systems Software
Computer Systems Analysts
Database Administrators
Network and Computer Systems Administrators
Computer Specialists, All Other

72,010
85,660
90,780
75,890
70,260
67,850
72,310

61,726
81,310
92,545
67,391
74,175
56,878
74,462

B. By Metropolitan Area (Computer & Mathematical Occupations Only)
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA
San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA
San Francisco-Oakland-Fremont, CA
San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk, CT
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV
Trenton-Ewing, NJ
New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island, NY-NJ-PA
Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA

74,510
73,310
87,930
98,160
83,480
85,060
76,320
82,540
82,120

83,349
75,698
89,285
95,443
70,937
82,676
77,000
78,791
76,840

Year: 2007
Number of observations

Table notes: This table reports wage comparisons between IT workers (SOC major group 15-0000, Computer and Mathematical
Occupations) in the 2007 BLS Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) and IT workers in our sample. All figures are expressed
in dollars, and are rounded to the nearest dollar. Column (1) reports 2007 averages from the OES; Column (2) reports wages for
employed annual IT workers from our sample. Panel A classifies workers by ONET occupation group, identified by manually
grouping workers in our sample into ONET categories using their standardized job titles. Panel B shows comparisons between
the two data sets for some high-tech regions.

TABLE 4: EXAMPLES OF IT SYSTEMS CLASSIFIED BY AGE AND GROWTH RATE
Growth rate
Technology age

Examples

Number of workers in
sample using each IT type

>= Median
<=10 years
Actionscript
Agile Development
Citrix Metaframe
Oracle Clinical
Oracle Fixed Assets
Paint Shop Pro
Sap Basis
Struts
Unity
Google Analytics

>=Median
>10 years
Autodesk
Citrix Winframe
Datastage
Informatica
Ingenix
Java Applets
Peopletools
Sound Forge
Sun Servers
Teradata

< Median
<=10 years
Avaya
Java Servlets
Lotus Organizer
Macromedia
Dreamweaver
Macromedia Fireworks
Mascot
Microsoft Photo Editor
Oracle Project
Tomcat

< Median
>10 years
Adobe Photoshop
Cisco Routers
Crystal Reports
Delphi
Informix
Python
Samba
Shell Scripting
Siebel
Sybase

8,089

5,912

3,920

33,427

Table notes: This table provides examples of information technologies classified by their age and their growth rate. Age is computed in 2007, when
the job search data were collected. Growth rates are computed as described in Appendix A. Technologies in the first column are illustrative of a
larger set we refer to in our analysis as “emerging” information technologies.

34

TABLE 5: STATISTICS FOR KEY REGRESSION VARIABLES FOR IT WORKERS IN SAMPLE
Variable
Current wage
Target wage
Experience (Years)
Job tenure (Years)
Emerging IT (0/1)

Mean
73,901
77,775
13.48
2.23
0.22

Std. Dev.
34,370
36,062
7.14
3.87
0.42

N
50,628
50,628
50,628
50,628
50,628

Table notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for key variables used in our regression analysis. Wage
statistics are rounded to the nearest dollar.

TABLE 6: USE OF EMERGING IT ON THE JOB AND WAGES
DV: Log(Target)
IT growth measure
Emerging
New=0, Growth=1

(1)

>=Median

(2)

>=Median

0.022***
(0.003)

0.021***
(0.002)

0.024***
(0.003)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.017***
(0.006)
-0.011***
(0.003)
0.039***
(0.003)
0.079***
(0.003)
0.763***
(0.005)

0.023***
(0.003)
0.006
(0.006)
-0.017***
(0.006)
-0.012***
(0.004)
0.037***
(0.003)
0.075***
(0.003)
0.761***
(0.002)

New=1, Growth=0
Male
Gender unreported
Less than high school
2-year degree
4-Year degree
Graduate degree
Log (Wage)
Employer FE
Location FE
Robust S.E.
Demographic controls
R-squared
Observations

(3)

(4)


0.734
50,628

(6)

(7)

(8)

>=Median

>=Median

>=25%

Growth

%Emerg

0.022***
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.024***
(0.003)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.017***
(0.006)
-0.011***
(0.003)
0.039***
(0.003)
0.079***
(0.003)
0.763***
(0.005)

0.021***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
0.000
(0.003)
0.023***
(0.003)
0.006
(0.006)
-0.017***
(0.006)
-0.012***
(0.004)
0.037***
(0.003)
0.075***
(0.003)
0.761***
(0.002)

0.020***
(0.007)

0.020***
(0.007)

0.019***
(0.004)

0.037***
(0.005)

-0.025***
(0.008)
-0.005
(0.016)
-0.028**
(0.014)
0.010
(0.009)
0.033***
(0.007)
0.071***
(0.008)
0.843***
(0.006)

-0.025***
(0.008)
-0.005
(0.016)
-0.028**
(0.014)
0.010
(0.009)
0.033***
(0.007)
0.071***
(0.008)
0.843***
(0.006)

-0.024***
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.016)
-0.026*
(0.014)
0.011
(0.009)
0.033***
(0.007)
0.072***
(0.008)
0.842***
(0.006)

0.023***
(0.006)
-0.007
(0.014)
-0.008
(0.013)
-0.000
(0.007)
0.035***
(0.006)
0.080***
(0.006)
0.775***
(0.005)















0.734
50,628


0.787
11,070


0.787
11,070


0.787
11,070


0.760
11,070




0.736
50,628

(5)

>=Median



0.736
50,628

Table notes: This table reports regression estimates of emerging IT use on workers’ target wages, controlling for their wages, job tenure, experience, race, gender, and
education. The base group for gender is Female, and for educational attainment is vocational degree. Columns (1) through (5) use whether the IT growth rate is greater
than or equal to median value as a measure of technology growth to construct the emerging IT variable. Column (6) uses whether the growth rate is in the top quartile as
the IT growth measure. Column (7) uses the standardized growth rate. Column (8) uses the fraction of IT workers reporting emerging skills to construct an employer level
measure of emerging IT use. The drop in sample size in columns (5) through (8) is due to adding employer fixed-effects. Appendix B compares the sample used in (1)-(4)
with the sample in (5)-(9). Standard errors are clustered at the geographic level in Columns (1) and (3); *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

35

TABLE 7: USE OF EMERGING IT AND CAREER DYNAMICS
DV
Model
Employment spell
sample
Emerging
Exp>=15yrs
Emerging * Exp>=15yrs
Log (Wage)
Employer FE
Location FE
Robust S.E.
Demographic controls
R-squared
Observations

(1)
OLS

(2)
(3)
Log(Target wage)
FE
FE

(4)

(5)

FE

Hazard
Current
& prior
jobs

(6)
(7)
(8)
Years until exiting job
Hazard
Hazard
Hazard
Current
Current
Prior
& prior
& prior
jobs
jobs
jobs

1.121***
(0.012)

1.124***
(0.016)

1.151***
(0.014)

1.091**
(0.048)

1.210***
(0.067)

0.955***
(0.009)

0.979
(0.014)

0.922***
(0.011)

0.902***
(0.034)

1.001**
(0.057)






0.012
10,423


0.012
5,456

All

All

All

All

0.021***
(0.003)
-0.010***
(0.002)

0.020***
(0.003)
-0.009***
(0.002)

0.770***
(0.006)

0.768***
(0.002)

0.027***
(0.003)
-0.006***
(0.002)
-0.021***
(0.005)
0.768***
(0.002)

0.036***
(0.009)
-0.017***
(0.005)
-0.041***
(0.015)
0.847***
(0.007)









0.740
47,712


0.741
47,712


0.685
10,423



0.742
47,712

(9)
Hazard
Prior
jobs




0.009
47,712



0.008
22,713


0.006
47,712

Table notes: Columns (1) through (4) report regression estimates of how the relationship between emerging IT use and wages varies by workers’ experience
levels, and columns (5) through (9) report regressions of how emerging IT use is associated with years until the worker either exits their job in the case of
prior employment spells, or searches for a new job for the case of the current employment spell. We only retain in our sample workers with less than 40 years
of experience and reported job tenure of less than 30 years which slightly lowers the size of the sample from that used in Table 6. The results of hazard models
are reported in Columns (5)-(9). Standard errors are clustered at the geographic level in Columns (1), (5), and (6); *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

36

TABLE 8: CORRELATIONS BETWEEN EMPLOYER ATTRIBUTES,
EMPLOYEES’ IT USE ON-THE-JOB, AND JOB SEARCH

DV:
Workplace attribute
LEARNING
TECHNOLOGY
COWORKERS
FLEXIBILITY
COMPENSATION
CAREER
INDUSTRY
LOCATION
Log(Wage)
Robust S.E.
Demographic controls
R-squared
Observations

(1)
Use
emerging
IT?
Logit
0.124**
(0.057)
0.166***
(0.050)
0.055
(0.049)
-0.073
(0.055)
-0.184***
(0.055)
0.047
(0.051)
-0.145**
(0.057)
-0.028
(0.060)

(2)
Use older,
High
growth IT?
Logit
-0.232***
(0.071)
0.177***
(0.053)
-0.112
(0.074)
0.319***
(0.055)
0.017
(0.071)
-0.060
(0.065)
0.051
(0.066)
0.024
(0.068)

(3)
Use newer,
low growth
IT?
Logit
-0.007
(0.080)
0.030
(0.102)
0.387***
(0.072)
0.018
(0.083)
-0.147
(0.094)
0.096
(0.082)
0.094
(0.090)
0.085
(0.081)

(4)
Use older,
low growth
IT?
Logit
-0.021
(0.046)
-0.146***
(0.045)
-0.092**
(0.044)
-0.091**
(0.042)
0.136***
(0.045)
-0.003
(0.052)
0.036
(0.046)
-0.012
(0.049)



N/A
2,414



N/A
2,414



N/A
2,414



N/A
2,414

(5)
Log(Target)
OLS
0.037**
(0.019)
0.039***
(0.014)
-0.032**
(0.015)
0.004
(0.014)
-0.017
(0.011)
0.015
(0.020)
0.061***
(0.012)
0.002
(0.018)
0.781***
(0.018)


0.731
2,414

Table notes: This table reports regression estimates of employer features mined from the Glassdoor.com reviews on
the worker level IT use and wage measures. Each observation is a worker and each row is an attribute value of that
worker’s employer. Details about how we produce employer attribute measures are provided in Appendix A. The
dependent variable is a binary variable that indicates whether or not the worker uses that type of technology in their job.
All regressions control for wages, job tenure, experience, race, gender, and education. Column (1)-(4) estimates
correlations of these employer attributes on binary indicators of the technologies that workers use on the job. Column (5)
embeds these employer attributes in the target wage specification used in the earlier tables. Robust standard errors are
shown in parentheses; Standard errors are clustered at the geographic level; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

37

TABLE 9: OTHER COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS AND VISA RESTRICTIONS
DV: Log (Target)
Model
Worker sample
Data year
% Emerging
Log (Other comp)

(1)
OLS
All
2011
0.027***
(0.009)

Log (Commission)
Log (Bonus)

(2)
OLS
All
2011
0.026***
(0.009)
0.010***
(0.001)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)

DENTAL (Y/N)

VACATION (Y/N)
RETIREMENT (Y/N)
Non-US Citizen (Y/N)

Location FE
Robust S.E.
Demographic controls
R-squared
Observations

(4)
FE
All
2011
0.028***
(0.010)
0.009***
(0.002)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)

-0.013
(0.016)
0.060***
(0.017)
-0.015
(0.013)
-0.025***
(0.009)

HEALTH (Y/N)

Log(Wage)

(3)
OLS
All
2011
0.022**
(0.009)
0.010***
(0.001)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)

0.810***
(0.010)

0.802***
(0.011)

0.802***
(0.011)



0.778
6,843



0.781
6,843



0.782
6,843

(5)
FE
All
2011
0.024**
(0.010)
0.009***
(0.002)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.012
(0.014)
0.068***
(0.015)
-0.026**
(0.012)
-0.021**
(0.010)

(6)
FE
All
2011
0.028***
(0.010)

(7)
FE
Citizens
2011
0.027**
(0.011)

0.816***
(0.007)


0.804
5,310

0.791***
(0.007)


0.792***
(0.007)


0.003
(0.006)
0.804***
(0.006)



0.768
6,843


0.769
6,843


0.760
6,843

Table notes: This table adds measures of equity compensation, benefits, and citizenship status for a subsample of workers who
report this information on the job board. % Emerging is the fraction of workers at the firm who are using emerging IT. This firm level
measure, generated using 2007 data, is matched by employer name to a sample of workers from 2011 who reported their compensation
information. Job seekers report the value of alternative compensation measures in US dollars. DENTAL, HEALTH, VACATION,
RETIREMENT are dummy variables and indicate whether the worker receives these benefits from their employer. Non-US citizen is
also a binary indicator. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions control for wages, job tenure, experience, race, gender, and
education. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses; Standard errors are clustered at the geographical level in Columns (1), (2)
and (3); *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

38

APPENDIX A: GENERATION OF TEXT BASED MEASURES OF IT USE AND EMPLOYER CHARACTERISTICS
I. IT MEASURES FROM RESUMES

To develop measures of technologies used on the job, we text mined the resumes that workers submitted to
the job board. In their resumes, job seekers provide details about prior employment including information
related to programming languages or software packages used on the job. Table A1 provides an illustrative
example.
TABLE A1. SAMPLE RESUME WITH PROJECT DESCRIPTIONS
EXPERIENCE
E. xxx Corporation Long Island City. N.Y
11/2005-31/2006 Help Desk Support/Analyst
Tested Proprietary Database System
Gathered User Requirement
Assisted System Design(Design Patterns)
Coded in Java, C#
Sxxx Magazine New York, N.Y
1/2003-6/2003 Web Designer
Designed Front End/ Back End
Assisted System Analyst
Headed 4 Team members in the Project

We wrote software scripts that extracted the following fields:
1) The technologies mentioned by job seekers
2) The beginning and end years of the jobs in which they used the technology
For each year t and skill s, we computed the fraction of IT workers starting a job in that year who reported
using that skill, (i.e. the ratio between 1) nts: IT workers starting a job and reporting the skill and 2) nt: IT workers
starting a job):
𝑠𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎(𝑠𝑠)𝑡𝑡 =

𝑛𝑛𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠
𝑛𝑛𝑡𝑡

.

We measure skill growth as changes in this skill share:
𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺ℎ(𝑠𝑠) = 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑒𝑒𝑡𝑡∈𝑇𝑇 (𝑆𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎(𝑠𝑠)𝑡𝑡 − 𝑆𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎(𝑠𝑠)𝑡𝑡−1 )

We then compute whether that skill has a growth rate that is greater than or equal to the median value for all
skills in that year. When workers list multiple skills in a job, we select the newest skill used by the worker in that
job.
Measurement error: Because our measures are based on changes in skill counts, whether workers accurately
report skills and whether the skills possessed by a worker influence her decision to post a resume can both
affect measurement error. Because reporting high-growth skills may increase the likelihood of future
employment, workers may over-report these skills. On the other hand, workers using emerging technologies
may have less incentive to use job boards if the market is tighter for these skills. In this case, we may
underestimate the growth of higher growth skills and overestimate the growth of low growth skills. When we
discretize this measure, skills growing at the median rate are most vulnerable to being misclassified, which
means that we may identify some new but slower growth skills as emerging skills. This source of error can lead
to underestimates of the IT coefficient because it associates a low difference between a target wage and current
wage to a skill mislabeled as emerging. For robustness, we used two alternative measures: 1) whether the growth
is in the top 25 percentile and 2) the standardized growth value.

39

II. GLASSDOOR MEASURES OF EMPLOYER ATTRIBUTES
We used the Glassdoor.com data to quantify the value workers assign to employer features by text-mining the
online reviews. We focused on the content in the “pros” section of the reviews, which limits the text to those
attributes that employees find valuable. We used 1) automated and 2) semi-automated approaches to create
different measures of employer features that we used for two separate analyses. The key distinction between
these approaches was whether the set of employer features was pre-specified before starting the text mining
task.
1. Automated generation of employer features: First, we used a procedure that does not rely on pre-specified
employer features. This approach replicates the procedure used to mine product features in Archak et al (2011)
and Ghose et al (2012). First, we assigned part-of-speech tags to keywords, “chunked” 18 sentences based on
grammar rules, and identified noun phrases as candidates for employer keywords. These were implemented
using the Python NLTK package. We dropped infrequent noun phrases by (1) using the algorithm from Liu
and Hu (2004) and (2) removing adjectives that did not introduce new concepts. Our final feature candidates
included approximately 3,000 unique lemmatized nouns or noun phrases.
Next, we clustered noun phrases based on their context, where context is defined as the five-word window
preceding and succeeding each feature. The intuition behind this approach is to cluster phrases that are
conceptually similar to one another using association patterns that appeared around these phrases. Each noun
phrase context was treated as a separate document. K-means clustering was used to group the noun-phrases.
We varied the number of clusters from five to fifteen, and finally settled on eight clusters because each feature
set represented a unique employer attribute and the correlations between clusters suggest that they are
reasonably orthogonal to one another.
For each cluster, we generated a list of the most frequent phrases and phrases with the top TF-IDF scores (TFIDF in the feature context documents) 19 and assigned labels to them. In Table B.1, we list the clusters and the
top TF-IDF phrases for each cluster. The labels for each topic were assigned using our own judgment, which
is standard for many unsupervised machine learning tasks.
Finally, to construct employer values for each cluster measure, we computed whether the fraction of workers
referencing each of these measures is greater than or equal to the median value when compared with all
organizations in the sample. This transformation absorbs some of the differences in employer size. Moreover,
larger companies receive more reviews, but systematic error is introduced into our measures only if workers
from larger companies disproportionally favor one feature over another.
2. Manually generated labeling of the SKILLS measure: For another analysis, we manually pre-specified
phrases referring to “skill development/training” (SKILL). 20 We analyzed the 2,000 most frequent keywords
in the Pros section of the reviews contributed by IT workers. For each keyword, we identified phrases that
referred to skills and learning at work. Then, we limited the list to bigrams that appeared at least thirty times in
the corpus. In Table B.2, we provide a list of illustrative bigram terms. We coded each review as referring to
SKILL if at least one of these bigrams appears in the review. For each employer, we computed the fraction of
IT workers referencing SKILL terms in their reviews.

Phrase chunking is a natural language process that separates and segments a sentence into its sub constituents, such as noun, verb,
and prepositional phrases.
19 TF-IDF is a value that increases proportionally to the number of times a word appears in a document, but is offset by the frequency
of the word in the corpus, which helps to adjust for the fact that some words appear more frequently in general.
20 This approach is similar to an “Axial coding” paradigm, in which researchers use pre-defined constructs to guide how they analyze
interview questions. Because of the size of the review text, we are not able to code each review. We therefore deconstruct the reviews
into the smallest meaningful unit of text.
18

40

TABLE A2. CLUSTERS OF EMPLOYER FEATURES
LEARNING
values, helpful colleague, learn environment, high turnover, tech support, flexibility in work schedule, high salary, pros, learn
experience, summer hour, exciting, high tech, family, much stress, technical work, coworker, work schedule, near future, free train,
positive
TECHNOLOGY
concept, industry leader, interesting product, various project, date technology, supply, project, advance technology, different
technology, engineering, software, many location, aerospace industry, automotive industry, agile development, project work,
database, employee development, various technology, innovative product
FLEXIBILITY
week vacation, hour shift, comp time, flexible work, remote, hours, hour day, short period of time, work time, free time, flexible
work time, generous vacation, ample time, flexible work hour, vacation day, time management, amount of time, time-off policy,
work hour, other week
COWORKER
group of people, team of people, decent people, sense of humor, many people, knowledgeable people, diverse group of people,
creative people, netapp, trench, experience people, kind people, bright, work environment, awesome people, helpful people,
competent people, quality people, smart people, cool people
COMPENSATION
bonus structure, ok salary, meal, medical, free access, solid benefit, federal government, balance between work, care of employee,
fitness, excellent benefits, region, pet, package, company car, competitive compensation, life/work balance, company vehicle, stock
purchase plan, work life balance
CAREER
different opportunity, fast growth, opportunities, job opportunity, growth potential, advancement opportunity, career development,
same company, opportunity for career advancement, growth opportunity, company with lot, mobility, promotions, company
growth, own career, own career path, educational opportunity, room for growth, carrier, opportunity for career growth
LOCATION
drama, cube, perfect place, beautiful location, beautiful place, san diego, easy place, san francisco, beach, nyc, amenity, weather,
valley, small office, stable place, private office, proximity, street, other place, seattle
INDUSTRY
everything, military, animal, professionalism, red tape, proud, let, paperwork, workload, competitor, face, vast majority, style, age,
thats, show, income, recession, personnel, alot
Table notes: We show the top keywords in this table for each employer feature. These keywords were selected based on their TF-IDF score.

TABLE A3. BIGRAMS USED TO CONSTRUCT SKILLS MEASURE
learn lot, cutting edge, great training, great experience, opportunity learn, good training, place learn, training program, learn new,
learning experience, good experience, opportunities learn, gain experience, great learning, work experience, training opportunities,
learning opportunities, learn grow, experience working, get experience, edge technology, excellent training, new skills, training good,
new technologies, training programs, training great, good learning, experience great, new technology, hands experience, job training,
skill set, learning environment, experience good, work learn, lot experience, great technology, people learn, learning new, get learn,
lots training, sales training, paid training, able learn, leading edge, want learn, learn something
Table notes: This table lists the bigrams used to create the SKILL measure used in our empirical analysis.

41

APPENDIX B: COMPARISONS OF SAMPLES USED IN ANALYSIS
TABLE B1: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR SAMPLES USED IN ANALYSIS
Worker sample
N
Current wage
Target wage
Experience
Job tenure (Years)
Emerging

(1)
Full regression
sample
50,628
73,901
77,775
13.48
2.23
0.22

(2)
Employer FE
sample
11,070
72,292
75,802
13.17
2.22
0.22

(3)
Glassdoor
sample
2,414
72,843
76,618
13.63
2.35
0.20

Table notes: This table compares descriptive statistics of key variables for (1) full regression sample, (2) observations included
in employer fixed effects regressions and (3) observations included in HRM practices regressions. Wage statistics are rounded
to the nearest dollar.

TABLE B2: DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES FOR SAMPLES USED IN ANALYSIS
Worker sample
Number of observations
A. By Gender
Female
Male
Gender not reported
B. By Educational Degree
Other
High School & Below
Vocational School
Two-Year Degree
Four-Year Degree
Graduate Degree
Doctorate Degree
C. By Ethnicity
African American/Black
Asian
White
Other

(1)
(2)
Full regression
sample
50,628
N
%

(3)
(4)
Sample used for
Employer FE
11,070
N
%

(5)

(6)

Glassdoor sample
N

2,414

%

5,623
23,816
21,189

11.1
47.0
41.9

1,245
5,010
4,815

11.3
45.3
43.5

250
1,086
1,078

10.4
45.0
44.7

7,582
1,217
1,163
5,963
22,643
11,591
469

15.0
2.3
2.4
11.8
44.7
22.9
0.9

1,392
268
128
1,388
5,191
2,662
41

12.6
2.4
1.2
12.5
46.9
24.1
0.4

276
38
17
310
1,124
649
0

11.4
1.6
0.7
12.8
46.6
26.9
0.0

3,665
4,830
25,247
16,886

7.2
9.5
33.4
49.9

915
964
3,596
5,595

8.3
8.7
32.5
50.5

194
220
777
1,223

8.0
9.1
32.2
50.7

Table notes: This table reports sample comparisons of gender, educational degree and ethnicity groups for (1) full regression
sample, (2) observations included in employer fixed effects regressions and (3) observations included in HRM practices
regressions.

42

APPENDIX C: SUPPLEMENTARY TESTS
TABLE C.1: LABOR MARKET FACTORS, EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES, AND WAGES
Table notes. This table analyzes how labor market factors that influence a worker’s outside options can affect the worker’s
willingness to exchange wages for the opportunity to use more interesting IT. These cross-market comparisons should be
interpreted with some caution, because the extent to which a worker and employer split the costs of various types of
“training” (and therefore the sizes of the effects we observe) are, in part, a function of tightness in the labor market in
which the worker is participating (e.g. Acemoglu and Pischke 1999). In this table, we test whether the patterns we observe
are consistent with the idea that workers are more likely to exchange wages for skills in markets with better outside options,
with the caveat that we cannot directly account for differences in supply and demand conditions across markets that might
influence these estimates. The table reports worker-level regression estimates that analyze correlations between the
workers’ IT use, characteristics of the labor markets in which they are searching, and the difference between the target and
current wage. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions control for wages, job tenure, experience, race, gender,
and education. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses; Standard errors are clustered at the geographic level in
columns (1), (3), and (5); *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
To characterize labor markets, we measured a) the fraction of local employers hiring workers with emerging IT skills and
b) the ratio of the number of employers on the hiring side of the market to the number of workers with these skills. We
use these two measures in different sets of regressions. In each, markets are classified according to whether they are above
the median value for these measures. We created a 2 x 2 matrix between this market measure and whether or not the focal
worker uses emerging IT.
Column (1) uses measures of the fraction of employers in a market hiring workers with emerging IT skills. The effects of
workers’ emerging IT use on target wages are statistically significant only in markets where more than the median fraction
of employers hire for these skills (t=5.75). The effects in smaller markets or where workers are using mature IT systems,
are insignificant. Column (2) includes fixed-effects, which compares IT workers who have the same employer and use the
same category of IT system, but who are located in different markets. The interaction effect when workers have emerging
IT skills and employees are hiring these skills remains positive (t=3.67), but the estimate on emerging IT in small markets
turns negative. This may indicate that for smaller market establishments, wages are bid up due to a constrained supply of
workers. Columns (3) and (4) use our alternative measure, the ratio of the number of employers using emerging IT systems
(i.e. employers with at least one worker using the system) to the number of IT workers using emerging IT systems, which
captures relative differences in the worker’s bargaining power. The pattern of estimates is similar to those we observed in
columns (1) and (2).
DV: Log(Target wage)
Model
Emerging & Above median fraction of employers use emerging IT
Emerging & Below median fraction of employers use emerging IT
Not emerging & Above median fraction of employers use emerging IT
Emerging & Above median ratio of emerging IT employers to workers

(1)
OLS
0.023***
(0.004)
0.011
(0.007)
-0.000
(0.003)

(2)
FE
0.033***
(0.009)
-0.092***
(0.015)
-0.003
(0.006)

0.763***
(0.005)

0.763***
(0.007)


Emerging & Below median ratio of emerging IT employers to workers
Not emerging & Above median ratio of emerging IT employers to workers
Log(Wage)
Employer FE
Robust SE
Demographic controls
R-squared
Observations



0.736
50,628

43


0.686
11,070

(3)
OLS

(4)
FE

0.020***
(0.004)
0.016***
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.002)
0.763***
(0.005)

0.038***
(0.009)
-0.075***
(0.014)
0.001
(0.006)
0.761***
(0.007)




0.736
50,628


0.685
11,070

TABLE C.2: PAIRWISE CORRELATIONS AMONG EMPLOYER CULTURE ATTRIBUTES
Table notes: This table reports the full set of pairwise correlations between the key workplace dimensions constructed
from the Glassdoor review text. Correlations are reported at the employer level for 473 employers that appear both in our
sample of workers and in the Glassdoor data. Details about how we produce these workplace dimensions from the online
review text are provided in Appendix A, Part II. The strongest correlations in the sample are between LEARNING and
TECHNOLOGY, between LEARNING and CAREER, and between TECHNOLOGY and CAREER, which supports
the argument that IT access is highly valued by workers for new skills and future opportunities. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.
(1) LEARNING
(2) TECHNOLOGY
(3) COWORKERS
(4) FLEXIBILITY
(5) COMPENSATION
(6) CAREER
(7) INDUSTRY
(8) LOCATION

(1)
1
.139***
-.025
.085*
.037
.153***
.080*
.086*

(2)
1
.025
.037
-.052
.234***
.122***
.117**

44

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

1
.084*
-.047
.064
.051
.081*

1
.100**
-.013
.048
.076*

1
.032
.018
-.079*

1
.103**
.003

1
.094**

TABLE C.3: WORKPLACE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT, EMERGING IT USE, AND JOB SEARCH
Table notes. This table tests interactions between IT systems and whether the employer is known as a good place to learn
new skills, as indicated by the Glassdoor reviews. To develop a measure of whether an employer is known to be a good
place to learn skills (SKILL), we manually selected phrases that indicate skill development at work. 21 Details of this process
are available in Appendix A, Part II. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is a binary variable indicating whether
they used emerging IT systems or older IT systems, respectively. The dependent variable in columns (3) through (5) is the
logged target wage and the regression is specified similarly to what was used in earlier tables. In addition to the variables
shown in the regressions, all regressions control for wages, job tenure, experience, race, gender, and education. Standard
errors are shown in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Columns (1) and (2) indicate correlations between emerging IT use and the workplace SKILL measure. The estimates
suggest that the employer measure of SKILL is positively correlated with the use of emerging IT (t=1.97), but negatively
correlated with the use of mature IT systems (t=-2.57). Columns (3) through (5) test our target wage specification with the
SKILL measures. T he estimates in column (3) indicate that more is required to induce IT workers to leave firms that are
higher on the SKILL measure, which is consistent with the view that opportunities for skill development are valuable to
IT workers (t=2.00). The estimates in (4) indicate that this relationship holds only when the use of emerging IT and an
emphasis on skill development are present together, although the estimate on the interaction term is significant only at the
10% level. The relationship does not hold when either of these two factors is present in isolation. In fact, the estimated
coefficient on emerging IT when present alone is negative, which is consistent with firms paying a premium for workers
who are already skilled in that technology. The overall pattern of estimates is similar in column (5) after adding a measure
controlling for the extent to which workers note longer hours (HOURS) in their reviews. 22 We include this measure
because some employers that are known as being good places to learn also require long hours from their workers. The
estimate on HOURS is negative and significant (t=-2.13). The coefficient estimates on Emerging IT, SKILLS, and the
interaction terms in columns (4) and (5) suggest that workers who use emerging IT and are employed at firms that are
known as good places to acquire skills set their target wages about 5% higher.
(1)

DV

Emerging

Model
Emerging
SKILLS
HOURS

Logit, FE
0.371***
(0.119)

(2)
Old
High-growth
Logit, FE

(3)

(4)

(5)

Log (Target)

Log (Target)

Log (Target)

FE

-0.388**
(0.151)

0.016**
(0.008)

FE
-0.059**
(0.028)
0.011
(0.008)

FE
-0.066**
(0.032)
0.017**
(0.008)
-0.003
(0.008)

0.095*
(0.053)
0.806***
(0.010)

0.096*
(0.050)
0.831***
(0.011)

Emerging x
SKILLS
Log (Wage)
Location FE
Demographic controls
R-squared
Observations

21
22

0.183
(0.169)

-0.440**
(0.188)

0.807***
(0.010)







2,414

2,414



0.761
2,414



0.761
2,414

We also tested variations that account for phrase negation in the review text with minimal change in coefficients.
We thank an anonymous reviewer for recommending this test.

45



0.777
2,414

TABLE C.4: EMPLOYER CHARACTERISTICS OF WORKERS’ SOURCE AND DESTINATION FIRMS
Table notes. One potential source of bias is related to the unobserved non-wage characteristics of the job for which the
worker is searching. If workers who use emerging IT systems tend to target employers who offer jobs with undesirable
characteristics, such as restrictive work practices or the use of old technologies, it can bias our estimates upwards.
Alternatively, if they target jobs offering more desirable characteristics, it will exert a downward bias on our estimates. The
fact that the job board does not permit workers to set targets for non-wage characteristics should discourage job switchers
who are looking for a significant change in work context, but some workers may be looking for such changes. We cannot
directly control for the non-wage component of the worker’s target job, but we can probe the importance of this source
of bias using the resume data to assess patterns of employment transitions between firms for which we have Glassdoor
data, which we show in this table.
We use IT workers’ career histories through 2011 to identify, for job transitions, characteristics of source and destination
firms. For each employer in our Glassdoor sample, we compute the share of workers using emerging IT (Emerging%) and
the value for each employer work attribute, and we label these as being High if they are greater than or equal to the median
value for that feature for all firms. Then, we report the fraction of worker transitions that fall into each of the following
four categories: moving from an employer with a high value of a given feature to another employer with a high value for
that feature (high to high), and using similar notation, high to low, low to high, and low to low.
Panel A reports these fractions based on workers in the sample who left a high-emerging IT employer; Panel B is based on
workers who left a low-emerging IT employer. For instance, the value in the first row and first column indicates that of works
leaving high emerging-IT employers, 71.3% went from an employer where the value of LEARNING was high to another
firm where this value was also high. 7.1% of these workers went from an employer where the value of LEARNING was
high to a firm where this value was low.
The results suggest that i) workers tend to move between firms that are similar in terms of the non-wage compensation
they offer and ii) the patterns are similar for workers whether or not they are using emerging IT systems. The transition
patterns in the table are inconsistent with the argument there is a large pool of workers who use emerging IT systems and
are seeking to move to jobs with undesirable non-wage characteristics.

LEARNING
TECHNOLOGY
COWORKERS
FLEXIBILITY
COMPENSATION
CAREER
INDUSTRY
LOCATION
LEARNING
TECHNOLOGY
COWORKERS
FLEXIBILITY
COMPENSATION
CAREER
INDUSTRY
LOCATION

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
High to High
High to Low
Low to High
Low to Low
A. Percentage of workers leaving High-Emerging IT Employers, N=86,219
71.3
7.1
2.5
19.2
61.9
6.2
4.0
27.9
52.4
5.6
4.2
37.8
38.3
4.5
5.5
51.8
36.9
4.9
5.1
53.1
61.0
6.7
3.4
28.9
61.8
13.4
3.7
21.2
45.0
4.9
5.1
45.0
B. Percentage of workers leaving Low-Emerging IT Employers, N=80,942
26.6
5.8
9.9
57.7
35.2
6.4
8.1
50.3
43.1
5.6
8.3
43.0
57.4
8.2
7.3
27.2
52.6
6.9
7.6
33.0
30.2
5.1
8.1
56.6
25.8
5.4
9.4
59.5
48.3
7.7
8.0
35.9

46

