NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ENDOWMENT MODEL AND MODERN PORTFOLIO THEORY
Stephen G. Dimmock
Neng Wang
Jinqiang Yang
Working Paper 25559
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25559

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

For helpful comments, we thank Andrew Ang, Winston Dou, Thomas Gilbert, Steve Grenadier,
Lars Peter Hansen, Bob Hodrick, Steve Kaplan, Monika Piazzesi, Jim Poterba, Mark Schroder,
Tom Sargent, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Luis Viceira, and Steve Zeldes; seminar participants at
Columbia University; and participants at the European Finance Association and NBER New
Developments in Long-Term Asset Management conferences. We thank Matt Hamill and Ken
Redd of NACUBO and John Griswold and Bill Jarvis of Commonfund for assistance with data.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Stephen G. Dimmock, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Endowment Model and Modern Portfolio Theory
Stephen G. Dimmock, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 25559
February 2019
JEL No. G11,G23
ABSTRACT
We develop a dynamic portfolio-choice model with illiquid alternative assets to analyze
conditions under which the “Endowment Model,” used by some large institutional investors such
as university endowments, does or does not work. The alternative asset has a lock-up, but can be
voluntarily liquidated at any time at a cost. Quantitatively, our model's results match the average
level and cross-sectional variation of university endowment funds' spending and asset allocation
decisions. We show that asset allocations and spending crucially depend on the alternative asset's
expected excess return, risk unspanned by public equity, and investors' preferences for intertemporal spending smoothing.
Stephen G. Dimmock
Division of Finance and Banking
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
dimmock@ntu.edu.sg
Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu

Jinqiang Yang
Shanghai University of Finance
and Economics
Guoding Rd. 777
Shanghai, 200433
China
yang.jinqiang@mail.sufe.edu.cn

1.

Introduction

University endowment funds allocate large fractions of their portfolios to illiquid alternative assets. Indeed, more than half of aggregate university endowment fund assets are
currently allocated to illiquid assets such as such as hedge funds, private equity, venture
capital, and natural resources. An investment strategy of high allocations to illiquid
assets is often referred to as the Endowment Model, as it was popularized by the success
of David Swensen of the Yale University endowment fund and other universities (Lerner,
Schoar, and Wang (2008)).1 The Endowment Model (e.g., Swensen, 2000) argues that
long-term investors with access to valuable illiquid investment opportunities should have
relatively high allocations to alternative assets, so as to earn illiquidity premiums and
exploit the inefficiencies found in illiquid markets.
The Endowment Model, however, has its limitations. As Swensen (2005) himself
notes, only sophisticated investors who have access and can identify superior active managers should invest in alternative assets. Further, illiquidity can be costly. For example,
during the financial crisis the endowments of Harvard and Stanford Universities incurred
significant losses due to their large allocations to illiquid assets.2 That is, illiquidity can
be particularly costly in bad times when financial reserves are most needed. Therefore,
investors need to properly balance the costs and benefits of investing in illiquid assets. Although the Endowment Model provides general guidelines for investing in illiquid assets,
these guidelines are based on static mean-variance modeling (Takahashi and Alexander
(2002)) and rules of thumb. This is not surprising, as the Endowment Model is developed
from practitioners’ lore and not explicitly derived from a dynamic optimizing framework.
In this paper, we bridge the gap between the practitioners’ Endowment Model and
academic portfolio theory by developing a parsimonious yet sufficiently rich model to
analyze a long-term investor’s dynamic consumption and asset allocation decisions. The
1

See Swensen (2000), Takahashi and Alexander (2002), and Leibowitz, Bova, and Hammond (2010).
Lerner, Schoar, and Wang (2008, figure 3) show that allocations to alternative assets increased sharply
for selective institutions.
2
For further discussion of the effects of endowment illiquidity on Harvard University see Ang (2012)
and for Stanford see http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/06/business/06sorkin.html.

1

key is to incorporate illiquid (alternative) investment opportunities into an otherwise
standard Modern portfolio theory (MPT) framework developed by Markowitz (1952)
and Merton (1969, 1971) where all assets are liquid.3 We use this dynamic portfolio
choice model to illustrate the heterogeneity of investment strategies followed by investors
with different preferences, investment horizons, and investment opportunities. We show
the conditions under which portfolio allocations similar to those recommended by the
Endowment Model can be optimal for investors, as well as the conditions under which
the Endowment Model does not serve investors well.
Our model incorporates a key feature of alternative assets, illiquidity, in a manner
that is sufficiently realistic and also analytically tractable. First, the alternative asset has
automatic liquidity events on dates when the alternative asset (or a fraction of it) becomes
fully liquid. For example, when a hedge fund lock-up expires or a private equity fund
liquidates. This is an important feature of our model, as advocates of the Endowment
Model argue that natural liquidity, such as private equity cash distributions, offsets much
of the apparent illiquidity of alternative assets (see Swensen (2000) and Takahashi and
Alexander (2002)). Our model show how an investor can engage in liquidity diversification
by investing in multiple alternative asset funds with automatic liquidity events staggered
over time.4 Second, the investor can voluntarily transact in the illiquid alternative asset at
any time by paying a proportional transaction cost. For example, this cost would include
the empirically observed discounts for alternative assets sold in secondary markets due to
search and adverse selection costs. Third, the alternative asset’s risk is not fully spanned
by public equity, and this unspanned risk together with the illiquidity has a first-order
effect on asset allocation.
Our qualitative and quantitative results significantly differ from the standard predictions implied by MPT. We show that wt = Wt /Kt , the ratio between the value of liquid
wealth Wt (e.g., stocks and bonds) and the value of the illiquid alternative asset holding
3

Many research papers in the portfolio-choice literature analyze the impact of illiquidity on asset
allocation, which we fully acknowledge. The key contribution of our model is to link to the widelyused Endowment Model and take a balanced perspective on when it is sensible to follow the model’s
recommendation, and to examine how to improve upon the Endowment Model.
4
For an empirical examination of liquidity diversification, see Robinson and Sensoy (2016).

2

Kt , follows a double-barrier policy: the investor rebalances only when the value of the
alternative asset rises or falls to the endogenous rebalancing boundaries.5 This result is
in sharp contrast to the classic MPT prediction that the allocation ratio between any
two assets is constant over time.
We provide an analytical characterization for the investor’s certainty equivalent wealth
under optimality, P (Wt , Kt , t), which is the time-t total wealth that makes the investor
indifferent between: permanently forgoing the opportunity to invest in the illiquid asset
and keeping the status quo with liquid wealth Wt and illiquid wealth Kt with the opportunity to invest in the illiquid asset. We exploit the model’s tractability to provide
a quantitative yet intuitive analysis of a long-term investor’s optimal portfolio choice,
spending rule, and welfare measured by P (Wt , Kt , t).
We show that the two types of illiquidity – arising from lock-ups and from transaction
costs – interact over time. As an automatic liquidity event approaches, the investor
becomes less willing to liquidate alternative assets. The rebalancing policies are also
strongly affected by liquidity diversification; investors who invest in more alternative
asset funds and stagger the maturities of their investments can maintain much more
stable portfolio allocations.
We calibrate our model using parameters drawn from the literature and compare the
results with the portfolio allocations of actual university endowment funds. We find three
main results.
First, our model matches the empirically observed variation in endowment funds’ allocations to alternative assets given reasonable variation in beliefs about its alpha. The
model defines alpha relative to the benchmark of public equity, and thus “alpha” may
include compensation for illiquidity, managerial skill, and the value created through improved corporate governance and incentive structures.6 With an alpha of 3% per year and
5

The double-barrier policy is a standard feature in models with transaction costs. See Davis and
Norman (1990) as an early example in the portfolio-choice literature.
6
Franzoni, Nowak, and Phalippou (2012) show that private equity funds earn liquidity premia; Aragon
(2007) and Sadka (2010) show similar findings for hedge funds. Cornelli and Karakas (2008) argue that
private equity funds create value-add (i.e., alpha) by improving corporate governance and operating
efficiency. See Kaplan and Strömberg (2009), Metrick and Yasuda (2011) and Agarwal, Mullally, and
Naik (2015) for review studies of alternative asset performance.

3

unspanned volatility of 15% our model implies an alternative asset allocation of 60.2%,
which is consistent with the actual allocations of the largest decile of endowment funds.
With expected alphas of 1% and 2%, our model implies alternative asset allocations of
12.7% and 34.5%, respectively, which approximately match the interquartile range of
endowment fund allocations.
Second, our calibration shows that asset allocations are very sensitive to the unspanned volatility of the alternative asset. For example, as the unspanned volatility
changes from 10% to 15%, the implied allocation to alternative assets falls by more than
half from 76.3% to 34.5%. We further show that, controlling for the level of the alternative asset’s total risk, the spanned and unspanned risks have quantitatively very different
effects on asset allocation. While the investor can offset the alternative asset’s spanned
risk of the by adjusting allocations to public equity, the alternative asset’s unspanned
volatility is by definition specific to the alternatives and cannot be hedged. Alternative
asset performance metrics such as internal rates of returns (IRRs) and public market
equivalent (PMEs), while useful, do not directly guide investors’ asset allocation as these
metrics ignore the distinction between spanned and unspanned volatilities.
Third, investors’ preferences for inter-temporal spending smoothing have a first-order
effect on their investment strategies due to the presence of illiquid alternative assets.
We use non-expected utility preferences developed by Epstein and Zin (1989), which
separates risk aversion from the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS). This separation is economically and quantitatively important for our analysis as by varying the
EIS we conveniently capture the heterogeneity in spending flexibility across institutional
investors.7 For example, defined benefit pension plans have little spending flexibility and
so have a low EIS. In contrast, family offices have high spending flexibility and university
endowments have intermediate flexibility.
The EIS has large effects on the spending rate: changing the EIS from 0.5 to 1
decreases the spending rate from 5.3% to 4.0%. This closely matches the actual variation
in university endowment fund spending rates (e.g., Sedlacek and Jarvis (2010) report that
7

See Hayes, Primbs, and Chiquoine (2015) for a discussion of spending flexibility across investors.

4

policy payout rates typically range from 4.0% to 5.5%). The EIS also affects portfolio
allocations when the alternative asset is illiquid. An investor with a high EIS is more
willing to substitute consumption across periods, and so is more willing to accept portfolio
illiquidity. For example, changing the EIS from 0.5 to 1 implies an increase in alternative
asset holdings of 5.7 percentage points. This contrasts with the case of full spanning,
in which the EIS does not affect asset allocation. Thus, a higher EIS results in lower
spending and higher portfolio risk. Over time, this combination results in substantially
greater wealth accumulation for high EIS investors.
We focus on the dynamic asset allocation problem faced by an institutional investor’s
Chief Investment Officer (CIO) who is assumed to behave in the interest of the investor,
and leave the delegated management problem (between the CIO and asset managers who
implement security selection) outside of our model for simplicity. However, Sharpe (1981),
Elton and Gruber (2004), and Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2008) emphasize that this
two-step delegated investment process can result in misaligned incentives. Binsbergen,
Brandt, and Koijen (2008) show that these incentive issues between the CIO and external
asset managers can result in large utility costs for institutional investors due to loss of
incongruence differences in the preferences of the institution and the asset manager.
Related Literature. Ang, Papanikolaou, and Westerfield (2016) develop a parsimonious and tractable quantitative model of portfolio choice with an illiquid asset. They
assume that the alternative asset cannot be traded for intervals of uncertain duration
(modeled via a stochastic Poisson arrival process). In their model the asset can be fully
illiquid for extended periods of time due to the long tails associated with exponential
distributions. In contrast, our model has a secondary market that allows liquidation at
all times by paying a proportional transaction cost.
Sorensen, Wang, and Yang (2014) use a dynamic portfolio choice model to value
the cost of illiquidity and management compensation in private equity. For technical
tractability they use constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) utility and hence their
model generates a wealth-independent dollar allocation to private equity and hence is
5

not suited for analyzing asset allocation (which in practice is almost always framed in
terms of percentage allocations). Also, the two papers model illiquidity differently. They
assume that the investor must hold the alternative asset for a fixed T years without any
option to exit and does not include a secondary market for the alternative asset.
Bollen and Sensoy (2016) develop a model for valuing illiquid private equity when secondary markets exist. They assume that investors must place their entire private equity
allocation in a single fund, and they exogenously fix the spending rate and the allocation
to the risk-free asset rather than allowing investors to make optimal portfolio rebalancing decisions. In contrast, our model allows for liquidity diversification as investors can
stagger illiquid investments over time, and solves for optimal allocations to the risk free
asset, the spending rate, and rebalancing decisions at all times.
In the portfolio-choice literature, illiquidity is often modeled via transaction costs8 or
via trading restrictions in which the asset is freely tradable at certain points in time but
cannot be traded at other times.9 Motivated by the structures of private equity and hedge
funds, as well as the secondary markets for these illiquid alternatives, we combine the
features of both types of models; the alternative asset becomes fully liquid at maturity
(e.g., when a private equity fund is dissolved) but can be liquidated prior to maturity
by paying a proportional cost (e.g., selling a private equity fund at a discount on the
secondary market).
Merton (1992), Gilbert and Hrdlicka (2015), and Cejnek, Franz, and Stoughton (2017)
model the spending and asset allocation decisions of university endowment funds. In these
papers, endowments invest only in fully liquid assets.

2.

Model

We analyze a long-term investor’s dynamic spending (or equivalently consumption) and
asset allocation decisions by incorporating an illiquid investment opportunity into the
8
For example, see Constantinides (1986), Davis and Norman (1990), Grossman and Laroque (1990),
Vayanos (1998), and Lo, Mamaysky, and Wang (2004).
9
For example, see Kahl, Liu, and Longstaff (2003), Longstaff (2009), and Ang, Papanikoaou, and
Westerfield (2016).

6

classic modern portfolio theory developed by Merton (1969, 1971) and Samuelson (1969).
We interpret the illiquid investment opportunity in our model as the representative portfolio of alternative assets including private equity, hedge funds, private real estate, etc.
For technical convenience, we develop our model in continuous time. Next, we summarize
the standard liquid investment opportunities and then introduce the alternative asset.
Liquid Investment Opportunities: Bonds and Public Equity. The risk-free bond
pays interest at a constant (annualized) risk-free rate r. Public equity can be interpreted
as the market portfolio of publicly traded securities, and its cum-dividend market value,
St , follows a geometric Brownian motion (GBM):
dSt
= µS dt + σS dBSt ,
St

(1)

where BSt is a standard Brownian motion, and µS and σS are the constant drift and
volatility parameters. The liquid investment opportunity in our model is the same as in
Merton (1971). Next, we introduce the alternative asset, which is the investor’s third
investment opportunity and the key building block in our model.

2.1.

The Alternative Asset

Adding the alternative asset expands the investment opportunity set and thus makes the
investor better off. Additionally, provided the alternative asset is not perfectly correlated
with public equity, it provides diversification benefits. Unlike public equity, however,
alternative assets are generally illiquid and involve some form of lock-up. For example,
investments in private equity typically have a life span of 10 years with extension options
and hedge funds often have lock-up periods and gate provisions.
A key feature of alternative assets is that their illiquidity is not constant over time.
For example, private equity funds are highly illiquid for much of their lives but eventually
mature and return liquid capital to their investors. We model these liquidity events as
follows. Let {At ; t ≥ 0} denote the alternative asset’s fundamental value process with a
given initial stock A0 . The fundamental value refers to the fully realizable value of the

7

asset if it is held to maturity. However, with illiquidity, at any time t prior to maturity
the asset’s fundamental value differs from its market value. Let {Kt ; t ≥ 0} denote the
accounting value of the alternative asset holding process with a given initial stock K0 . To
capture the target finite duration of the lock-up and holding period, we assume every mT
years, where m is a positive integer, a δT fraction of the stock of illiquid alternative asset
KmT automatically becomes liquid at no cost. Naturally, the investor’s liquid asset value
at time mT increases by δT KmT − . Therefore, in the absence of any active acquisition or
divestment of the illiquid asset at mT , we have KmT = (1 − δT )KmT − .
The Fundamental Value Process A for the Alternative Asset. We assume that
the fundamental value A, in the absence of a scheduled automatic liquidity event (at
time mT ) or any interim acquisition or divestment, evolves via the following GBM:
dAt
= µA dt + σA dBA
t − δA dt ,
At−

(2)

where BA
t is a standard Brownian motion, µA is the cum-payout expected return (net
of fees), σA is the constant volatility of returns, and δA is the alternative asset’s payout
rate. That is, the alternative asset pays dividends at the rate of δA At with an implied
payout yield of δA . Intuitively, δA is one way for illiquid alternative assets to provide
liquidity to investors. We use ρ to denote the correlation coefficient between the shocks
S
to alternative assets, BA
t , and the shocks to public equity, Bt .

Note that in complete markets, the investor can frictionlessly and dynamically trade
the alternative asset without restrictions or costs. Therefore, the alternative asset’s market value equals its fundamental value and the Modigliani-Miller theorem holds, meaning
that whether we explicitly model the alternative asset’s payout yield δA is irrelevant. In
this ideal case, the alternative asset is conceptually no different than liquid public equity.
In contrast, when the alternative asset is illiquid and not fully spanned by public equity,
we must separately keep track of the payout yield δA and expected capital gains µA − δA .
That is, the cum-dividend payout rate µA is no longer a sufficient measure of the total expected returns for the alternative asset as its (current) payout yield and expected
8

capital gains influence the investor’s portfolio optimization problem differently.
Interim Acquisition and Liquidation of the Alternative Asset Holding. At any
time, the investor can choose to change her alternative asset holdings through acquisitions
or liquidations. Let dLt denote the amount of the alternative asset that the investor
liquidates at any time t > 0, and let dXt denote the amount of the alternative asset that
the investor purchases at time t. Then, we can incorporate the investor’s acquisition and
liquidation options into the alternative asset’s fundamental value process as follows:
dKt = (µA − δA )Kt− dt + σA Kt− dBA
t − dLt + dXt − δT Kt− I{t=mT } .

(3)

Here, I{t=mT } is the indicator function, which is equal to one if and only if t is an integer
multiple, m, of T . The first two terms correspond to the standard drift and volatility
terms, the third and fourth terms give the liquidation and acquisition amounts, and the
last term captures the lumpy payout to the investor at the scheduled liquidity event dates
t = mT where m = 0, 1, . . .
Although the acquisition and liquidation costs for the alternative asset do not appear
in (3), they will appear in the liquid wealth accumulation process. We assume that the
cost of voluntary liquidation is proportional. That is, by liquidating an amount dLt > 0,
the investor realizes only (1 − θL )dLt in net, where the remaining amount θL dLt is the
liquidation cost. Similarly, if the investor acquires an amount dXt > 0, the transaction
cost θX dXt is paid out of the liquid asset holding to the third party. Naturally, 0 ≤ θL ≤ 1
and θX ≥ 0. Higher values of θL or θX indicate that the alternative asset is less liquid.
Intuitively, θL can be interpreted as the illiquidity discount on secondary market sales
of alternative assets (e.g., see Kleymenova, Tamor, and Vasvari (2012), Bollen and Sensoy
(2016), and Nadauld, Sensoy, Vorkink, and Weisbach (2019)). Such discounts can arise
to compensate buyers for search costs, asymmetric information risks, or due to market
power when there are few buyers. The parameter θX can be interpreted as the transaction
costs of purchasing alternative assets, such as search costs, legal fees, placement agent
fees, consultant fees, and etc. The costs of interim liquidation (θL ) and of purchases (θX )
9

can be asymmetric as voluntary liquidation is generally more costly, particularly when
there are few buyers and many sellers such as during the recent financial crisis.
Alpha, Beta, and Epsilon (Unspanned Volatility). Suppose that the instantaneous return for the alternative asset, dAt /At− , is perfectly measurable. We can then
regress dAt /At− on dSt /St , and obtain the alternative asset’s beta with respect to public
equity, following the standard capital asset pricing model (CAPM) formula:
βA =

ρσA
.
σS

(4)

However, in reality, because investors cannot dynamically rebalance their holdings in the
illiquid asset without incurring transaction costs, investors will demand compensation in
addition to the standard risk premium implied by the CAPM.
We decompose the total volatility of the alternative asset, σA , into two orthogonal
components: the part spanned by the public equity, ρσA , and the remaining unspanned
volatility, ǫ, given by:
ǫ=

q
q
σA2 − ρ2 σA2 = σA2 − βA2 σS2 .

(5)

This volatility, ǫ, introduces an additional risk into the portfolio, as markets are
incomplete and adjusting the alternative asset holding is costly. We will show that the
spanned and unspanned volatilities play distinct roles in the dynamic asset allocation.10
Anticipating our subsequent risk-return tradeoff analysis in the context of dynamic
portfolio construction, we next introduce α implied by the CAPM, where public equity
is used as the aggregate market portfolio. That is, we define α as follows:
α = µA − (r + βA (µS − r)) ,

(6)

where βA is the alternative asset’s beta given by (4).
In frictionless capital markets where investors can continuously rebalance their portfolio without incurring any transaction costs, α measures the risk-adjusted excess return
10

Although ǫ is unspanned by public equity, this does not necessarily imply it is purely idiosyncratic
risk. We take no stand on whether public equity is the market portfolio in the sense of Roll (1977).
Thus, ǫ may include systematic risks that are potentially compensated, but which are not correlated
with the market portfolio (e.g., liquidity risk).

10

after benchmarking against the other risky assets, which in our model corresponds to
public equity. However, in our framework with illiquid assets, α also includes the part of
the excess return that compensates investors for bearing an illiquidity premium (or for
bearing any other systematic risk that is unspanned by public equity).

2.2.

The Optimization Problem

Liquid Wealth and Net Worth. We use W to denote the investor’s liquid wealth
and Π to denote the amount allocated to public equity. The remaining liquid wealth,
W − Π, is allocated to the risk-free bond. Thus, liquid wealth evolves according to:
dWt =

(rWt− + δA Kt− − Ct− ) dt + Πt− (µS − r)dt + σS dBSt
+(1 − θL )dLt − (1 + θX )dXt + δT Kt− I{t=mT } ,



(7)

where the first two terms in (7) are the standard ones in Merton’s consumption/portfoliochoice problem. The third and fourth terms describe the effect on liquid wealth W due
to the investor’s interim liquidation and purchase of the alternative asset. Recall that
θL and θX capture the proportional cost of interim liquidations and purchases of the
alternative asset, respectively. Finally, the last term captures the lumpy payout to the
investor at the automatic liquidity event dates t = mT .
Recursive Preferences and Value Functions. The investor’s preferences allow for
separation of risk aversion and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS). Epstein
and Zin( 1989) and Weil (1990) develop this utility in discrete time by building on early
important work by Kreps and Porteus (1978). We use the continuous-time formulation of
this non-expected utility, introduced by Duffie and Epstein (1992). That is, the investor
has a recursive preference defined as follows:
Vt = Et

Z

∞



f (Cs , Vs )ds ,
t

(8)

where f (C, V ) is known as the normalized aggregator for consumption C and the investor’s utility V . Duffie and Epstein (1992) show that f (C, V ) for Epstein-Zin non11

expected homothetic recursive utility is given by:
C 1−ψ − ((1 − γ)V )χ
ζ
,
f (C, V ) =
1 − ψ −1
((1 − γ)V )χ−1

(9)

1 − ψ −1
.
1−γ

(10)

−1

where
χ=

The parameter ψ > 0 measures the EIS, and the parameter γ > 0 is the coefficient of
relative risk aversion. The parameter ζ > 0 is the investor’s subjective discount rate.
This recursive, non-expected utility formulation allows us to separate the coefficient
of relative risk aversion (γ) from the EIS (ψ), which is important for our quantitative
analysis. For example, a key source of preferences heterogeneity among investors is the
elasticity and flexibility of their spending. The expected CRRA utility is a special case
of recursive utility where the coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ, equals the inverse of
the EIS, γ = ψ −1 , implying χ = 1.11
There are three state variables for the optimization problem: liquid wealth Wt , the
alternative asset’s value Kt , and calendar time t. Let V (Wt , Kt , t) denote the corresponding value function. The investor chooses consumption C, public equity investment
Π, and the alternative asset’s cumulative (undiscounted) liquidation L and cumulative
(undiscounted) acquisition X to maximize (8).
Naturally, at each automatic liquidity event date iT , if WiT = W(i−1)T = W , and
KmT = K(m−1)T = K, we must have:
V (W, K, mT ) = V (W, K, (m − 1)T ) .

(11)

Hence, it is sufficient for us to characterize our model over (0, T ], as the solution is
stationary every T years.

3.

Model Solution

We solve the model as follows. First, we analyze the investor’s problem in the region
where there is no voluntary adjustment of the alternative asset in the absence of automatic
11

1−γ
For the special case of CRRA,
f (C, V ) = U (C)
/(1 − γ). By integrating
R ∞ −ζ(s−t)
 − ζV , where U (C) = ζC
U (Cs )ds .
Eq. (8), we obtain Vt = Et t e

12

liquidity event (i.e., when t 6= mT .) Second, we characterize the investor’s voluntary
liquidation and acquisition decisions for the alternative asset when t 6= mT . Finally, we
integrate the periodic liquidity event that occurs at t = mT to complete our analysis.
Dynamic Programming and First-Order Conditions (FOCs). Fix time t within
the time interval ((m − 1)T, mT ), where m is a positive integer. Using the standard dynamic programming approach, we have the following standard Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
(HJB) equation for the investor’s value function V (Wt , Kt , t) in the interior region:
0 = max f (C, V ) + (rW + δA K + (µS − r)Π − C)VW +
C, Π

+Vt + (µA − δA )KVK +

(ΠσS )2
VW W
2

σA2 K 2
VKK + ρΠKσS σA VW K .
2

(12)

The first three terms on the right side of (12) capture the standard effects of consumption
and asset allocation (both drift and volatility effects) on the investor’s value function,
V (Wt , Kt , t) as in Merton (1971). The investor’s opportunity to invest in the illiquid
alternative asset generates three additional effects on asset allocation: 1) the effect of
target holding horizon T captured by Vt ; 2) the risk-return and volatility effects of changes
in the value of the alternative asset K; and 3) the additional diversification/hedging
benefits due to the correlation between public equity and the alternative asset. By
optimally choosing C and Π, the investor equates the right side of (12) to zero in the
interior region where there is no interim liquidation nor acquisition.
The optimal consumption C is characterized by the following standard FOC:
fC (C, V ) = VW (W, K, t),

(13)

which equates the marginal benefit of consumption with the marginal value of savings
VW . The optimal investment in public equity is given by:
Π=−

µ S − r VW
ρσA KVW K
−
.
2
σS VW W
σS VW W

(14)

The first term gives the classical Merton’s mean-variance demand and the second term
captures the investor’s hedging demand with respect to the illiquid alternative asset.
13

Note that the hedging demand depends on the cross partial VW K , and is proportional
to ρσA /σS (which is equal to βA as shown in (4)). Both results are intuitive and follow
from the standard hedging arguments in Merton (1971); the investor chooses her public
equity allocation to fulfill two objectives: to obtain the desired mean-variance exposure
and to hedge the fraction of the alternative asset’s risk spanned by public equity.
Certainty Equivalent Wealth P (W, K, t). We express the investor’s value function
V (W, K, t) during the time period t ∈ ((m − 1)T, mT ) as:
V (W, K, t) =

(b1 P (W, K, t))1−γ
,
1−γ

(15)

where b1 is a constant given by:
ψ

1

b1 = ζ ψ−1 φ11−ψ ,

(16)

and φ1 is the constant given by:


(µS − r)2
φ1 = ζ + (1 − ψ) r − ζ +
.
2γσS2

(17)

Guided by MPT, we can interpret P (W, K, t) as the investor’s certainty equivalent
wealth, which is the minimal amount of total wealth required for the investor to permanently give up the opportunity to invest in the alternative asset. That is, in the interim
period where (m − 1)T < t < mT ,
V (W, K, t) = J(P (W, K, t)) .

(18)

Here, J( · ) is the value function for an investor who can invest only in liquid public equity
and risk-free bonds. We show that J( · ) is given by
J(W ) =

(b1 W )1−γ
,
1−γ

(19)

where b1 is given in (16).
Homogeneity Property. In our model, the certainty equivalent wealth P (W, K, t)
has the homogeneity property in W and K, and hence it is convenient to work with the
14

liquidity ratio wt = Wt /Kt and the scaled certainty equivalent wealth function p(wt , t)
defined as follows:
P (Wt , Kt , t) = p(wt , t) · Kt .

(20)

This homogeneity property is due to the Duffie-Epstein-Zin utility and the value processes
for public equity and the alternative asset. Importantly, this homogeneity property allows
us to conveniently interpret the optimal portfolio rule and target asset allocation.
Endogenous Effective Risk Aversion γi . To better interpret our solution it is helpful to introduce the following measure of endogenous relative risk aversion for the investor,
denoted by γi (w, t) and defined as follows:
γi (w, t) ≡ −

p(w, t)pww (w, t)
VW W
× P (W, K, t) = γpw (w, t) −
.
VW
pw (w, t)

(21)

In (21) the first identity sign gives the definition of γi and the second equality follows
from the homogeneity property.
What economic insights does γi (w, t) capture and what is the motivation for introducing it? First, recall the standard definition of the investor’s coefficient of absolute risk
aversion is −VW W /VW . To convert this to a measure of relative risk aversion, we need to
multiply absolute risk aversion −VW W /VW with an appropriate economic measure for the
investor’s total wealth. Under incomplete markets, although there is no market-based
measure of the investor’s economic well being, the investor’s certainty equivalent wealth
P (W, K, t) is a natural measure of the investor’s welfare. This motivates our definition
of γi in (21).12 We will show that the illiquidity of alternative assets causes the investor
to be effectively more risk averse, meaning pw (w, t) > 1 and pww (w, t) < 0, so that
γi (w, t) > γ. In contrast, if the alternative asset is publicly traded (and markets are
complete), γi (w, t) = γ as pw (w, t) = 1 and pww (w, t) = 0.
12

See Wang, Wang, and Yang (2012) and Bolton, Wang and Yang (2018) for similar definitions
involving endogenous risk aversion but for very different economic applications.

15

Optimal Policy Rules. Again, by using the homogeneity property, we may express
the scaled consumption rule c(wt , t) = C(Wt , Kt , t)/Kt as follows:
c(w, t) = φ1 p(w, t) pw (w, t)−ψ .

(22)

Because illiquidity makes markets incomplete, the investor’s optimal consumption policy
is no longer linear and depends on both the certainty equivalent wealth p(w, t) and also
the marginal certainty equivalent value of liquid wealth pw (w, t).
The allocation to public equity is Πt = π(wt , t)Kt where π(w, t) is given by:
µS − r p(w, t)
ρσA
π(w, t) =
−
2
σS γi (w, t)
σS



γp(w, t)
−w
γi (w, t)



,

(23)

where γi ( · ) is the investor’s effective risk aversion given by (21). Intuitively, the first term
in (23) reflects the mean-variance demand for the market portfolio, which differs from
the standard Merton model in two ways: 1) risk aversion γ is replaced by the effective
risk aversion γi (w, t) and 2) net worth is replaced by certainty equivalent wealth p(w, t).
The second term in (23) captures the dynamic hedging demand, which also depends on
γi (w, t) and p(w, t).
PDE for p(w, t). Substituting the value function (15) and the policy rules for c and π
into the HJB equation (12) and using the homogeneity property and the definition of the
investor’s effective risk aversion, γi , given by (21), we obtain the following PDE for p(w, t)
at time t, for the liquidity ratio wt in the interior region, and when (m − 1)T < t < mT :
!
ǫ2 w 2
γσA2
φ1 (pw (w, t))1−ψ − ψζ
p(w, t) + pt (w, t) +
+ µA − δA −
pww (w, t) (24)
0=
ψ−1
2
2
2

µS −r
− γρσA pw (w, t)p(w, t)

σS
γǫ2 w 2 (pw (w, t))2
+ δA − α + γǫ2 wpw (w, t) −
+
.
2
p(w, t)
2γi
Because of incomplete spanning (e.g., ǫ 6= 0), unlike Black-Scholes, (24) is a nonlinear
PDE, and moreover, pw (w, t) > 1, as we will show. The numerical solution for p(w, t)
involves the standard procedure.

16

Rebalancing the Illiquid Alternative Asset during the Interim Period. Although under normal circumstances the investor plans to hold the alternative asset until
an automatic liquidity event occurs at date mT , under certain circumstances the investor
may find it optimal to actively rebalance even at time t 6= mT .
As acquisition and voluntary liquidation are costly, we have an inaction region at all
time including t = mT . Let wt and wt denote the lower liquidation boundary and the
upper acquisition boundary for the liquidity ratio wt at time t, respectively. We show
that it is optimal for the investor to keep the liquidity ratio wt within the boundary
(wt , wt ) by voluntarily liquidating a portion of the illiquid alternative asset if wt is too
high and acquiring the illiquid alternative asset if wt is too low.
We show in Appendix B that the following conditions hold at wt and wt , respectively,
p(wt , t) =


1 − θL + wt pw (wt , t) ,

p(wt , t) = (1 + θX + wt ) pw (wt , t) .

(25)
(26)

These two equations at the boundaries are implied by the continuity of the value function,
the linear transaction acquisition and liquidation cost functions (i.e., constant θL and θX ),
and the homogeneity property of our model.13
Next, we provide the conditions that describe the investor’s optimal liquidation and
acquisition decisions. By differentiating (25) with respect to wt and (26) with respect to
wt , we obtain the following boundary conditions:

pww wt , t = 0 ,

pww (wt , t) = 0 ,

(27)
(28)

which are often referred to as the “super contact” conditions as in Dumas (1991).
Until now, we have characterized the investor’s optimal decision ignoring the potential
automatic liquidity event. Next, we analyze the investor’s decision at t = mT when the
13

As p ≥ 0 and pw ≥ 0, equation (25) implies wt ≥ −(1 − θL ), meaning that the investor can borrow
only a fraction of the alternative asset’s fundamental value. As a result, the investor can repay the
liability with probability one by liquidating the alternative asset. Thus, the investor’s debt capacity is
endogenously determined by the liquidation value of the alternative asset. Although the investor can
borrow, in our numerical exercise, as in reality, the investor rarely does borrow.

17

portfolio’s liquidity changes discretely due to the automatic liquidity event, i.e., when an
alternative investment in the investor’s portfolio pays a lumpy liquidating dividend.
Value and Decisions when there is an Automatic Liquidity Event at t = mT .
At time t = mT , a fraction δT of the alternative asset automatically becomes fully liquid
cmT and K
b mT to denote the corresponding
without any voluntary liquidation. We use W

levels of liquid wealth and the alternative asset at t = mT if the investor chooses not to
cmT = limt→mT (Wt + δT Kt ) and
do any voluntary rebalancing. It is immediate to see W

b mT = limt→mT (Kt − δT Kt ). Let w
K
bmT denote the corresponding liquidity ratio:
w
bmT ≡

cmT
W
wt + δT
.
= lim
b mT
t→mT 1 − δT
K

(29)

By now, we have outlined the procedures for calculating both wmT (ignoring the
automatic liquidity event) and w
bmT (focusing only the automatic liquidity event.) Of

course, the investor optimizes her decision by considering both the “marginal analysis”

for the liquidity ratio and the automatic liquidity event at t = mT . As a result, we
have two cases to consider at t = mT : Case (i) where w
bmT ≤ w mT and Case (ii) where

w
bmT > wmT . As the automatic liquidity event always increases liquid asset holdings,
w
bmT is always larger than wmT . Hence, we need only consider these two cases.

In Case (i) when w
bmT ≤ w mT , the optimal liquidity ratio at mT is w
bmT as it is optimal

for the investor not to voluntarily rebalance the illiquid alternative asset holding. The

intuition is that, even with the automatic increase in liquidity at mT , the liquidity ratio
will still lie within the inaction range limt→mT (wt , wt .) Therefore, the continuity of the
cmT , K
b mT ), which can be simplified as:
value function implies P (WmT , KmT ) = P (W
lim p(w, t) = p(w
bmT , t)(1 − δT ) ,

t→mT

where w
bmT is given in (29).

(30)

In Case (ii) when w
bmT > wmT , the optimal liquidity ratio at mT is wmT as it is

optimal for the investor to voluntarily acquire the illiquid alternative asset. In this
case, the automatic liquidity events results in wmT = w
bmT > w mT , which means the
18

investor holds too much of the liquid asset. To bring the portfolio liquidity ratio back
into the inaction region, the investor must acquire more of the alternative asset, so that
wmT = w mT . In Appendix B, we show
lim p(w, t) = p (w mT , mT ) (1 − δT + λ) ,

t→mT

(31)

where λ reflects the effect of rebalancing and is given by
λ = lim

t→mT

wt + δT − wmT (1 − δT )
.
1 + θX + w mT

(32)

Finally, the homogeneity property allows us to express the value-matching condition
(11) in terms of p(w, t) at t = mT :
p(w, mT ) = p(w, (m − 1)T ) .

(33)

Next, we summarize the main results of our model.
Proposition 1 The scaled certainty equivalent wealth p(w, t) in the interim period when
(m − 1)T < t ≤ mT solves the PDE (24) subject to the boundary conditions (25), (26),
(27), (28), and (33). Additionally, p(wmT − , mT −) satisfies (30), if w
bmT ≤ wmT where
w
bmT is given by (29), and satisfies (31) if w
bmT > wmT .

4.

Data and Calibration

4.1.

Data and Summary Statistics

The university endowment fund data come from the annual NACUBO-Commonfund
Endowment Survey (NCES) conducted by the National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO) and Commonfund. See Brown, Garlappi, and
Tiu (2010), Dimmock (2012), and Brown, Dimmock, Kang, and Weisbenner (2014) for
detailed discussions of these data. We focus on the cross-section of 774 university endowment funds14 as of the end of the 2014-2015 academic year.
14

If a university reports multiple endowment funds we aggregate to form a single observation.

19

Asset Allocation. The NCES provides annual snapshots of endowment funds’ portfolio allocations. To link the NCES data to the model, we aggregate endowment allocations
into the three asset classes featured in our model: (1) the risk-free asset, which aggregates
cash and fixed income, (2) public equity, which aggregates public equity and REITs, and
(3) the alternative asset, which aggregates hedge funds, private equity, venture capital,
private real estate, and illiquid natural resources. In the summary statistics, and for generating some of the calibration parameters, we use the disaggregated sub-asset classes
(e.g., hedge funds, etc.).
Table 1 shows the summary statistics as of the end of the 2014-2015 academic year.
The first and second columns show the equal and value weighted averages, respectively.
The remaining columns show averages within various size categories of endowment funds
(e.g., “0-10%” summarizes the variables for the smallest decile of funds). Panel A shows
that the average Endowment Size is $677 million, but the distribution is highly positively
skewed and the average size for the median decile is $116 million. On an equal weighted
basis, Public Equity has the largest average allocation at 50.7%. On a value weighted
basis, Alternative Allocations has the largest average allocation at 51.7%, compared with
35.6% for public equity and 12.7% for cash and fixed income. The average equally
weighted spending rate is 4.2%.
Panel B of Table 1 shows the summary statistics for the more detailed sub-asset
categories. Within Alternative Allocations, hedge funds has the largest allocation with an
equal weighted average allocation of 16.7%. For all of the sub-asset classes the allocations
increase with endowment size, particularly for the least liquid categories: private equity,
venture capital, private real estate, and illiquid natural resources.
Prior studies show a positive relation between endowment size and alpha, which they
attribute to access to superior alternative asset investments (Lerner, Schoar, and Wang
(2008), Brown, Garlappi, and Tiu (2010), Barber and Wang (2013), and Ang, Ayala,
and Goetzmann (2018)). We follow these papers and also interpret size as a proxy for
the endowment’s ability to access alternative assets with alphas.

20

Table 1: Summary of Endowment Fund Asset Allocation
This table summarizes endowment fund portfolios as of the end of the 2014-2015 academic year for 774 endowments. The first three
columns show the mean, value weighted mean, and standard deviation of the variables, respectively. The columns 0-10% to 90-100%
show averages within size-segmented groups of endowment funds. For example, the column “0-10%” shows the value weighted average
portfolio allocation for the smallest decile of endowment funds. The final column shows results for the 20 largest endowment funds. Panel
A shows summary statistics for endowment fund size (reported in millions of dollars), asset class allocations and spending rates (reported
in percentages), the number of alternative asset funds that the endowment holds, and the average target horizon for the alternative assets.
Cash & Fixed Income includes cash, cash equivalents, and fixed income securities (except for distressed securities). Public Equity includes
domestic and foreign equity as well as REITs. Alternative Allocations includes hedge funds, private equity, venture capital, private real
estate, and illiquid natural resources. Panel B reports summary statistics for the more detailed sub-asset classes. Hedge Funds includes
managed futures. Natural Resources includes illiquid natural resources, such as timberland and oil & gas partnerships.
Mean
21

Panel A
Endowment Size ($M)
Cash & Fixed Income
Public Equity
Alternative Allocations
Spending Rate
No. Alternative Funds
Alt. Target Horizon
Panel B
Cash & Equivalents
Fixed Income
Public Equity
Hedge Funds
Private Equity
Venture Capital
Private Real Estate
Natural Resources

677
21.0%
50.7%
28.3%
4.2%
16.9
4.2
5.1%
15.9%
50.7%
16.7%
4.6%
1.7%
2.7%
2.7%

VW Mean

Std Dev 0-10% 20-30% 45-55% 70-80% 90-100% Top 20

12.7
35.6
51.7
4.4
56.0
5.5

2,483
11.3
14.6
19.3
2.2
28.6
2.5

17
33.1
60.1
6.3
4.5%
1.1
3.6

50.1
21.7
57.9
20.4
3.7
5.6
4.1

116
22.4
54.7
22.9
3.9
7.2
4.0

408
15.2
45.9
38.9
3.9
22.5
4.6

13,409
10.8
32.0
57.1
4.5
86.5
5.9

18,585
9.7
29.3
61.0
4.5
152.2
6.3

4.0
8.7
35.6
23.4
10.9
5.7
6.1
5.9

8.3
9.3
14.6
12.2
6.6
3.3
3.8
3.5

7.2
25.8
60.1
4.6
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.8

3.5
18.2
57.9
13.0
3.1
0.5
1.8
1.9

5.6
16.8
54.7
14.3
3.1
0.4
2.7
2.0

3.8
11.4
45.9
22.3
7.1
2.2
3.1
4.2

3.5
7.4
32.0
23.8
12.3
6.9
7.0
6.7

2.6
7.1
29.3
23.7
14.0
7.3
8.4
7.5

Portfolio Illiquidity and Target Horizons. We estimate target holding periods for
alternative assets based on investors’ portfolio allocations and the horizons of each subasset class within alternatives. For hedge funds, we assume a horizon of six months, which
approximately equals the sum of the average redemption, advance notice, and lockup
periods reported in Getmansky, Liang, Schwarz, and Wermers (2015). For private equity
and venture capital, we assume a horizon of 10 years, based on the average commitment
period reported in Metrick and Yasuda (2010). For private real estate and illiquid natural
resources, we also assume horizons of 10 years, based on the holding periods reported in
Collet, Lizieri, and Ward (2003) and Newell and Eves (2009). Panel A of Table 1 reports
Alt. Target Horizon, which is the value-weighted average target horizon.
Table 1 also reports the average number of alternative asset funds held by the endowments, which is an important component of liquidity management. Suppose Endowment A invests its entire alternative asset allocation into a single private equity fund with
a 10 year lock-up. Suppose Endowment B spreads its alternative asset allocation across
120 different private equity funds, each of which has a 10 year lock-up. Further suppose
that Endowment B staggers its investments across time, so that one lock-up expires every month. Although both endowments have the same allocation to private equity, their
liquidity exposures are very different. Endowment A can only reduce its exposure to
private equity through the secondary market. In contrast, Endowment B can costlessly
reduce its exposure to private equity as ,lock-ups expire each month. Thus, by holding
multiple funds with staggered maturities, the endowment can enhance the liquidity of its
portfolio, which we refer to as liquidity diversification. In our quantitative analysis, we
explore the relation between liquidity diversification and investor welfare.
As Panel A of Table 1 shows, there is a strong positive relation between endowment
size and the number of alternative asset funds. On average, endowments in the largest
decile hold 86.5 alternative asset funds; endowments in the smallest decile own only
a single fund. Thus, illiquidity diversification is more effective for larger endowments,
lowering the unspanned risk.

22

4.2.

Parameter Choices and Calibration

Calculating Unspanned Volatility ǫ. Calibrating the model requires the standard
deviation, beta, and unspanned volatility of the representative alternative asset. To
obtain these parameters, we build up from the standard deviations and correlations of
the sub-asset classes comprising the representative alternative asset. For each sub-asset
class a, we combine its βa and Ra2 with the standard deviation of the market σS = 20%
p
to obtain the implied standard deviation for the asset class: σa = βa2 σS2 /Ra2 .
Panel A of Table D1 in Appendix D shows the βa , Ra2 , and σa for each of the alternative

sub-asset classes. For hedge funds, the β and R2 are taken from Getmansky, Lo, and
Makarov (2004) and account for return smoothing. For private equity and venture capital,
the β and R2 are taken from Ewens, Jones, and Rhodes-Kropf (2013). For private real
estate and illiquid natural resources, the variables are based on Pedersen, Page, and He
(2014) and account for return smoothing. Panel B of Appendix Table D1 shows the
pairwise correlations between the asset classes, which are calculated using index returns
over the period 1994-2015.15 We combine the asset allocations from Table 1 with the
data from Appendix Table D1 to impute portfolio β, σ, and unspanned volatility (ǫ).
Table 2 shows the imputed variables for the cross-section of endowment funds.
Parameter Choices. We set the alternative asset βA = 0.6 and the unspanned volatility of the alternative asset to ǫ = 15%. We set the horizon of the representative alternative
asset H = 6 years. These values closely match the value weighted endowment fund portfolio values reported earlier.
Following the literature, we choose the following standard parameter values: the
annual risk-free rate r = 4% and the investor’s coefficient of relative risk aversion γ = 2.
We set the EIS to be ψ = 0.5, so that it corresponds to expected utility with γ = 1/ψ = 2.
We also set the investor’s discount rate equal to the risk-free rate, ζ = r. For public equity,
15

The indexes are: Bloomberg/Barclays US Aggregate Bond Index, CRSP value weighted index,
Credit Suisse/Tremont Aggregate Hedge Fund Index, Cambridge Associates U.S. Private Equity Index,
Cambridge Associates U.S. Venture Capital Index, NCREIF Property Index (unsmoothed), and the S&P
Global Timber and Forestry Index. For private equity, venture capital, private real estate, and illiquid
natural resources the returns are quarterly; the other returns are monthly.

23

Table 2: Implied Alternative-Asset Risk and Unspanned Volatility
This table summarizes the implied parameters of the alternative asset: βA is the beta, σA
is the standard deviation, and ǫ is the unspanned volatility. The first two columns show
results for the equal-weighted and value-weighted average portfolios. The remaining
columns show allocations for size-segmented groups of endowments. e.g., the column
“0-10%” shows the value-weighted statistics for the smallest decile of endowment funds.

Avg.
βA
σA
ǫ

VW

0.58 0.61
18.1% 18.7
13.9% 14.2

0-10% 20-30% 45-55% 70-80% 90-100% Top 20
0.53
17.7%
14.1

0.55
17.7
13.9

0.54
17.3
13.5

0.57
18.2
14.2

0.62
18.9
14.3

0.62
18.8
14.2

we use an annual volatility of σS = 20% and a public equity risk premium of µS −r = 6%.
In our model, the alpha of the illiquid alternative investment includes compensation
for skill, liquidity risk, and other risks unspanned by public equities. We set α = 2%,
which we view as reasonable given the empirical findings in the literature. For example,
Franzoni, Nowak, and Phalippou (2012) find that private equity earns a net-of-fees liquidity risk premium of 3% annually. Aragon (2007) and Sadka (2010) find similar net-of-fees
liquidity risk premia for hedge funds. Empirical studies of endowment funds also find
a positive relation between performance and allocations to illiquid assets (e.g., Lerner,
Schoar, and Wang (2008), Brown, Garlappi, and Tiu (2010), Barber and Wang (2013),
and Ang, Ayala, and Goetzmann (2018)). Given this assumed alpha, the expected overall
return on the alternative asset is µA = 0.02 + 0.04 + 0.6 × (0.10 − 0.04) = 0.096 = 9.6%.
For voluntary liquidations, we assume that the proportional transaction cost is θL =
10%, based on empirical findings and the following back-of-the-envelope calculation: For
secondary market liquidations of private equity, Kleymenova, Talmor, and Vasvari (2012)
and Nadauld, Sensoy, Vorkink, and Weisbach (2019) find average discounts of 25.2% and
13.8%, respectively. For secondary market liquidations of hedge funds, Ramadorai (2012)
finds an average discount of 0.9%, which rises to 7.8% during the financial crisis. Therefore, we combine the aggregate endowment fund portfolio weights with liquidation costs
of 20% for PE and VC, 1% for hedge funds, and 10% for private real estate and timber24

land, to obtain a proportional liquidation cost of 9.3% for the representative alternative
asset. For acquisitions, we assume that the proportional acquisition cost is θX = 2%,
which is equal to the average placement agent fee reported by Rikato and Berk (2015)
and Cain, McKeon, and Solomon (2016).
Calibrating the model also requires a payout parameter, which determines the liquidity generated by automatic liquidity events (e.g., liquidity from funds maturing and
paying out capital). The payout rate depends on the number of alternative asset funds
held by the investor. For example, given the target horizon of H = 6 years, an investor
with a single alternative asset fund would receive a large payout once every six years.
In contrast, an investor with a large number of funds would receive smaller but more
frequent payouts. For any given number of funds, denoted by i, Appendix E shows how
it is possible to impute the payout rate using the previously described parameter values.
For our baseline calibration we use i → ∞, which implies a continuous payout rate of
δA = 4.0%. For comparison, we also consider the cases with i = 1 and i = 6.
Table 3 summarizes the baseline parameter values.

5.

Quantitative Results

In this section, we analyze the model using the parameter values from Table 3. As a
benchmark, we also analyze the case when the alternative asset is fully liquid.16

5.1.

Certainty Equivalent Wealth and Net Worth

We introduce the widely-used net worth as the accounting value of the investor’s portfolio:
Nt ≡ Wt + Kt .

(34)

In general, due to illiquidity Nt is not an economic measure of the investor’s true welfare.
Figure 1 plots P (W, K, t)/Nt , the ratio of the certainty equivalent wealth to the
portfolio’s book value (net worth) Nt , as a function of
zt =

Kt
1
Kt
=
=
,
Nt
Wt + Kt
wt + 1

(35)

16
In this case, the alternative asset simply expands the investment opportunity set. Thus, as Appendix
B.1 shows, the value function is clearly higher than when the alternative asset is illiquid.

25

Table 3: Summary of Key Parameters
This table summarizes the baseline parameter values. For completeness, the table also reports values of implied parameter values, i.e., those parameters whose values are
determined by other parameters.
Parameter

Symbol

Value

Coefficient of relative risk aversion
Elasticity of intertemporal substitution
Subjective discount rate
Risk-free rate
Public equity expected return
Volatility of market portfolio
Beta of the alternative asset
Alternative asset alpha
Alternative asset expected return
Volatility of alternative asset
Alternative asset target horizon
Proportional cost of liquidation
Proportional cost of acquisition

γ
ψ
ζ
r
µS
σS
βA
α
µA
σA
H
θL
θX

2
0.5
4%
4%
10%
20%
0.6
2%
9.6%
19.2%
6
0.1
0.02

Implied Parameter Values
Correlation between risky assets
Unspanned volatility
Payout rate

ρ
ǫ
δA

0.625
15%
4.00%

the proportion of the portfolio allocated to alternative assets. Recall that we use the
liquidity ratio, wt , as the effective state variable when analyzing the model and its solution
in Sections 2 and 3. Here, we use zt to exposit our quantitative results, as practitioners
typically work with portfolio allocations. Also, note that zt is typically between zero and
one making the results easier to interpret.
As the optimal w is a range (w, w) and z decreases with w, the corresponding range
for the optimal z is (z, z), where
z=

1
w+1

and z =

1
.
w+1

(36)

Therefore, the lower liquidation boundary w maps to the upper liquidation boundary z
and the upper acquisition boundary w maps to the lower acquisition boundary z.
Figure 1 includes the case of i → ∞, and for comparison it also includes the cases of i = 1 and i = 6.

For the case where i → ∞, we see that z lies between
26

Certainty equivalent wealth/Net worth: P/N
1.09
i=1
i=6
i=∞

ooo
ooo
o

↑
Full Spanning (0.444, 1.089)

1.085

1.08

(0.307, 1.0779) (0.345, 1.0784)
↓
↓
oo
o oo
o
ooo
↑
(0.338, 1.0784)
ooo
o

ooo
o

ooo
o

1.075

1.07

1.065

1.06

1.055
0.25

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.55
0.45
0.35
Allocation to Alternatives: z

0.6

0.65

Figure 1: This figure plots P/N = p(w)/(w + 1), the ratio of the certainty equivalent
wealth P (W, K) = p(w)K and net worth N = W + K, on the y-axis and the portfolio’s
percentage allocation to alternative assets z = K/N on the x-axis. For the case with
with i = ∞ and δA = 4%, the optimal range for the allocation is (z, z) = (0.275, 0.649).
Other parameter values are given in Table 3. Note that zb = 0.345 and the maximand is
1.078, highlighted in the figure. For i = 1 and i = 6 the figure shows results at t = mT .
(z, z) = (27.5%, 64.9%). That is, if the allocation to alternatives z falls to the endogenous
acquisition boundary, z = 27.5%, the investor immediately sells just enough units of the
liquid assets and invests the proceeds in the illiquid alternative asset to keep z ≥ 27.5%.
If the allocation to alternatives rises to the endogenous liquidation boundary, z = 64.9%,
the investor sells just enough units of the illiquid asset so that z falls back to 64.9%
Hypothetically, if the investor could costlessly choose z, she would choose the “desired” target zb = 34.5%. At this point, her certainty equivalent wealth is 7.8% high-

er than her net worth. The curve is noticeably asymmetric and declines more rapidly to the right of the maximum, as the investor approaches the voluntary liquidation
boundary, because liquidating alternative assets is more costly than acquiring them (i.e.,
θL = 10% > θX = 2%).
In sharp contrast, when the alternative asset is perfectly liquid, as in the case of full
27

spanning, the admissible illiquid alternative asset holding is not a range, but instead is
a singleton with the value of z ∗ = 44.4%.
For the case of i = 1, the rebalancing boundaries are further to the left, indicating that
the investor holds less of the alternative asset when there is less liquidity diversification
from staggering maturities across time. The curve for i = 6 is similar to that for i → ∞
indicating that even a moderate number of alternative asset funds provide benefits from
liquidity diversification.

5.2.

Rebalancing Boundaries

Figure 2 shows the rebalancing boundaries over the period 0 < t < T . First, recall
that for the case with i = ∞, the rebalancing boundaries are constant over time which
correspond to two horizontal lines at z = 27.5% and z = 64.9%. Next, we turn to the
case with time-varying rebalancing boundaries. We use the case with i = 1 (the investor
owns only a single alternative asset fund) to highlight the main results.
In this case, there is an automatic liquidity event every six years at which time the
alternative asset becomes fully liquid (see Appendix E for more details). The differences
between the cases of i → ∞ and i = 1 highlights one of the unique features of our model
– that it can accommodate the liquidity diversification from investing in illiquid assets
with staggered lock-up expirations.
The initial rebalancing boundaries, at time t = 0, are lower for the case of i = 1
than that of i → ∞ because the effective cost of illiquidity due to trading restrictions
is greater, resulting in lower demand for the illiquid asset. The comparison between the
cases of i = 1 and i → ∞ illustrates the interrelation of illiquidity from transactions
costs and illiquidity from trading restrictions (i.e., lockups). For the case of i = 1, both
boundaries increase as t → mT . This means that the investor becomes less willing to
liquidate alternative assets and more willing to voluntarily acquire alternative assets as
the automatic liquidity event at t = mT approaches. This is intuitive, as the investor can
simply wait until the automatic liquidity event rather than incurring the liquidation cost.
Indeed, the liquidation boundary z t becomes very large, indicating that as t → mT the
28

Optimal rebalancing boundaries
3

2.5

i=1
i=1
i=∞
i=∞

voluntary liquidation boundary zt →

2

1.5

1

voluntary liquidation boundary zt
↓
0.5

0
0

acquisition boundary zt
↓

1

2

acquisition boundary zt →

3
t

4

5

6

Figure 2: This figure plots the rebalancing boundaries for the portfolio’s percentage
allocation to alternative assets over time: z = K/N, where N = W + K. The optimal
(lower) acquisition boundary is termed zt and the (upper) liquidation boundary is termed
zt . The input parameter values are given in Table 3. For the case with i → ∞ and
δA = 4%, the optimal z lies between zt = 0.275 and zt = 0.649 for all t (see the two
horizontal lines). The blue solid and red dashed lines correspond to the case with i = 1
and the implied payout δT = 21.34% every six years, i.e., H = 6.
investor prefers to wait for the automatic liquidity event to adjust her portfolio rather
than incur transaction costs.
Similarly, the acquisition boundary, zt , rises as t → mT for the case of i = 1. However,
the quantitative effects for the acquisition boundary are smaller than for the liquidation
boundary, because the acquisition cost is smaller than the liquidation cost (θL > θX .)

5.3.

Comparative Statics

This section reports calibrated results for i → ∞. As shown earlier, because of the
transaction costs the model generates a range of history-dependent optimal allocation,
(z, z). For ease of interpretation, we do not report comparative static results for the
admissible range (z, z), but instead only for the desired target, zb, shown in Figure 1.

This single number, z, gives the highest possible utility for the investor. For each table,
29

the row in bold font shows results using the baseline parameter values from Table 3.
5.3.1.

The Effect of α

Table 4 reports comparative static results for α. Panel A shows results for the general case
where the alternative asset is illiquid. For comparison, Panel B shows results for the case
of full spanning. For the general case with the baseline parameters, the investor allocates
53.93% of the portfolio to public equity, 34.48% to alternative assets, and the remaining
11.59% to bonds. These values are similar to the equal weighted average endowment
fund portfolio allocations found in the data (see Table 1), which has allocations of 50.7%
to public equity, 28.3% to alternative assets, and 21.0% to bonds. In the case of full
spanning, the model implies approximately a 10 percentage point higher allocation to
alternative assets and the spending rate is slightly higher.
Table 4 shows that asset allocations are quite sensitive to changes in α. For example,
increasing α from 2% to 3% increases the alternative asset allocation from 34.48% to
60.24%. As the allocation to the alternative asset increases, the allocation to public
equity falls from 53.93% to 37.91% to manage the overall portfolio β and because of the
additional liquidity risk. If α rises to 4% the investor will optimally borrow 8.12% of
net worth to invest in the alternative asset. It is worth noting that some endowment
funds, such as Harvard, have occasionally taken on debt to invest in public and private
equities. For example, during the financial crisis period, Harvard chose not to liquidate
its endowment but rather to issue bonds (see Ang (2012)).
The sensitivity of the implied portfolio allocations to changes in α is consistent with
the large cross-sectional dispersion in endowment funds’ allocations to alternative assets.
An α of 0% can explain non-participation, while an α of 3% implies allocations that are
broadly consistent with those of large endowments such as Yale and Stanford. Thus, with
reasonable parameter values, our model is consistent with both the average allocation
and also the cross-sectional dispersion of allocations to alternative assets.
The sensitivity of allocations to α is also consistent with the empirically observed
strong relation between endowment fund size and allocations to alternative assets. Lerner,
30

Table 4: The Effect of α on Asset Allocation and Spending Rates
This table reports the comparative static effect of α on asset allocation and spending.
The three columns, Public Equity, Alternatives (Alternative Assets), and Bonds, report
Π/N, K/N, and (W − Π)/N, respectively, evaluated at the desired target highlighted in
Figure 1. The Spending column reports the corresponding desired target spending rate,
C/N. These four columns are presented in percent (%), which are omitted for simplicity.
Panel A reports results for the case with illiquidity. Panel B reports results for the case
of full spanning. The baseline parameter values are given in Table 3.
A. General case

α = 0%
α = 1%
α = 2%
α = 3%
α = 4%

Public Equity

Alternatives

Bonds

Spending

75.00
67.29
53.93
37.91
20.41

0.00
12.69
34.48
60.24
87.72

25.00
20.02
11.59
1.87
−8.12

5.13
5.16
5.32
5.60
6.00

7.22

5.35

B. Full-spanning case
α = 2%

48.33

44.44

Schoar, and Wang (2008), Brown, Garlappi, and Tiu (2010), Barber and Wang (2013),
and Ang, Ayala, and Goetzmann (2018) find that large endowment funds persistently
earn significant alphas, which they attribute to superior alternative asset investments,
while small endowments do not earn significant alphas. Lerner, Schoar, and Wang (2008)
discuss how large endowments typically have better investment committees, better access
to elite managers, and can exploit economies of scale in selecting alternative assets.
5.3.2.

Unspanned Volatility ǫ

Table 5 shows that the unspanned volatility of the alternative asset, ǫ, has a quantitatively
large effect on asset allocation. This table also reports the implied value of ǫ2 /σA2 , the
fraction of the alternative asset’s total variance from unspanned variance (which changes
in response to the change of ǫ). We use two panels to demonstrate how the unspanned
volatility affects asset allocation.
In Panel A, we fix βA = 0.6, which implies that the systematic volatility of the
alternative asset, ρσA , is also fixed. In our calibration, the spanned variance is (ρσA )2 =
31

Table 5: The Effect of ǫ on Asset Allocation and Spending
This table reports the comparative static effect of ǫ on asset allocation and spending.
The three columns, Public Equity, Alternatives (Alternative Assets), and Bonds, report
Π/N, K/N, and (W − Π)/N, respectively, evaluated at the desired target highlighted in
Figure 1. The Spending column reports the corresponding desired target spending rate,
C/N. These four columns are presented in percent (%), which are omitted for simplicity.
Panel A show the effect of changing ǫ while βA is fixed at βA = 0.6 and the column
“Implied σA ” shows the total volatility of the alternative asset. Panel B shows the effect
of changing ǫ while the total volatility of the alternative asset is fixed at σA = 19.2% and
the column “Implied β” shows the implied beta of the alternative asset. In both panels,
the column “ǫ2 /σA2 ” shows the alternative asset’s unspanned variance as a percentage of
its total variance. The baseline parameter values are given in Table 3.

Panel A. Fixing βA = 0.6
Implied σA

2
ǫ2 /σA

Public Equity

Alternatives

Bonds

Spending

ǫ = 10%

15.6%

41.0%

27.79

76.34

−4.13

5.59

ǫ = 15%

19.2%

61.0%

53.93

34.48

11.59

5.32

ǫ = 17.5%

21.2%

68.0%

60.17

24.33

15.50

5.26

ǫ = 19.2%

22.6%

71.9%

63.07

19.61

17.33

5.24

Panel B. Fixing σA = 19.2%
Implied βA

2
ǫ2 /σA

Public Equity

Alternatives

Bonds

Spending

ǫ = 10%
ǫ = 15%

0.82
0.60

27.1%
61.0%

−2.12
53.93

95.24
34.48

6.88
11.59

5.62
5.32

ǫ = 17.5%

0.40

83.0%

66.41

20.58

13.01

5.25

ǫ = 19.2%

0

100.0%

74.57

11.82

13.61

5.20

(βA σs )2 = (0.6 × 0.2)2 = 0.0144. (This calculation follows from the CAPM equation
given in (4).) Thus, the total variance of the alternative asset, σA2 = (ρσA )2 + ǫ2 =
0.122 + ǫ2 , changes one-to-one with ǫ2 , which implies that ǫ2 /σA2 , also changes with ǫ2 .
For example, as we decrease ǫ from 15% (the baseline case) to 10%, the ratio of unspanned
to total variance decreases from 61.0% to 41.0%. The investor reacts by substantially
increasing the allocation to alternative assets from 34.48% to 76.34%, decreasing public
equity from 53.93% to 27.79%, and changing a long position of 11.59% in the bond
to a short position (-4.13%). These changes are quantitatively very large. Moreover,
the difference between 10% and 15% for unspanned volatility is not that substantial,
particularly given the noisiness of empirical estimates of the unspanned volatility of
32

alternative assets. Our quantitative results suggest it is worth devoting much more work
to improve the empirical estimates of unspanned volatility.
In Panel B of Table 5, we fix the total volatility of the alternative asset σA at 19.2%. As
we increase the unspanned variance, ǫ2 , the alternative’s βA must decrease to adjust the
spanned variance, (ρσA )2 = (βA σS )2 , so that ǫ2 + (ρσA )2 = σA2 = 19.2%2 . Now consider
again the exercise of decreasing ǫ from 15% (the baseline case) to 10%. Unlike in Panel
A, βA must increase from 0.60 to 0.82 to offset the reduction in unspanned volatility and
keep σA2 = 19.2%2 . The investor reacts to this change in the composition of total variance
by increasing the allocation to alternative assets from 34.48% to 95.24% and decreasing
public equity from 53.93% to a short position of -2.12%. As in the earlier panel, changes
in the unspanned volatility have quantitatively large effects on asset allocation.
Finally, we study the effect of increasing the spanned variance, σA2 −ǫ2 ≡ (ρσA )2 , while
holding the unspanned variance, ǫ2 , fixed. We do this by comparing the same numbered
rows in Panels A and B. For example, ǫ is 10% in the first row of both panel, but βA = 0.6
and σA = 15.6% in Panel A, which are lower than βA = 0.82 and σA = 19.2% in Panel B.
As a result, by decreasing ǫ2 /σA2 from 41% in Panel A to 27.1% in Panel B, the investor
significantly increases the allocation to the alternative asset from 76.34% to 95.24%,
decreases public equity from 27.79% to a short position (-2.12%), and increases bonds
from a short position (-4.13%) to a long position of 6.88%. The intuition for this dramatic
shift in asset allocation is as follows. As ǫ2 /σA2 decreases, a higher allocation to the
alternative asset is less costly in terms of the exposure to the alternative asset’s unspanned
risk. The investor therefore increases the allocation to alternatives and reduces public
equity and increases bonds in order to keep the portfolio’s β in a target range.
In sum, the alternative asset’s unspanned and spanned risk have conceptually and
quantitatively very different effects on asset allocation. The investor can offset the publicmarket-spanned risk of the alternative asset by adjusting allocations to public equity,
while the alternative asset’s unspanned volatility is by definition specific to the alternative
asset and cannot be hedged.

33

Table 6: The Effect of the EIS ψ on Asset Allocation and Spending
This table reports the comparative static effect of ψ on asset allocation and spending.
The three columns, Public Equity, Alternatives (Alternative Assets), and Bonds, report
Π/N, K/N, and (W − Π)/N, respectively, evaluated at the desired target highlighted in
Figure 1. The Spending column reports the corresponding desired target spending rate,
C/N. These four columns are presented in percent (%), which are omitted for simplicity.
The baseline parameter values are given in Table 3. For the results in this table, we fix
risk aversion at γ = 2.

ψ = 0.1
ψ = 0.5
ψ=1
ψ=2

5.3.3.

Public Equity

Alternatives

Bonds

Spending

56.20
53.93
50.47
44.39

30.77
34.48
40.16
50.25

13.03
11.59
9.37
5.36

6.36
5.32
3.95
1.33

The EIS ψ

Table 6 shows that varying the EIS has large quantitative effects on the spending rate. In
this panel, we fix risk aversion at γ = 2, a widely used value. An investor who is unwilling
to substitute spending over time (e.g., ψ = 0.1) has a spending rate of 6.36%, which is
relatively high (in light of the permanent-income argument). In contrast, an investor who
is willing to substitute spending over time, (e.g., ψ = 2 as in the long-run risk literature
following Bansal and Yaron (2004)), has a spending rate of only 1.33%. The intuition is
that an investor with a high EIS defers spending to exploit the investment opportunity.
As the EIS increases, the investor increases allocations to the illiquid alternative asset
and reduces allocations to the liquid asset classes (public equity and bonds). For example,
an investor with ψ = 0.1 allocates 56.20% of net worth to public equity and 30.77%
to alternatives, compared to an investor with ψ = 2 who allocates 44.39% to public
equity and 50.25% to illiquid alternatives. A high EIS increases the investor’s willingness
to shift consumption across periods, which allows a high EIS investor to respond to
return shocks by deferring consumption rather than engaging in costly liquidation of the
alternative asset. The strong dependence of asset allocation on the EIS in our model is
due to the interactive effect between asset allocation and optimal spending policies in our

34

Table 7: The Effect of γ on Asset Allocation and Spending Rates
This table reports the comparative static effect of γ on asset allocation and spending.
The three columns, Public Equity, Alternatives (Alternative Assets), and Bonds, report
Π/N, K/N, and (W − Π)/N, respectively, evaluated at the desired target highlighted in
Figure 1. The Spending column reports the corresponding desired target spending rate,
C/N. These four columns are presented in percent (%), which are omitted for simplicity.
The baseline parameter values are given in Table 3. For the results in this table, we fix
the EIS at ψ = 0.5.
Public Equity

Alternatives

Bonds

Spending

112.75
53.93
27.21

53.76
34.48
17.36

−66.51
11.59
55.43

6.57
5.32
4.66

γ=1
γ=2
γ=4

incomplete-markets model. In contrast, for the case of full spanning, the asset allocation
rule is the same as that in Merton (1971) and it is risk aversion, not the the EIS, that
influences asset allocation (see equations (C.1) and (C.2)).
Our model-implied results for the relation between spending flexibility and portfolio
liquidity are consistent with empirical facts. Hayes, Primbs, and Chiquoine (2015) argue
that pension funds have little spending flexibility and family offices have a great deal
of flexibility. Rose and Seligman (2016) find that the average allocation to alternative
assets for public pension plans is only 3.3%. In contrast, a UBS/Campden survey found
that family offices hold more than 50% of their wealth in illiquid asset classes.17 Over a
medium or long horizon, the combined effect of a high EIS – reducing spending and tilting
investments towards illiquid alternatives which deliver alpha – will have a significant
impact on the accumulation of net worth.
5.3.4.

Risk Aversion γ

Table 7 shows that the coefficient of relative risk aversion has a large effect on asset
allocation. For a fixed EIS of ψ = 0.5, if risk aversion decreases from γ = 2 to γ = 1 the
investor increases the portfolio allocation to alternative assets from 34.48% to 53.76%.
Even more strikingly, the investor changes the portfolio allocation to the risk-free asset
17

See http://www.globalfamilyofficereport.com/investments/.

35

from a long position of 11.59% to a short position (borrowing 66.51% of net worth). As
a result, the investor increases the portfolio allocation to public equity from 53.93% to
a levered position (112.75% of net worth). As risk aversion increases from γ = 2 to
γ = 4, allocations to bonds significantly increase from 11.59% to 55.43%, allocations
to alternative assets decrease by about half from 34.48% to 17.36%, and allocations to
public equity decrease from 53.93% to 27.21%.

6.

Conclusion

The “Endowment Model” is widely used by many university endowment funds and other
institutional investors. We build on the framework of Modern Portfolio Theory to develop a dynamic portfolio-choice model with illiquid alternative assets to analyze conditions
under which the Endowment Model does and does not work. We capture the illiquidity
of the alternative asset as follows. First, a fraction of the alternative asset periodically
matures and becomes fully liquid, and the investor can benefit from liquidity diversification by holding alternative assets maturing at different dates. Second, the investor can
voluntarily trade in the illiquid asset at any time by paying a proportional transaction
cost. Third, the alternative asset’s risk is not fully spanned by public equity.
Quantitatively, our model’s results are broadly consistent with the average level and
the cross-sectional variation of actual university endowment funds’ asset allocation and
spending decisions. We show that asset allocations and spending decisions crucially
depend on the alternative asset’s expected excess return, its risk unspanned by public
equity, and investors’ preferences for inter-temporal spending smoothing.
Due to space considerations we have not included several conceptually interesting
and generalizations. For example, stochastic calls and distributions are potentially important as they create uncertainty about the precise timing of cash flows making illiquid alternative assets less attractive, ceteris paribus. Extending the model to allow for
time-variation in the liquidation cost is also an interesting direction for future research,
particularly given the rise in illiquidity observed during the financial crisis.

36

Appendices
A

Public Equity and Bonds with No Alternatives

First, we summarize the solution for the complete-markets special case of our model where
an investor with Duffie-Epstein-Zin recursive preferences has the standard investment
opportunities defined by the public equity’s risky return process given by (1) and a
risk-free bond that pays a constant rate of interest r. The investor dynamically adjusts
her consumption/spending and frictionlessly rebalances her portfolio to maximize her
recursive preferences given in (8)-(9). Note that the investor only has liquid wealth W .
The following proposition summarizes the solution for this frictionless benchmark.
Proposition 2 The investor allocates a constant fraction, denoted by π, of her wealth
Wt to public equity, i.e., the total investment amount in public equity is Π = πW where
π=

µS − r
.
γσS2

(A.1)

Note that the optimal asset allocation rule is the same as that in Merton (1969, 1971).
Specifically, the EIS has no effect on π in this frictionless benchmark. The optimal
spending Ct is proportional to wealth Wt : Ct = φ1 Wt where


(µS − r)2
.
φ1 = ζ + (1 − ψ) r − ζ +
2σS2 γ

(A.2)

Note that the optimal spending rule depends on both risk aversion γ and the EIS ψ, which
is different from Merton (1969, 1971). The investor’s value function J(W ) is given by:
J(W ) =

(b1 W )1−γ
,
1−γ

(A.3)

where b1 is a constant given by:
ψ

1

b1 = ζ ψ−1 φ11−ψ .

(A.4)

Next, we analyze the general case where the investor can also invest in illiquid alternative assets in addition to public equity and bonds.

37

B

Proof for Proposition 1

Optimal Policy Functions and PDE for p(w, t). We conjecture that the value
function V (W, K, t) takes the following form:
(b1 p(w, t)K)1−γ
(b1 P (W, K, t))1−γ
=
,
V (W, K, t) =
1−γ
1−γ

(B.1)

where b1 is given in (A.4). Substituting (B.1) into the consumption FOC given in (13)
and the asset-allocation FOC given in (14), we obtain (22) for the scaled consumption
rule c(w, t) and (23) for the scaled asset allocation in public equity π(w, t), respectively.
Finally, substituting the conjectured value function given in (B.1) and the consumption
and asset-allocation policy rules, given in (22) and (23), into the HJB equation (12), we
obtain the PDE (24) for the certainty equivalent wealth p(w, t).
Lower Liquidation Boundary Wt and Upper Acquisition Boundary Wt . Let
(Wt , Kt ) denote the investor’s time-t holdings in public equity and the alternative asset,
respectively. We use ∆ to denote the amount of the illiquid alternative asset that the
investor is considering to liquidate. The investor’s post-liquidation holdings in public
equity and the alternative asset, are equal to Kt − ∆ and Wt + (1 − θL )∆, respectively.
Because the investor’s value function is continuous before and after liquidation, we have
V (Wt + (1 − θL )∆, Kt − ∆, t) − V (Wt , Kt , t) = 0 .

(B.2)

Dividing (B.2) by ∆ and letting ∆ → 0, we obtain under differentiability:
1
[V (Wt + (1 − θL )∆, Kt − ∆, t) − V (Wt + (1 − θL )∆, Kt , t)]
∆→0 ∆
1 − θL
[V (Wt + (1 − θL )∆, Kt , t) − V (Wt , Kt , t)]
+ lim
∆→0 ∆(1 − θL )

0 = lim

= −VK (Wt , Kt , t) + (1 − θL )VW (Wt , Kt , t) .

(B.3)

The preceding equation implicitly defines the boundary Wt , in that
VK (Wt , Kt , t) = (1 − θL )VW (Wt , Kt , t) .

38

(B.4)

The optimality of Wt implies that the derivatives on both sides of (B.6) are equal. Therefore,
VKW (Wt , Kt , t) = (1 − θL )VW W (Wt , Kt , t) .

(B.5)

Substituting the value function given by (B.1) into (B.4), we obtain:
PK (Wt , Kt , t) = (1 − θL )PW (Wt , Kt , t) .

(B.6)

Similarly, substituting the value function given by (B.1) into (B.5), we obtain:
PKW (Wt , Kt , t) = (1 − θL )PW W (Wt , Kt , t) .

(B.7)

By using the homogeneity property, we obtain the following: PW (Wt , Kt , t) = pw (wt , t),
PW W (Wt , Kt , t) = pww (wt , t)/Kt , PK (Wt , Kt , t) = p(wt , t)−pw (wt , t)wt , and PW K (Wt , Kt , t) =
−Wt pww (wt , t)/Kt2 . Substituting these expressions into (B.6) and (B.7), we obtain
p(wt , t) − pw (wt , t)wt = (1 − θL )pw (wt , t)
−pww (wt , t)wt /Kt = (1 − θL )pww (wt , t)/Kt .

(B.8)
(B.9)

Simplifying these two equations, we obtain (25) and (27).
We can derive the boundary conditions for Wt and wt by using essentially the same
procedure as the above.
The preceding proof is applicable to the upper and lower barriers for all t such that
t 6= mT . To complete our analysis for t = mT . we need to incorporate the automatic
liquidity event that takes place t = mT .
Value and Decisions at t = mT . When there is an automatic liquidity event at
t = mT , it is possible that without active rebalancing, the automatic liquidity can cause
the portfolio to be overly exposed to liquid assets. In this case, i.e., when w
bmT > wmT ,

the investor may choose to reduce her liquid asset holding.

Suppose that the investor optimally purchases Λ units of the alternative asset such
cmT − (1 + θX )Λ = W mT and the liquidity ratio is then equal to
that W
wmT =

cmT − (1 + θX )Λ
W
Wt + δT Kt − (1 + θX )Λ
= lim
,
b mT + Λ
t→mT
Kt − δT Kt + Λ
K
39

(B.10)

By solving the above equation, we obtain the investor’s demand for the alternative
asset at t = mT , Λ = λKmT − , where λ is the scaled demand and is given by
λ = lim

t→mT

C

wt + δT − wmT (1 − δT )
.
1 + θX + w mT

(B.11)

Full Spanning with Liquid Alternative Asset

In this appendix, we summarize the full-spanning case where the alternative asset is fully
liquid. An investor with Duffie-Epstein-Zin recursive preferences has three investment
opportunities: (a.) the public equity whose return process is given by (1), (b.) a riskfree bond that pays a constant rate of interest r, and (c.) the risky liquid alternative
asset. The investor dynamically adjusts her consumption/spending and frictionlessly
rebalances her portfolio to maximize her recursive preferences given in (8)-(9). Note that
the investor’s wealth is fully liquid. The following proposition summarizes the solution
for this frictionless benchmark.
Proposition 3 The investor continuously rebalances the portfolio so the investment in
public equity, Π, and in the alternative asset, K, are proportional to net worth N, i.e.
1
Π =
σS γ(1 − ρ2 )
α
N.
K =
γǫ2



µS − r
µA − r
−ρ
σS
σA



N,

(C.1)
(C.2)

The remaining wealth, N − (Π + K), is allocated to the risk-free bond. The optimal
consumption C is proportional to the net worth, N: C = φ2 N where


1
φ2 = ζ +(1−ψ) r − ζ +
2γ(1 − ρ2 )



(µS − r)2 2ρ(µS − r)(µA − r) (µA − r)2
+
−
2
σS σA
σS2
σA



. (C.3)

The investor’s value function V (N) is given by:
V (N) =

(b2 N)1−γ
= J((b2 /b1 )N) ,
1−γ

(C.4)

where b2 is a constant given by
ψ

1

b2 = ζ ψ−1 φ21−ψ ,

(C.5)

and J( · ) is the value function given in (A.3) for an investor who only has access to
public equity and bonds.
40

By comparing φ2 given in (C.3) and φ1 given in (A.2), we see that diversification (|ρ| < 1)
and an additional risk premium

µA −r
σA

> 0 both make the investor better off. By intro-

ducing a new risky (alternative) asset into the investment opportunity set, the investor is
better off because b2 > b1 . The second equality in (C.4) implies that b2 /b1 − 1 is the fraction of wealth that the investor would need as compensation to permanently give up the
opportunity to invest in the liquid alternative asset and instead live in the environment
where she can only invest in public equity and the risk-free asset.
Proof for the Case of Full Spanning with the Liquid Alternative Asset. Using
the standard dynamic programming method, we have:
0 = max f (C, V ) + [rN + (µS − r)Π + (µA − r)K − C]V N
C,Π,K

+

(ΠσS )2 + 2ρΠσS KσA + (KσA )2
V NN ,
2

(C.6)

and using the FOCs for Π, K and C, we have:
fC (C, V ) = VN ,

(C.7)

µ S − r VN
ρσA
−
K,
2
σS VN N
σS
µ A − r VN
ρσS
K = −
−
Π.
2
σA VN N
σA
Π = −

(C.8)
(C.9)

We conjecture and verify that the value function takes the following form:
V (N) =

(b2 N)1−γ
.
1−γ

(C.10)

N, (C.1), and (C.2). Finally,
Substituting (C.10) into the FOCs, we obtain C = ζ ψ b1−ψ
2
substituting them into the HJB equation (C.6) and simplifying the expression, we obtain
(C.3).

D

Inputs for Calculating Unspanned Volatility

Table D1 shows summary statistics for the sub-asset classes within the illiquid asset class,
which are used to calculate the unspanned volatility of the endowment fund portfolios.

41

Table D1: Summary of Asset Class Risk and Correlations
Panel A shows βa , Ra2 , and σa for each alternative asset class a. Panel B shows the
pairwise correlations between these sub-asset classes.
Panel A
Hedge Funds (HF)
Private Equity (PrivEqu)
Venture Capital (VC)
Private Real Estate (PrivRE)
Natural Resources (NatRes)
Panel B
FixedInc PubEqu
FixedInc
1
PubEqu
0.02
1
HF
0.16
0.64
PrivEqu
-0.23
0.78
VC
-0.18
0.46
PrivRE
-0.13
0.35
NatRes
0.04
0.87

E

βa
0.54
0.72
1.23
0.50
0.20

Ra2
0.32
0.32
0.30
0.49
0.07

HF

PrivEqu

VC

PrivRE

NatRes

1
0.73
0.52
0.31
0.67

1
0.66
0.51
0.70

1
0.17
0.46

1
0.44

1

σa
19.1%
25.4%
45.1%
16.0%
17.0%

Calibrating the Payout Rates: δA and δT

We focus on the steady state in which the investor always has i funds at any time t. This
is feasible provided the investor immediately replaces each fund that exits.
To simplify the exposition, assume that each fund’s payoff structure involves only
one contribution at its inception and one distribution upon its exit, and the horizon
(or equivalently the lockup period) of each fund is H. At the steady state, i/H funds
mature each year, which means that there is one liquidity event every T = H/i years.
For example, if the lockup period for each fund is H = 6 and there are three funds at the
steady state (i = 3), then every two years (T = 6/3 = 2) an automatic liquidity event
occurs. To ensure that the investor has three funds at the steady state, the investor
immediately replaces the exited fund by investing in a new fund with a 6-year lock-up.
To ensure growth stationarity, we assume that both the growth rate of each fund,
gA , and the growth rate of the inception size for each fund (vintage), gI , are constant.
Consider a vintage-t fund, which refers to the fund that enters the portfolio at time t.
Let ISt denote the fund’s initial size (IS) at inception. Its size at (t+jT ) is then egA jT ISt
42

where j = 1, 2, · · · i and hence the fund’s size when exiting at time t + H is egA H ISt .
At time (t + H) the investor holds a total of i illiquid alternative funds ranging from
vintage-t to vintage-(t + (i − 1)T ). Note that the value of the vintage-(t + j) fund is
egA (i−j+1)T × (ISt egI (j−1)T ) as its inception size is ISt egI (j−1)T and has grown at the rate
of gA per year for (i − j + 1)T years. Summing across all vintages, we obtain:
i
X

egA (i−j+1)T × (ISt egI (j−1)T ) = egI H ISt ×

i
X

e(gA −gI )jT .

j=1

j=1

The net payout at time (t + H) is given by the difference between egA H ISt , the size
of the exiting vintage-t fund, and egI H ISt , the size of the new vintage-(t + H) fund. As
the payout occurs once every T years, the annualized net payout rate is then:

egA H ISt − egI H ISt
1 e(gA −gI )H − 1
1
1
−(gA −gI )T
1
−
e
.
=
=
P
P
T egI H ISt × ij=1 e(gA −gI )jT
T ij=1 e(gA −gI )jT
T

(E.1)

Next, we use this annualized net payout rate to calibrate δA and δT . Although, for
the sake of generality, the model includes both δA and δT , in any single calibration we
use only one of either δA or δT . Next, we provide three examples.
First, consider the case when i → ∞, and with fixed finite holding period H for each
fund, T ≡ H/i → 0. Therefore, the investor continuously receives payout at a constant
rate. This maps to the parameter δA in our model. By applying L’Hopital’s rule to (E.1),
we obtain, as one may expect, the following simple expression for the net payout rate,
δA = gA − gI ,

(E.2)

which is simply the difference between the incumbent fund growth rate gA and the growth
of the new fund’s initial size gI . For our calibration, we set µA = gA = 9.6% and gI = 5.6%
(approximately equal to the average endowment fund growth rate over the past 20 years)
resulting in δA = 4%.
Second, consider the case when the investor has only one fund outstanding at each
point in time. Then, T = H, the payout occurs once every H years, and we use δT to
capture the payout rate for this case. That is, when T is relatively large, δT is given by:
δT = 1 − e−(gA −gI )T .
43

(E.3)

Note that δT as defined in the model is not annualized. Thus, with gA = 9.6% and
gI = 5.6%, for a single fund (i = 1) in the portfolio and H = 6, δT = 21.34%, which is
equivalent to an annualized payout of 3.28%.
Third, consider an intermediate case when the investor has six funds at each point in
time. Then, we have T = H/i = 6/6 = 1, and we could use δT = δ1 = 1 − e−0.04 = 3.92%
to capture the payout. Alternatively, we could approximate with a continuous constant
dividend yield by annualizing δT and using this annualized value as δA in the calibration.
In this case, we would have δA ≈ (1 + δT )1/T − 1 = δT = δ1 = 3.92% when T = 1. As one
can see, the difference between the two approximations is not noticeable.

44

References
Agarwal, V., Mullally, K.A., Naik, N.Y., 2015. The economics and finance of hedge funds: A
review of the academic literature. Foundations and Trends in Finance, 10, 1-111.
Ang, A., 2012. Liquidating Harvard. CBS #100312. New York, NY: Columbia CaseWorks
Publishing.
Ang, A., Ayala, A., Goetzmann, W.N., 2018. Investment beliefs of endowments. European
Financial Management, 24, 3-33.
Ang, A., Papanikolaou, D., Westerfield, M.M., 2016. Portfolio choice with illiquid assets.
Management Science, 60, 2737-2761.
Aragon, G.O., 2007. Share restrictions and asset pricing: Evidence from the hedge fund
industry. Journal of Financial Economics, 83, 33-58.
Bansal, R., Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles. Journal of Finance, 59, 1481-1509.
Barber, B.M., Wang, G., 2013. Do (some) university endowments earn alpha? Financial
Analysts Journal, 69, 26-44.
van Binsbergen, J.H., Brandt, M.W., Koijen, R.S.J., 2008. Optimal decentralized investment
management. Journal of Finance, 63, 1849-1895.
Bollen, N.P.B., Sensoy, B.A., How much for a haircut? Illiquidity, secondary markets, and the
value of private equity. Working paper, Vanderbilt University.
Bolton, P., Wang, N., Yang, J., 2018, Liquidity and risk management: Coordinating investment and compensation policy. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Brown, J.R., Dimmock, S.G., Kang, J.K., Weisbenner, S., 2014. How university endowments
respond to financial market shocks: Evidence and implications. American Economic
Review, 104, 931-962.
Brown, K.C., Garlappi, L., Tiu, C., 2010. Asset allocation and portfolio performance: Evidence from university endowment funds. Journal of Financial Markets, 13, 268-294.
Cain, M.D., McKeon, S.B., Solomon, S.D., 2016. Intermediation in private equity: The role
of placement agents. Working paper, University of Oregon.
Cejnek, G., Franz, R., Stoughton, N.M., 2017. An integrated model of university endowments.
Working paper, WU Vienna University.
Collett, D., Lizieri, C., Ward, C., 2003. Timing and holding periods in institutional real estate.
Real Estate Economics, 31, 205-222.

45

Constantinides, G.M., 1986. Capital market equilibrium with transaction costs. Journal of
Political Economy, 94, 842-862.
Cornelli, F., Karakas, O., 2008. Private equity and corporate governance: Do LBOs have
more effective boards? Working paper, London Business School.
Davis, M.H.A., Norman, A.R., 1990. Portfolio selection with transaction costs. Mathematics
of Operations Research, 15, 676-713.
Dimmock, S.G., 2012. Background risk and university endowment funds. Review of Economics
and Statistics, 94, 789-799.
Duffie, D., Epstein, L.G., 1992. Stochastic differential utility. Econometrica, 60, 353-394.
Dumas, B., 1991. Super contact and related optimality conditions. Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Controls, 15, 675-685.
Elton, E.J., Gruber, M.J., 2004. Optimum centralized portfolio construction with decentralized portfolio management. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39, 481-494
Epstein, L.G., Zin, S.E., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of
consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica, 57, 937-969.
Ewens, M., Jones, C.M., Rhodes-Kropf, M., 2013. The price of diversifiable risk in venture
capital and private equity. Review of Financial Studies, 26, 1853-1889.
Franzoni, F., Nowak, E., Phalippou, L., 2012. Private equity performance and liquidity risk.
Journal of Finance, 67, 2341-2373.
Getmansky, M., Liang, B., Schwarz, C., Wermers, R., 2015. Share restrictions and investor
flows in the hedge fund industry. Working paper, University of Massachusetts.
Getmansky, M., Lo, A.W., Makarov, I., 2004. An econometric model of serial correlation and
illiquidity in hedge fund returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 74, 529-609.
Gilbert, T., Hrdlicka, C., 2015. Why are university endowments large and risky? Review of
Financial Studies, 28, 2643-2686.
Grossman, S.J., Laroque, G., 1990. Asset pricing and optimal portfolio choice in the presence
of illiquid durable consumption goods. Econometrica, 58, 25-51.
Hayes, M., Primbs, J.A., Chiquoine, B., 2015. A penalty cost approach to strategic asset
allocation with illiquid asset classes. Journal of Portfolio Management, 41, 33-41.
Kahl, M., Liu, J., Longstaff, F.A., 2003. Paper millionaires: How valuable is stock to a
stockholder who is restricted from selling it? Journal of Financial Economics, 67, 385410.

46

Kaplan, S.N., Strömberg, P., 2009. Leveraged buyouts and private equity. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 23, 121-146.
Kleymenova, A., Talmor, E., Vasvari, F.P., 2012. Liquidity in the secondaries private equity
market. Working paper, London Business School.
Kreps, D. M., and E. L. Porteus., 1978. Temporal resolution of uncertainty and dynamic
choice theory. Econometrica, 46, 185-200.
Leibowitz, M.L., Bova, A., Hammond, P.B., 2010. The endowment model of investing: Return,
risk, and diversification. Hobokon, NJ, John Wiley & Sons.
Lerner, J., Schoar, A., Wang, J., 2008. Secrets of the academy: The drivers of university
endowment success. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22, 207-222.
Lo, A.W., Mamaysky, H., Wang, J., 2004. Asset prices and trading volume under fixed
transaction costs. Journal of Political Economy, 112, 1054-1090.
Longstaff, F.A., 2009. Portfolio claustrophobia: Asset pricing in markets with illiquid assets.
American Economic Review, 99, 1119-1144.
Markowitz, H.M., 1952. Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance, 7, 77-91.
Merton, R.C., 1969. Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time case.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 51, 247-257.
Merton, R.C., 1971. Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model.
Journal of Economic Theory, 3, 373-413.
Merton, R.C., 1992. Optimal investment strategies of university endowment funds. In Continuous Time Finance. ed. R.C. Merton, 649-674. Malden, MA, Blackwell.
Metrick, A., Yasuda, A., 2010. The economics of private equity funds. Review of Financial
Studies, 23, 2303-2341.
Metrick, A., Yasuda, A., 2011. Venture capital and other private equity: A survey. European
Financial Management, 17, 619-654.
Nadauld, T.D., Sensoy, B.A., Vorkink, K., Weisbach, M.S., 2019. The liquidity cost of private
equity investments: Evidence from secondary market transactions. Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Newell, G., Eves, C., 2009. The role of U.S. timberland in real estate portfolios. Journal of
Real Estate Portfolio Management, 15, 95-106.
Pedersen, N., Page, S., He, F., 2014. Asset allocation: Risk models for alternative investments.
Financial Analysts Journal, 70, 34-45.

47

Ramadorai, T., 2012. The secondary market for hedge funds and the closed hedge fund
premium. Journal of Finance, 67, 479-512.
Rikato, M., Berk, A.S., 2015. Costliness of placement agents. Journal of Financial Services
Research, 48, 263-287.
Robinson, D.T., Sensoy, B.A. 2016. Cyclicality, performance measurement, and cash flow
liquidity in private equity. Journal of Financial Economics, 122, 521-543.
Roll, R., 1977. A critique of the asset pricing theory’s tests Part I: On past and potential
testability of the theory. Journal of Financial Economics, 4, 129-176.
Rose, P., Seligman, J., 2016. Are alternative investments prudent? Public sector pension use
and fiduciary duty. Journal of Alternative Investments, 18, 5-20.
Sadka, R., 2010. Liquidity risk and the cross-section of hedge-fund returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 98, 54-71.
Samuelson, P.A., 1969. Lifetime portfolio selection by dynamic stochastic programming. Review of Economics and Statistics, 51, 239-246.
Sedlacek, V.O., Jarvis, W.F. 2010. Endowment spending: Building a stronger policy framework. Commonfund Institute White Paper
Sharpe, W.F., 1981. Decentralized investment management. Journal of Finance, 36, 217-234.
Sorensen, M., Wang, N., Yang, J., 2014. Valuing private equity. Review of Financial Studies,
27, 1977-2021.
Swensen, D.F., 2000. Pioneering portfolio management: An unconventional approach to institutional investing. New York, NY, The Free Press.
Swensen, D.F., 2005. Unconventional success: A fundamental approach to personal investment. New York, NY, The Free Press.
Takahashi, D., Alexander, D., 2002. Illiquid alternative asset fund modeling. Journal of
Portfolio Management, 28, 90-100.
Vayanos, D., 1998. Transaction costs and asset prices: A dynamic equilibrium model. Review
of Financial Studies, 11, 1-58.
Wang, C., Wang, N., Yang, J., 2012, A unified model of entrepreneurship dynamics. Journal
of Financial Economics, 106, 1-23.
Weil, P., 1990, Nonexpected utility in macroeconomics. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105,
29-42.

48

