                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DE FACTO OR DE JURE? ETHNIC DIFFERENCES IN QUIT RESPONSES TO
          LEGAL PROTECTIONS OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES

                                       Jenny Williams
                                    Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
                                        Rosanna Smart

                                      Working Paper 25555
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25555


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2019




The authors thank Shannon Ward who set up the data used in this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jenny Williams, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, and Rosanna Smart. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
De Facto or De Jure? Ethnic Differences in Quit Responses to Legal Protections of Medical
Marijuana Dispensaries
Jenny Williams, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, and Rosanna Smart
NBER Working Paper No. 25555
February 2019
JEL No. H75,I18,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the impact of legal medical marijuana markets on the decision to quit
marijuana use, distinguishing between de jure legalization, in which dispensaries are legally
protected, and de facto legalization, where dispensaries operate in the absence of laws protecting
them. Geographic and temporal variation in the presence of de facto and de jure legalized markets
serve to identify their impact on quitting. Although we find little robust evidence that quitting by
females is impacted by either the presence or protection of retail medical marijuana dispensaries,
our results reveal significant, and ethnically differentiated responses by males. Minority males are
found to delay quitting in response to legal protection of dispensaries, while white males delay
quitting in response to operating dispensaries. This behavior is consistent with racial and ethnic
differences in the risks of arrest for simple marijuana offences, particularly for black males.


Jenny Williams                                   Rosanna Smart
Department of Economics                          RAND Corporation
University of Melbourne VIC 3010                 1776 Main Street
Australia                                        Santa Monica, CA 90407
and IZA                                          rsmart@rand.org
jenny@unimelb.edu.au

Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
pacula@rand.org
1        Introduction
The marijuana policy landscape is changing rapidly both in the United States and abroad. Despite
a federal prohibition against marijuana in the United States, ten states have passed laws allowing
commercial recreational marijuana markets to exist, and the nation’s capital, Washington DC, has
passed a law legalizing growing and possession for personal use. Several more states are considering
similar legal changes either legislatively or through ballot initiatives. The relevance of these state
laws is more than just symbolic, as they have encouraged other jurisdictions to do the same, with
Uruguay (2013), Jamaica (2015), and most recently Canada (2017) all passing legislation enabling
legal recreational marijuana markets (Kilmer and Pacula, 2017).
        While there is a clear expectation that legalization will reduce the criminal justice costs of
prohibition and the racial disparities in enforcement and incarceration associated with it (Golub
et al., 2007; Nguyen and Reuter, 2012; Nicosia et al., 2017), there is considerable speculation about
the impact of legal marijuana markets on recreational marijuana use and public health. As it is
too early to evaluate the impact of these legal changes on recreational markets, many have tried to
infer implications based on the state medical marijuana policy experiments. Substantial attention
has been given to impacts of medical marijuana laws on static measures of recreational use, such as
prevalence rates and frequency of use (Anderson et al., 2013, 2015; Hasin et al., 2015; Pacula et al.,
2015; Wen et al., 2015). This body of work has shown that medical marijuana laws have spill-over
effects on recreational markets, increasing adult recreational marijuana use. What remains unclear,
however, is the extent to which the increase in marijuana use induced by medical marijuana laws is
a result of decreased quitting among adult marijuana users, or an increase in uptake by this group.
Distinguishing between impacts on uptake and quitting is necessary for quantifying the full effect
of legal marijuana markets. And given the evidence from the tobacco literature, it is unlikely that
those making decisions about initiating and those who are deciding whether to quit respond to
policies in the same way (DeCicca et al., 2008; Lillard et al., 2013).
        This study contributes to the literature in three key ways. First, our analyses extend beyond
static measures of marijuana use by examining quitting behavior to demonstrate how the pres-
ence of legal markets for marijuana, whether legally protected are not, influences the duration of
marijuana use. The duration of marijuana use is an outcome of considerable policy importance
because it is long term use that is more strongly associated with adverse health and social impacts,
including anxiety and depression, cardiovascular disease, respiratory problems, and reduced edu-
cational attainment (Anderson et al., 2013; Hall, 2015; Marie and Zölitz, 2017; McCaffrey et al.,
2010; Moore et al., 2007; van Ours and Williams, 2009; Van Ours and Williams, 2011, 2012).1
    1
    The impact of medical marijuana policies on marijuana uptake is also an area that deserves study. We are unable
to pursue this issue in this paper because our analysis is based in the NLSY97, a cohort born over the period 1980-84,


                                                          2
Second, we describe how supply-side regulations of medical marijuana laws have evolved to create
differential variation in on-the-ground access to retail markets for marijuana (de facto legalization
of dispensaries) versus state legal protections for obtaining marijuana through retail channels (de
jure legalization of dispensaries). Finally, we are the first to demonstrate the differential impact of
de facto and de jure allowances for marijuana dispensaries across different racial/ethnic groups.
    To estimate the impact of the medical marijuana retail environment on quitting, we link infor-
mation on operating medical marijuana dispensaries and laws protecting them to self-reported lon-
gitudinal data on marijuana use from the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Geographic
and temporal variation in the presence of operating dispensaries and laws protecting dispensaries
serve to identify the impacts of these dimensions of the legal marijuana market on quitting behav-
ior. Our results reveal no evidence that either the presence or legal protection of medical marijuana
dispensaries impacts the decision to quit marijuana assuming homogeneous treatment effects.
    However, a homogeneous treatment effect approach to studying the impact of legalized mari-
juana markets on quitting may mask important differences across race/ethnicity and gender, driven
by differing costs under prohibition (MacCoun et al., 2009). For example, marijuana’s criminal sta-
tus is routinely used to justify searching individuals during a pretextual stop (Kreit, 2016).2 This
practice is disproportionately applied to blacks and Hispanics, who are in turn disproportionately
arrested and convicted for marijuana possession and sales offenses (Golub et al., 2007; Nguyen and
Reuter, 2012; Ramchand et al., 2006), with the most pronounced disparities for black males (Ram-
chand et al., 2006).3 The greater risk of arrest under criminalization for minority males suggests
that their quitting behavior may be more responsive to legal protection of marijuana markets.
    Allowing for heterogenous effects across race/ethnicity and gender reveals important differences
in quitting responses to de facto and de jure legal markets for marijuana. Non-Hispanic white males
delay quitting in response to the presence of operating retail dispensaries (de facto legalization),
black males respond to the legal protection of retail dispensaries (de jure legalization), and Hispanic
males delay quitting in response to both. We find little robust evidence that quitting by females
responds to either the presence or protection of retail medical marijuana dispensaries. We conclude
that the decision to quit using marijuana among men, and therefore the duration of use, is sensitive
to whether de facto legal markets are operating. However, it is the legal protection of markets,
similar to the protection we are now observing for recreational markets, that will lead to further
and past the age when uptake generally occurs when the relevant marijuana policies are introduced. For example,
the NLSY97 cohort are 21-25 when the first law protecting medical marijuana dispensaries is introduced in 2005.
   2
     Even if the motivation for police to stop and search an individual is not related to marijuana offenses, and the
resulting arrest is not for a marijuana offense, appealing to suspicions about marijuana are sufficient to justify the
stop and search.
   3
     Differential arrest risk by sex and race/ethnicity has also been documented in the longitudinal data used for the
current study (NLSY97), with estimates showing significantly higher cumulative prevalence of arrest by age 18 and
by age 23 among males relative to females, and among black males relative to whites males (Brame et al., 2014).


                                                          3
increases in duration of use for minorities, reflecting the higher costs they faced under prohibition.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information on
the evolution of medical marijuana laws and medical marijuana dispensaries in the United States.
Section 3 describes the data used in the empirical analyses and Section 4 outlines the empirical
framework for estimating the effects of medical marijuana laws on the marijuana cessation decision.
Our results are presented in Section 5, and Section 6 concludes.


2        Background on Medical Marijuana Laws and Dispensaries
State medical marijuana laws differ along a variety of dimensions, which have been discussed at
length in several prior studies (Bradford and Bradford, 2018; Klieger et al., 2017; Pacula et al.,
2015; Pacula and Smart, 2017; Sabia and Nguyen, 2018; Wen et al., 2015). While little is known
about the extent to which many of these dimensions are associated with access by recreational
users (Pacula et al., 2015; Smart, 2016), those related to dispensaries have received the greatest
research attention given their demonstrated association with changes in prices, potency and market
size (Anderson et al., 2013; Sevigny et al., 2014; Smart, 2016). Given the clearer conceptual and
empirical links between medical marijuana dispensary provisions and the supply of marijuana to
both medical and recreational markets, we focus our discussion and empirical analyses on the
presence and legal protections of this supply-side aspect of medical marijuana policy.


2.1       Evolution of Medical Marijuana Laws

Modern medical marijuana laws (MMLs), which provide explicit legal protections to patients and
their caregivers for possession and use of marijuana for specific medical conditions, first emerged
in 1996 with the passage of California’s medical marijuana ballot initiative (Proposition 215). By
1999, four more states (Oregon, Washington, Alaska, and Maine) had followed suit, passing laws
through similar ballot initiatives. These early MMLs provide patients and their caregivers legal
protection from state prosecution for possessing and using marijuana for certain medical conditions
as specified in the laws, and also protected doctors from legal state sanctions for discussing the
medicinal use of marijuana with their patients.4 Early state initiatives were purposefully vague
regarding an explicit supply source for the marijuana, due to concerns about a response from the
federal government which retained its prohibition (Pertwee, 2014). To the extent that any source
    4
    These MMLs differed from previous state efforts in the mid-1970’s and 1980’s to provide legal protections for the
medicinal use of marijuana by stating that a patient require a doctor’s “recommendation” as opposed to “prescription”
to qualify for medical marijuana, a semantic distinction designed to protect physicians from federal sanctions, such as
revocation of their license to prescribe medicines (Pacula et al., 2002), and hence allow patients to receive state-legal
protections for medicinal marijuana use.



                                                           4
of supply was specified in these early laws, they typically allowed for home cultivation by patients
and/or their caregivers, not dispensaries or group cultivation cooperatives (Pacula et al., 2002).5
       The ambiguity of many of these early laws, combined with explicit federal opposition to state
efforts toward liberalizing medical marijuana (Claiborne, 1997; Law, 2001; Newbern, 2000; Pertwee,
2014; Tiersky, 1998), created an environment wherein actual legal protections afforded by MMLs
may have been unclear to many of the potential actors involved, including physicians, patients, and
suppliers.6 While dispensaries and group cultivation cooperatives were not provided de jure legal
protections under early state MMLs, the statutory language was ambiguous enough in California,
Colorado and Montana to effectively permit the de facto operation of largely unregulated large-scale
production, and medical marijuana dispensaries soon began to sprout up in these states.
       The mid-2000s saw a shift toward MMLs with more precise regulatory language regarding supply
sources, but continued threats of federal prosecution and federal raids of medical marijuana pro-
duction sites remained an impediment to the development of regulated state systems (Mikos, 2009;
Vickovic, 2011). Conflict and lawsuits in California regarding the legitimacy of group cooperatives
selling through retail outlets led to the passage of S.B. 420 in 2003, which amended California’a
initial MML to explicitly allow for cooperative cultivation and sale to members. However, regula-
tory discretion of these newly protected legal entities was left to local governments, so as to keep
the state out of the crosshairs of the Federal government. While New Mexico became the first state
to enact a medical marijuana law that established legal provisions for state-licensed dispensaries in
its July 2007 initial legislation (S.B. 523), threats of federal prosecution led to significant delays in
licensing (Baker, 2007).
       In 2009, the uncertainty about the federal government’s response to state experimentation with
legal medical marijuana was seemingly resolved. Shortly following the inauguration of President
Barack Obama, Attorney General Eric Holder issued a statement that federal authorities would
cease interfering with medical marijuana dispensaries operating in compliance with state law (John-
son and Lewis, 2009). On October 19, 2009, Deputy Attorney General David Ogden formalized this
policy of federal non-enforcement with a memorandum stating that federal prosecutors “should not
focus federal resources on individuals who are in clear and unambiguous compliance with existing
   5
     States that enabled home cultivation typically set a maximum allowable number of plants that could be cultivated
(usually three mature plants), in order to reduce the potential risk patients might face if targeted by the federal
government. Exceptions are Washington and California. Washington imposed a limit of a 60-day supply, without
specifying a maximum number of plants. California was the only state that did not specify any limit (Pacula et al.,
2002). In 2000, Hawaii became the first state to enact a medical marijuana law through its state legislature, but it
too specified home cultivation with strict limits on the number of plants as the only source of supply.
   6
     For instance, the month following California’s passage of Proposition 215, then drug-czar Barry McCaffrey and
Attorney General Janet Reno issued statements threatening to suspend the licenses of physicians who recommended
marijuana to patients and to render their clinics ineligible for Medicare and Medicaid funding (Annas, 1997; Newbern,
2000). While the enforceability of these federal threats was ruled against with the September 2000 decision in Conant
v. McCaffrey, the appeals process continued until October 2003 (Kasprak, 2004).


                                                         5
state laws providing for the medical use of marijuana” (Ogden, 2009, p. 1-2). State MMLs passed
following this announcement have provided much more explicit and comprehensive state regulation
and oversight of the supply chain, including oversight of cultivation, dispensaries and labeling of
cannabis-derived products.7 Some states that passed early laws subsequently modified their policies
after the Ogden memo, providing more explicit protection and regulation of retail dispensaries for
medical marijuana (e.g., Colorado in 2010).


2.2      Medical Marijuana Laws and Dispensaries Today

As of December 2018, thirty-three states and the District of Columbia had medical marijuana laws
in effect, and the number continues to grow each year. All of these states, except Alaska, allow
for legally protected dispensaries (see Table 1 for state laws in effect through 2017).8 Only 22 out
of the 29 jurisdictions with medical marijuana laws in effect in 2017 had legal dispensaries that
were actually open and operating as of the end of 2017, even though every state adopting a new
medical marijuana law since 2010 has included state-licensed dispensaries as a legal form of supply
in the initiating legislation. The rules and regulation surrounding the licensing of retail sale and
distribution of medical marijuana has become more complex and burdensome. For example, the
vast majority of states today regulate dispensary density, location and product source, while nearly
half also regulate stocking levels (Klieger et al., 2017). Structural requirements for dispensaries,
cultivators, and processors are also imposed, with regulations related to safety and security, ven-
tilation systems, hand washing stations, and even disposal. The development of these additional
licensing requirements and regulations imposed on the cultivation, distribution and retail sale of
medical marijuana have caused there to be significant lag times between the point at which a state
adopts an MML allowing for dispensaries and the dispensaries actually opening, as indicated in
Table 1. This stands in stark contrast to states that adopted their initial medical marijuana law
prior to 2010.
       Today, legal protections provided to patients and suppliers through MMLs differ along a vari-
ety of other dimensions as well, including covered illnesses, registration requirements, cultivation
allowances and rules, product safety and licensing (Klieger et al., 2017). The specific privileges and
requirements related to each of these dimensions have also varied widely across states and even
within states over time. This substantial heterogeneity in approaches helps to explain why studies
examining the impact of simple dichotomous measures of state medical marijuana laws on various
   7
      Newly adopted MMLs have also trended toward greater consistency with traditional medical care and phar-
maceutical regulations, requiring testing and labeling of marijuana cannabinoid profiles in addition to a bona-fide
clinical doctor-patient relationship requiring the ongoing management of the patient’s medical condition (Williams
et al., 2016).
    8
      Alaska legalized recreational cannabis in 2014 allowing sale through retail stores for any purpose, at which point
medical dispensaries would be included.


                                                           6
outcomes at different points of time yield inconsistent and contradictory results (Anderson et al.,
2013; Pacula et al., 2015; Pacula and Smart, 2017; Wen et al., 2015).


2.3      Medical Marijuana Retail Markets and the Cost of Marijuana Use

Medical marijuana retail markets, and MMLs more generally, influence the cost of recreational
marijuana use through two broad channels: 1) reducing its monetary price by lowering the legal
risk faced by now legitimate medical suppliers bringing the drug to market, which reduces their
production costs (Anderson et al., 2013; Hansen et al., 2017; Sevigny et al., 2014), and 2) reducing
the non-pecuniary costs associated with obtaining marijuana, including legal risks and search costs.
This second point warrants further explanation of how legal protections provided to medical users
might be conferred on recreational users.
       In principle, MMLs that provide legal protections from state criminal prosecution for the pos-
session and use of specified quantities of marijuana should only benefit a limited set of individuals
who qualify as medical marijuana patients.9 However, these policies likely benefit recreational users
as well. This is because early state laws tended to be broadly permissive in what constituted a
qualifying condition, did not require a bona fide relationship between recommending physician and
patient, and did not mandate that medical marijuana patients register with the state in order to
receive legal protections (Mikos, 2009).10 The breadth of legal protections granted to MMLs pa-
tients without requirements for state registries make it difficult for law enforcement to differentiate
medical users from recreational users. Further, the presence of medical dispensaries, whether legally
protected or not, reduces the search costs associated with obtaining the product (Galenianos et al.,
2012; Jacobi and Sovinsky, 2016; Pacula et al., 2010). Recent work by Sabia and Nguyen (2018)
supports the conclusion that at least some of the increase in use associated wtih medical marijuana
laws on adult males comes from an increase in recreational use among males under the age of 30.
       The reduction in the risk associated with purchasing and using marijuana when MMLs are in
place, when dispensaries are legally protected, and when they operate but without protection, is
likely to vary across groups depending on the expected risks they faced under a regime of marijuana
prohibition (MacCoun et al., 2009). There is a well-established literature showing that blacks
and Hispanics are disproportionately arrested and convicted, particularly in cases where there is
greater discretion for police in choosing suspects or for courts in determining incarceration and
   9
     Individuals who use marijuana solely for medical purposes represent a tiny fraction of marijuana users. While
12.1% of the U.S. adult population report using marijuana for recreational purposes, only 0.8% report using marijuana
for medicinal purposes only (Compton et al., 2017).
  10
     The costs of becoming a legal medical marijuana patient include the monetary value of any patient registration
fee in states that mandate registration, as well as the time costs of finding a doctor who will provide certification
that the individual has a qualifying condition that could benefit from marijuana use. However, particularly when
examining MMLs passed during this study’s timeframe up to 2011, we anticipate these costs to be negligible.


                                                         7
sentencing (Geller and Fagan, 2010; Goel et al., 2016; Gross and Barnes, 2002; Mustard, 2001).
This has been shown specifically for marijuana possession and sales offenses (Golub et al., 2007;
Nguyen and Reuter, 2012; Ramchand et al., 2006), with the most pronounced disparities for black
males (Ramchand et al., 2006).11 Similarly, the impact of MMLs, operating dispensaries, and laws
protecting dispensaries may also differentially impact females compared to males given experimental
evidence showing females exhibit greater risk aversion and greater sensitivity to social cues than
their male counterparts (Croson and Gneezy, 2009; Eckel and Grossman, 2008).
         In light of these findings in the literature, we assume throughout the subsequent discussion that
medical marijuana policies reduce legal risks and access costs to all potential marijuana users, both
recreational and medical, allbeit to varying degrees for users from different race/ethnic groups and
genders. It is this broader impact of medical marijuana policies, particularly those related to the
operation and legal protection of dispensaries, on marijuana users that we seek to understand.


3         Data
Our analysis combines individual histories on marijuana use collected longitudinally in the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97) with state level information on the operating of
medical marijuana dispensaries, general medical marijuana laws and laws providing legal protection
to medical marijuana dispensaries.


3.1        NLSY97

The NLSY97 is a longitudinal survey representative of American youths who were 12–16 years
old as of 31 December 1996. The first wave of the survey, fielded in 1997 and 1998, collected
information on 8,984 individuals (4,599 males and 4,385 females).12 Respondents were subsequently
interviewed annually until wave 15, fielded in 2011.13 We use data from the first 15 waves of the
NLSY97, with each of these waves collecting detailed information on marijuana use, including
retrospective information on age at first use, which is collected in wave 1.14 Making use of both
    11
      Differential arrest risk by sex and race/ethnicity has also been documented in the longitudinal data used for the
current study (NLSY97), with estimates showing significantly higher cumulative prevalence of arrest by age 18 and
by age 23 among males relative to females, and among black males relative to whites males (Brame et al., 2014).
   12
      Of the 8,984 originally surveyed, 6,748 composed a representative cross-sectional sample and 2,236 compose a
supplement that over-sampled Hispanics and blacks who were born in the same time period as the representative
sample. We use both in our analysis.
   13
      The retention rate for wave 15 is 85.6%. The NLSY97 data has continued beyond 2011. However, the next wave
of the survey is 2013 —two years later —and does not include questions on marijuana or illicit drug use. We therefore
stop our analysis in 2011.
   14
      The information used in this paper was reported by the youth. The only exception is parental characteristics
which were reported by the youths’ parents in 1997.




                                                          8
the retrospective and annually collected data allows us to construct marijuana use histories for this
large, representative sample covering the period 1990-2011.15


3.2    Marijuana Use Histories and the Duration of Use

Of the 8,984 interviewed in wave 1, we observe information on whether or not marijuana is used
in at least one round of the survey for 8,922 individuals (4,558 males and 4,364 females). The
duration of each person’s marijuana use is calculated from the age of first use and the age of last
use. The age at first use is self-reported for those who report having ever used marijuana in wave
1. For individuals who do not report using in wave 1, the age at first use is based on information
provided in subsequent waves on whether the respondent had used marijuana since the date of
the last interview (SDLI). The age of last use is defined as the age at the survey in which the
respondent last reported using marijuana. Duration of use is calculated using information on the
age at which the respondent last reported marijuana use combined with the age at first use. For
those individuals who are not observed to quit use, their duration of marijuana use is censored at
the age at which they were last surveyed (and reported marijuana use).


3.3    The Medical Marijuana Retail Environment

As our interest in this paper is on the decision to quit use and previous research in the alcohol
and tobacco literature demonstrate the importance of retail outlets on uptake and quitting (Chen
et al., 2010; Halonen et al., 2013; Reitzel et al., 2011), we focus here on two specific aspects of state
medical marijuana policy environments: operating dispensaries, measured by an indicator equal
to one for states in months and years in which a dispensary system is known to operate even if
it is not legally protected, and legal protection for medical marijuana dispensaries, measured by
an indicator equal to one for states that legally protects dispensaries to sell marijuana to patients
within the state (based on month and year of the law’s effective date). In some states (CA, CO,
MT and WA) dispensary systems operated in specific locations prior to any legal authorization
- these are our examples of de facto markets. In other states (NM, NY, MA) these dispensary
systems took years to put in place and open even after the laws providing legal protections were
passed. Those states with laws explicitly allowing retail dispensaries to operate are considered de
jure markets. In addition, we account for whether states have passed any medical marijuana law
using a dichotomous indicator which is set equal to one in month-years when a given state has an
effective policy providing legal protection to patients who use marijuana for medicinal purposes.
  15
    The interviews are conducted using a computer-assisted personal interview instrument, administered by an inter-
viewer with a laptop computer. The mode of interview is in person or by telephone. When interviews were conducted
in person, the information on drug use was self-administered. Personal interviews constitute the bulk of data.



                                                        9
       Information on state medical marijuana laws, including legal protections of dispensaries, were
collected through original legal research of state statutes and regulations conducted under a series of
projects funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse and the Robert Wood Johnston Founda-
tion (Chriqui et al., 2002; Pacula et al., 2002, 2015). The dates at which states provided these legal
protections to patients and their caregivers, as well the dates when legal protections were provided
to dispensaries, are shown in Table 1. Detailed information on the process for identifying whether
a state legally provides a patient access to marijuana for medicinal purposes or protects retail med-
ical marijuana dispensaries is discussed in Powell et al. (2018). As several state policies presented
in Table 1 were adopted outside of the NLSY sample period we are evaluating (1997-2011), we
indicate those state policies which provide variation for identification using an asterisk.
       As mentioned in Section 2, several states that adopted early medical marijuana laws did not
provide explicit legal protection to dispensaries, yet dispensaries were known to operate. We identi-
fied dates for dispensaries operating in these states through an extensive web search.16 Active dates
were determined as the earliest month and year in which an open dispensary was either discussed
or advertised in a mainstream news outlet (e.g., local TV news agency, website or newspaper).
These are reported in Table 1.
       The marijuana policy variables are merged onto individual’s marijuana use histories on the basis
of the state in which they live. Critical to our approach is measuring the policy environment in
place during the recall period over which survey respondents are deciding whether to quit marijuana
use. Noting that at each survey wave, individuals report on their use of marijuana “since the last
interview” as well as their current residential location, the relevant policy regime will be the regime
in place just prior at the start of the survey wave’s reporting period, which is the day of the “last
interview.”


3.4      Measurement Issues

A potential threat to the reliable estimation of the causal effects of operating dispensaries and laws
protecting them is that of measurement error in the reporting of marijuana use. Since our analysis is
based on longitudinal data which records annual information on respondents use of marijuana, the
possibility that errors are made in accurately remembering this information is minimized. Similarly,
the regular questioning of NLSY97 respondents regarding marijuana use from relatively early ages
  16
    The web search targeted two primary sources: (1) webpages produced by marijuana advocacy groups either
informing patients of where to get marijuana or linking to dispensary webpages, such as Weedmaps, the National
Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (www.norml.org), Marijuana Policy Project (www.mpp.org); and
(2) key word searches of old local newspapers and weekly circulars, using terms such as “medical marijuana” and
“dispensary” or “cooperative.” Three separate policy analysts independently conducted these searches and then
convened to discuss consistency in their findings.




                                                      10
also insures against a failure to report experimental use.17
       A second potential source of measurement error arises in matching state level information on
the medical marijuana retail environment to the respondent’s state of residence at each age that
the respondent is at risk of quitting marijuana use. However, as we observe respondents’ state of
residence at each interview, we are able to capture movements across state borders, mitigating the
risk of measurement error with respect to the medical marijuana retail regime faced when making
decisions regarding quitting. Of course, this raises the question of whether individuals move across
state borders in order to access retail marijuana markets. We examine this issue in a sensitivity
analysis.


3.5      Descriptive Statistics

Table 2 provides information on marijuana use by gender and race/ethnicity. In terms of gender,
60% of males and 53% of females report using marijuana and amongst those who have ever used,
males and females report a similar age at first use; 16.6 years for males and 16.8 for females. In
addition to being more likely to report using marijuana, males are also less likely to be observed to
quit use, with 65% of males quitting compared to 72% of females. Conditional on quitting, males
and females quit at similar ages having used for similar durations; on average males are 20.8 years
old when they quit, having used for 5.1 years and females are on average 20.9 when they quit,
having used for 4.9 years.
       In terms of race and ethnicity, Table 2 shows that amongst females, non-Hispanic white females
are more likely to report ever using marijuana than black or Hispanic females (60% of non-Hispanic
white females compared to 44% of black and 48% of Hispanic females). Non-Hispanic white and
black females are less likely to quit than Hispanic females, with 71% of non-Hispanic white and black
females quitting compared to 75% of Hispanic females. Amongst those who use, black females tend
to start later than non-Hispanic white and Hispanic females, and amongst those who quit Hispanic
females tend to quit at younger ages. As a result, non-Hispanic white females have the longest
average duration of use at 5.3 years, and black females have the shortest, at 4.3 years.
       Amongst males, non-Hispanic white males and black males have similar rates of marijuana use
(61 and 62% respectively), while Hispanic males are less likely to report use (57%). Black and
Hispanic males are more likely than non-Hispanic white males to quit marijuana use, with quit
  17
     Harrison et al. (2007) investigate the validity of self-reported drug use information in a general population survey
in the US by comparing the self-reports of respondents with the results of drug tests of urine specimens. For marijuana,
93% of individuals self-reported use in the past 3 days agreed with their urine sample, 5.2% of those who reported no
use tested positive and 1.8% reported using and tested negative. The authors also investigates whether there were
differences in truthfulness of self-reports by age, comparing 12–17 year olds with those aged 18–25. Overall, both
age-groups reported their drug use accurately, with 3% under-reporting 3 day use amongst 12-17 year olds compared
to 8% under-reporting 3 day use 18-25 year olds.


                                                           11
rates for black and Hispanic males of 67 and 68% respectively, compared to 62% for non-Hispanic
white males. Among those who ever use, Non-Hispanic white males are slightly younger than their
minority peers when they start marijuana use and, among those who quit, they are slightly older
when they quit. As a consequence, non-Hispanic white males tend to use for longer than minority
males, with white males using for 5.3 years on average compared to 4.8 and 4.5 for black and
Hispanic males, respectively.
       In addition to very detailed information on marijuana use, the NLSY97 provides rich information
on the respondents and the households in which they grow up that we control for in our analysis.
Sample averages for the control variables for the full sample and for the sub-sample of marijuana
users is shown in Appendix Table A.1 and Appendix Table A.2 respectively. These tables report
the sample means for the pooled sample as well as by gender and race/ethnicity.


3.6      Stylized facts

3.6.1      Quitting Marijuana Use

Figure 1 presents graphs of the hazard rate of quitting marijuana use and the cumulative quit rate
at each duration of use (measured in years) for females (left graph) and males (right graph), by
race/ethnicity. The hazard of quitting marijuana use is defined as the probability of quitting use at
each duration of use conditional on not having already quit. This is displayed graphically in Panel
A of Figure 1. The cumulative quit rate, defined as the proportion of marijuana users who have
quit use at each duration of use, is shown in the graphs in Panel B.18
       There are three main points to take from Figure 1. First, the hazard of quitting has a common
pattern across gender and race/ethnicity; it spikes after the first year of use, and is subsequently
relatively constant.19 Second, within gender, the spike in quitting after the first year of use is
greater for minorities than for non-Hispanic whites, and across gender the spike in quitting after
the first year of use is greater for females than males. The final point to take from Figure 1 is that,
for both females and males, the cumulative quit rate (which shows the proportion who have quit) is
higher at each duration of use for minorities than for non-Hispanic whites, although the difference
is greater amongst males.


3.6.2      Medical Marijuana Dispensaries and Quitting Marijuana Use

Table 3 shows the average rate of quitting marijuana use by whether individuals live in a state
that has MMLs, operating dispensaries, or legal protection for dispensaries. This information is
  18
     Those who have not quit when they exit the sample are considered to have a right censored duration of use.
  19
     The spike of quitting at one year of use suggests that a large proportion of individuals experiment with marijuana
for a short time only.


                                                          12
provided for the full sample and by gender. For the full sample, and for each gender, the average
quit rate is also provided by race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic white versus minorities, defined as black
or Hispanic).
    From Table 3 it is evident that the quit rate is generally lower in states in which the MM
environment is more liberal. For example, non-Hispanic white males living in a state with operating
medical marijuana dispensaries are, on average, 1.60 percentage points less likely to quit compared
to non-Hispanic white males living in a state without operating dispensaries (7.92% compared to
9.52%), and minority males are 1.57 percentage points less likely to quit if they live in a state
that provides legal protection for dispensaries compared to minority males living in a state where
dispensaries are not legally protected (10.29% compared to 11.86%). Minority females are an
exception; the quit rate of minority females is in fact higher in states with more liberal MM
environments. For example, minority females living in a state with operating dispensaries are 1.95
percentage points more likely to quit, on average, compared to minority females living in a state
without operating dispensaries (14.94% compared to 12.99%).


4     Empirical Framework
We consider a framework in which marijuana users decide whether or not to quit at each duration
of use by comparing the costs and benefits of doing so. As discussed above, medical marijuana
retail markets, and related laws, impact this decision by reducing the monetary and non-pecuniary
costs associated with search time and legal risk of marijuana possession and use, which together
we will refer to as the total cost.
    The extent to which the medical marijuana environment impacts the total cost of marijuana
use may differ by gender, race or ethnicity. Minorities in general, and blacks in particular, may be
more sensitive to legal protections being extended to medical marijuana dispensaries given their
greater risk of arrest (Geller and Fagan, 2010; Nguyen and Reuter, 2012; Ramchand et al., 2006).
Similarly, sex differences in risk aversion and sensitivity to social cues (Croson and Gneezy, 2009;
Flynn et al., 1994) may also result in differential effects of the legal protection of medical marijuana
dispensaries on marijuana use across gender. We investigate these potential sources of heterogeneity
in our empirical analysis.


4.1   Hazard Model for Quitting Marijuana Use

Our baseline empirical strategy uses a difference-in-differences (DID) setup, exploiting state and
time variation in the operating of retail medical marijuana dispensaries and legal protections pro-
vided to them to estimate their impact on the decision to quit use. The usual framework for doing


                                                  13
so is based on an empirical model of the form

      yit = δs + γt + βM Mst + Xi0 θ + it                                                                          (1)

where yit is an indicator equal to one if individual i living in state s quits marijuana use in period
t, δs is a vector of state fixed effects, γt is a vector of year fixed effects, and M Mst is the vector
of policy variables (M1st , M2st , M3st ) where M1st is an indicator for general medical marijuana
law in place, (M2st ) is an indicator for operating dispensaries, and (M3st ) is an indicator for laws
explicitly protecting medical marijuana dispensaries. The vector of parameters of interest, (β),
identify the causal effect of retail medical marijuana markets under the parallel trends assumption.
As commonly done in the literature, the validity of the parallel trends assumption can be examined
using leads and lags of policy indicators. Doing so, the event study can be expressed as:


                          M
                          X
      yit = δs + γt +           β k M Mst+k + Xi0 θ + it                                                           (2)
                         k=−m


    Because the outcome that we are studying is the decision to quit marijuana use, and as shown in
Figure 1, a feature of quitting behaviour is that it exhibits duration dependence (and duration of use
may be censored), we adapt the standard DID framework to a duration setting (Bartik and Nelson,
2017; Williams and Bretteville-Jensen, 2014). To do so, we embed the DID setup of equation 1
into a proportional hazard model. However, as our analysis is based on a discrete time measure of
marijuana use (measured at each survey wave), we follow (Bartik and Nelson, 2017; Williams and
Bretteville-Jensen, 2014) who adopt the discrete time analogue of the proportional hazard model,
given by the complementary log-log hazard (clog-log), which has the following form:20

      ln(−ln(1 − hit (j))) = αj + δs + γt + βM Mst + Xi0 θ                                                          (3)

where the hazard hit (j) characterizes the probability that person i at time t quits marijuana use at
duration of use j given that they have not quit use at duration j − 1, and αj represents duration
dependence, which is modelled non-parametrically.21
    The interpretation of the (exponentiated) coefficients is in terms of hazard ratios and the analog
to the linear model’s difference-in-difference is the ratio of (hazard) ratios. For example, the
coefficient on the indicator for state s having a law protecting dispensaries in year t is interpreted
  20
     In effect, it estimates a continuous time proportional hazard model using data that is grouped into discrete
intervals.
  21
     Duration dependence is modelled as a step function, with indicators for durations of use of two years, three years,
etc up to 18 or more years of use. One year of use is the base category.


                                                          14
as the percentage change in the hazard of quitting marijuana use associated with a state adopting
legal protections for medical marijuana dispensaries between period t−1 and time period t, relative
to the change that occurs over the same period of time in a state which remains dispensary free.
This is measured by (exp(β3 ) − 1) ∗ 100, where β3 is the coefficient on the indicator for the state
having a law protecting medical marijuana dispensaries.
   In order for the vector of parameters, β is be interpreted as the causal impact of the medi-
cal marijuana retail environment on the hazard of quitting, the equivalent of the parallel trends
assumption from equation 1 must hold. The analogous assumption for our setting is that log
continuous-time quitting hazards evolved along parallel trends in states that did and did not have
operating or protected dispensaries (see Bartik and Nelson (2017)). To investigate this assumption,
we estimate event-time versions of our hazard model specifications by including lags and leads of
the policy variables, akin to the standard event study framework shown in equation 2. For example,
the duration model version of equation 2 is:


                                              M
                                              X
      ln(−ln(1 − hit (j))) = αj + δs + γt +          β k M Mst+k + Xi0 θ                              (4)
                                              k=−m


The interpretation of the event-time coefficient β3k , for example, is the ratio of the change in the
hazard of quitting in states with legal protection for dispensaries in the kth period after (or before
for k < 0) their law came into effect relative to states that do not provide legal protection for
medical marijuana dispensaries.
   The empirical setup presented above assumes that the effect of the medical marijuana retail
variables on the decision to quit marijuana use do not vary by individual characteristics. We relax
this assumption to allow for differences across gender by estimating the hazard model for quitting
separately over subsamples of females and males. We also wish to allow for differences within
gender across race/ethnicity. In order to maintain reasonable sample sizes for estimation, we allow
for differences for non-Hispanic whites and minorities (for both males and females) by interacting
the vector of state policy variables, M Mst , the state and year indicators, and all controls in Xist with
separate indicators for race/ethnicity is non-Hispanic white and race/ethnicity is minority (black
or Hispanic). We extend this approach to allow for differences for blacks and Hispanics separately
in our extended robustness analysis. All models are estimated using maximum likelihood, and we
report standard errors that are clustered at the state level.




                                                     15
5         Results

5.1        Baseline Results

Table 4 reports maximum likelihood coefficient estimates from the baseline DID model for quitting
marijuana use. We report specifications estimated over the full sample in column 1, and over
the female and male subsamples in columns 2 and 3, respectively. Panel A reports estimates for
specifications that assume homogeneous treatment effects with respect to race/ethnicity. In panel
B, we relax this assumption, allowing for the treatment effect for non-Hispanic whites to differ from
the treatment effect for minorities (defined as Hispanics and blacks).22
         As can be seen from Panel A of Table 4, the DID estimates based on the pooled sample
of females and males and assuming homogenous policy effects across non-Hispanic whites and
minorities provides no evidence that MMLs, operating dispensaries or laws protecting them impact
on the decision to quit marijuana use. However, the results from estimating this specification for
females and males separately suggest that there are differences across gender in the impact of the
policy environment on quitting marijuana use. While we are unable to detect any statistically
significant impact on females’ decision to quit use in response to any of the medical marijuana
policy variables, including the presence or legal protection of medical marijuana dispensaries, the
same is not true of males. We find that living in a state with operating retail medical marijuana
dispensaries reduces the hazard of quitting marijuana use amongst males by 20% (exp(-0.22)-1).
And while not reaching statistical significance at conventional levels, the presence of laws protecting
medical marijuana dispensaries is estimated to reduce the hazard of quitting marijuana use of males
by 10% (p-value=0.16). We find that living in a state in which dispensaries are both active and
protected reduces the likelihood of males quitting marijuana use by 28% at each duration of use, and
this effect is statistically significant (p-value = 0.003). The different findings for males and females
are not surprising in light of previous studies that find gender differences in the responsiveness of
substance use to changes in the policy environment (Nelson, 2014; Wen et al., 2015).
         Panel B of Table 4 demonstrates that imposing a homogeneous response across race/ethnicity
to the medical marijuana policy environment can also mask important differences between non-
Hispanic whites and minorities. Specifically we find that living is a state with operating dis-
pensaries reduces the hazard of quitting marijuana of non-Hispanic white males by around 28%
(= exp(−0.33 − 1)). While we we find no evidence that non-Hispanic white males’ decision to quit
marijuana use is impacted by living in a state that provides legal protection to medical marijuana
dispensaries, living in a state with a general MML increases their quit rate. Noting that states with
    22
    Note that the DID specification in panel B includes state by race/ethnicity, year by race/ethnicity, and demo-
graphic controls by race/ethnicity interaction terms.



                                                       16
operating dispensaries also have general MMLs, we find no net effect of living in a state with both
an MML and operating dispensaries for non-Hispanic white males (p-value=0.90). This is because
the decrease in quitting in response to operating dispensaries is offset by an increase in quitting in
response to general MMLs by non-Hispanic white males.
       In contrast to their non-Hispanic white peers, living in a state that provides legal protection to
medical marijuana dispensaries reduces the quit rate of minority men. The point estimate implies
a 21% reduction in quitting following legal protection for dispensaries coming into effect relative
to living is a state where they remain unprotected.23 We also find that both living in a state with
a general MML and living in a state with operating dispensaries reduces the quit rate of minority
men (by 14 and 16%, respectively), although each of these effects is imprecisely estimated. In the
case of operating dispensaries, the impact for minority men is not statistically different from the
impact on non-Hispanic white men (p-value=0.63), which is estimated to reduce quitting by 28%.
       Overall, we conclude that while we find no robust evidence that the medical marijuana policy
environment impacts on quitting behavior of females, there is evidence of significant effects for males
and these effects differ across racial/ethnic groups. While we find no evidence that legal protection
of medical marijuana dispensaries impacts on the quit rate of non-Hispanic white males, general
MMLs and operating dispensaries having offsetting effects for this group of males. In contrast, we
find that minority men are less likely to quit marijuana use when they live is a state with laws that
legally protect dispensaries, and weaker evidence suggests that this group may also reduce quitting
in response to operating dispensaries.


5.2      Robustness

The interpretation of the DID estimator as providing causal estimates of the impact of the policy
variables on the decision to quit marijuana use relies on the parallel trends assumption. In order
to investigate this assumption, we conduct an event study analysis which involves including leads
and lags of the policy variables in the hazard model, as described in section 4.1. Evidence of an
impact of the policy variables in years preceding their introduction suggests differing trends in
treatment and controls states in the pre-treatment period, which is inconsistent with the parallel
trends assumption.
       We present the results from the event study analysis in graphical form for males in Figure 2.24
Panel A shows the results from the analysis for non-Hispanic white males and panel B shows the
  23
     As shown in the bottom of Table 4, the effect for minority males is statistically different from the null effect for
non-Hispanic white males.
  24
     We have also conducted the event time analysis for females. The analysis found no evidence of differing pre-trends
for females in general, nor for non-Hispanic white females, nor minority females. These results are not reported here
as there are no robust policy impacts found for females. These results from the event time analysis for females are
available upon request.


                                                           17
results for minority males. Each panel contains three graphs; one for each policy variable. Each
graph shows a plot of the coefficient estimates (and their 95% confidence intervals) corresponding
for the leads and lags of the policy variable. The coefficients are normalized to zero at the first full
year that the policy is in effect.
    Looking down the first column of graphs reveals no evidence of a significant pre-trend in the
coefficients on general medical marijuana laws for non-Hispanic white males. For minority males,
there is some evidence that quit rate is lower in the year before medical marijuana laws are in-
troduced than in the first year they are in effect. Looking down the second column of graphs, we
find no evidence of pre-trends in the coefficients on operating dispensaries for either non-Hispanic
white males or minority males. Finally, the third column graphs leads and lags for laws providing
protection for dispensaries. While it provides no evidence of pre-trends for non-Hispanic white
males, there is some evidence that the quit rate was lower among minority males in states that
introduced laws protecting dispensaries at t=-2, corresponding to 2 or more full years before the
law became effective. However, there is no difference in the quit rates between minority men living
in states that do not introduce laws to protect medical marijuana dispensaries and states that do
at t=-1, corresponding to the year before the policy is introduced.
    To further probe the issue of identification in our DID model, we include state and race/ethnicity
specific linear trends in our baseline specification. The results from estimating this model over the
subsample of males are reported in column 2 of Table 5. Column 1 repeats the baseline results
from Table 4 column 3 for ease of reference. As can be seen from Table 5, including state and
race specific time trends has little impact on the estimated impact of the medical marijuana policy
variables for white males, and strengthens the estimated impact for minorities. This provides some
reassurance that the baseline estimates can be interpreted as causal.
    The third column of Table 5 investigates the extent to which our findings reflect endogenous
sorting by marijuana users into states that have operating medical marijuana dispensaries, or laws
to protect them. We examine this issue by removing from our sample individuals from the time
they move to a state with a operating dispensaries, or laws in effect that protect them.25 As can
be seen from Table 5, column 3, removing observations on individuals who are potentially sorting
into states with retail markets for medical marijuana reduces the magnitude of the point estimates
on operating dispensaries for non-Hispanic whites and protected dispensaries for minorities, with
the former loosing statistical significance at conventional levels (p-value of 0.11). Nonetheless our
findings are not qualitatively changed, leading us to conclude that our results are not entirely
  25
     Many of these individuals subsequently move out of these states, but all durations of use are dropped once an
individual moves to a state with a liberal dispensary regime. We do not exclude people who move out of a state with
a liberal dispensary regime and back the following wave, as this circulatory internal migration in likely to be driven
by factors other than marijuana dispensaries and related policies.



                                                         18
explained by endogenous sorting.
      The final column of Table 5 attempts to tease out the separate impacts of the medical marijuana
measures on Hispanic and black men. To do this, we replace the non-white interaction terms with
separate interaction terms with an indicator for race is black, and interaction terms with ethnicity is
Hispanic. This is quite taxing for the data given the relatively limited information on minorities in
the NLSY97. Nonetheless, the results reveal a significant difference in the behavioural response of
Hispanic and black men to the medical marijuana environment. Specifically, the estimates indicate
that Hispanic men, but not black men, respond to operating dispensaries in their state of residence
by reducing their quit rate, as do non-Hispanic white men. We note that although the impact of
legal protection for dispensaries for Hispanic men is imprecisely estimated, it is not significantly
different from the statistically significant impact for black males, as shown in the bottom panel of
Table 5.


5.3      Discussion

The significant differences across gender and race/ethnicity on quitting marijuana arising from
these policies raises the question, “By how much is the duration of marijuana use extended by the
presence and legal protection of dispensaries?” We now turn to answering this question.
      In order to quantify the impact of operating medical marijuana dispensaries and their legal
protection on quitting, we conduct simulations using the parameter estimates from Table 5, in
which the policy variables are permitted to have differing effects for blacks, Hispanics, and non-
Hispanic whites. Because we find robust evidence that quitting behavior of males, but not females, is
impacted by the presence and protection of medical marijuana dispensaries, we conduct simulations
for males only. The simulations show the cumulative probability of quitting marijuana after each
year of use for non-Hispanic white males in the first panel, for black males in the second panel,
and for Hispanic males in the third panel. In each panel, the solid line depicts the evolution of
the cumulative probability of quitting in the absence of MMLs, operating dispensaries and laws
protecting them, and the dashed line shows the evolution on the cumulative probability of quitting
when MMLs, operating dispensaries and laws protecting them are all in place.
      As is clear from Figure 3, the proportion of non-Hispanic white male marijuana users who have
quit is the same at all durations of use under either policy scenario. This is because the reduction
in quitting that occurs in response to operating dispensaries is offset by an increase in quitting in
response to generic MMLS, and because this group does not change their quitting behaviour in
response to laws protecting medical marijuana dispensaries (and the coefficient on this variable for
non-Hispanic white males is small, in addition to being statistically insignificant).26
 26
      After 1 year of use, 26.5% of non-Hispanic white males marijuana users have quit use. The median duration of


                                                        19
    Black males and Hispanic males reduce their quit rate in response to lower perceived legal risks
associated with laws protecting dispensaries, and greater access provided by operating dispensaries.
This is demonstrated in the second and third panels of Figure 3, which shows a lower cumulative
quit rate at each duration of use for Hispanic and black males under the scenario in which all
medical marijuana policies are in effect compared to the scenario in which none are in effect. The
second panel shows that the proportion of black males who have quit after one year of use is
around 37% in the scenario in which there is no MML in place, no operating dispensaries and no
laws protecting dispensaries, compared to 19% in the scenario in which a MML is in effect, and
dispensaries are operating and have legal protection. The median duration of use of 3 years for
black males living under the former scenario increases to 9.5 years when all MMLs policies are in
effect. For Hispanic males, 34% quit by the first year of use under the scenario when no MML
policies are in effect compared to 17.5% when all policies are in effect, and the median duration of
use increases from 3.5 to 11 years.
    The implications of these longer use durations is uncertain, although the literature suggests
larger downstream health and social impacts (Marie and Zölitz, 2017; van Ours and Williams,
2009; Van Ours and Williams, 2011, 2012). Extending marijuana use careers through encouraging
longer durations of sporadic, casual use will have meaningfully different impacts than through
increased durations of chronic, heavy use; and the actual effects will most certainly depend on the
potency of the products consumed, method of ingestion, and frequency of use. Researchers are just
beginning to pay attention to the relevance of these aspects of use, and thus it seems too early to
know the health implications of these increases in durations of use for minority males.


6    Conclusion
Previous work has shown that medical marijuana laws have spill-over effects on recreational markets,
increasing adult recreational marijuana use, particularly among males (Sabia and Nguyen, 2018).
It is unclear, however, the extent to which this increase in use is a result of decreased quitting
among adult marijuana users, or an increase in uptake among this group. To shed light on this
issue, we study the decision to quit, focusing on how retail medical marijuana dispensaries and laws
protecting them impact quitting behavior. The presence of an operating dispensary, regardless of
its legal status, may delay quitting by reducing the search time associated with finding marijuana.
Legally protected dispensaries lower not just search costs, but also the monetary cost (because
suppliers face lower production costs due to their own reduction in legal risk) and legal risk faced
by the user. To investigate their effects on quitting, we link information on dispensaries operating
marijuana use for non-Hispanic white males is 6 years.



                                                         20
and legal protections of them to self-reported longitudinal data on marijuana use from the 1997
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Geographic and temporal variation in the presence of
operating dispensaries and their legal protection serve to identify the impact of these dimensions
of the legal marijuana market on quitting behavior.
   Our results highlight the importance of allowing for heterogeneous effects of legal marijuana
markets on measures of marijuana use by race and ethnicity. When we impose homogeneity on
the impacts of the presence of retail dispensaries and of laws protecting them across gender and
race/ethnicity we find no evidence that either the presence or protection of medical marijuana
dispensaries impact on the decision to quit marijuana use. Allowing for heterogeneous effects reveal
important differences across gender and race/ethnicity; non-Hispanic white males delay quitting
in response to the presence of operating retail dispensaries suggesting they are more sensitive to
the time and monetary factors. Black males respond to the legal protection of retail dispensaries
but not operating dispensaries, suggesting they are more sensitive to the legal risk. Hispanic males
delay quitting in response to both the legal protection and presence of operating retail medical
marijuana dispensaries, suggesting they are responsive to reductions in all components of cost. We
find little robust evidence that quitting by females responds to either the presence or protection
of retail medical marijuana dispensaries. We conclude that the decision to quit using marijuana
among men, and therefore the duration of use, is sensitive to both de facto retail markets and de
jure retail markets, although racial and ethnic differences in responsiveness to each of these types
of markets can mask their effects. The sensitivity by minorities to legal risks imposed by different
policies is not surprising in light of their increased risk of arrest for simple marijuana offenses,
particularly for black males.
   Because earlier incantations of medical marijuana dispensary laws were subject to less stringent
state oversight, our findings may better reflect the potential effects of recent recreational marijuana
policies than the more“medicalized” MMLs passed since 2010. The relevance of these findings in
light of recent state laws to legalize recreational marijuana is that they suggest such liberalization
policies may help reduce the racial and ethnic disparities associated with prohibition in the United
States, particularly among blacks. This could represent an important benefit of these policies that is
not fully reflected in criminal justice savings. However, the results also suggest that it is important
to understand quickly whether there are differential impacts of legalized markets on patterns of
use by various ethnic groups. We find that de jure legalization reduces quitting and increases the
duration of use amongst minority men. In the absence of further information on the frequency and
intensity of use, as well as the the strength of marijuana product used, is unclear whether and to
what extent this behavior will translate into differential health impacts, further exasperating health
disparities amongst minority men.


                                                  21
References
Anderson, D. M., B. Hansen, and D. I. Rees (2013). Medical marijuana laws, traffic fatalities, and alcohol
  consumption. The Journal of Law and Economics 56 (2), 333–369.

Anderson, D. M., B. Hansen, and D. I. Rees (2015). Medical marijuana laws and teen marijuana use.
  American Law and Economics Review 17 (2), 495–528.

Annas, G. J. (1997). Reefer madness: the federal response to california’s medical-marijuana law. New
  England Journal of Medicine 337, 435–439.

Baker, D. (2007). N.M.: Won’t oversee marijuana production. Associated Press, 15 August 2007. Available
  at: http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/health/2007-08-16-3815954333x.htm/.

Bartik, A. W. and S. T. Nelson (2017). Credit reports as résumés: The incidence of pre-employment credit
  screening. MIT Department of Economics Graduate Student Research Paper, October 29, 2017.

Bradford, A. C. and W. D. Bradford (2018). The impact of medical marijuana legalization on prescription
  medication use and costs in medicare part d. The Journal of Law and Economics 61, 461–487.

Brame, R., S. D. Bushway, R. Paternoster, and M. G. Turner (2014). Demographic patterns of cumulative
  arrest prevalence by ages 18 and 23. Crime & Delinquency 60 (3), 471–486.

Chen, M.-J., J. W. Grube, and P. J. Gruenewald (2010). Community alcohol outlet density and underage
  drinking. Addiction 105 (2), 270–278.

Chriqui, J. F., R. L. Pacula, D. C. McBride, D. A. Reichmann, C. J. Vanderwaal, and Y. Terry-McElrath
  (2002). Illicit drug policies: Selected laws from the 50 states. Andrews University Berrien Springs, MI.

Claiborne, W. (1997). Federal warning on medical marijuana leaves physicians feeling intimidated. The
  Washington Post, 1 January 1997. Available at: https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/
  1997/01/01/federal-warning-on-medical-marijuana-leaves-physicians-feeling-intimidated/
  6d521a3f-1e76-4c01-a0b1-7dda0abf0261/?utm_term=.aa20082b8f8e.

Compton, W. M., B. Han, A. Hughes, C. M. Jones, and C. Blanco (2017). Use of marijuana for medical
  purposes among adults in the United States. Jama 317 (2), 209–211.

Croson, R. and U. Gneezy (2009). Gender differences in preferences. Journal of Economic literature 47 (2),
  448–74.

DeCicca, P., D. Kenkel, and A. Mathios (2008). Cigarette taxes and the transition from youth to adult
  smoking: Smoking initiation, cessation, and participation. Journal of health economics 27 (4), 904–917.

Eckel, C. C. and P. J. Grossman (2008). Men, women and risk aversion: Experimental evidence. Handbook
  of experimental economics results 1, 1061–1073.

Flynn, J., P. Slovic, and C. K. Mertz (1994). Gender, race, and perception of environmental health risks.
  Risk analysis 14 (6), 1101–1108.

Galenianos, M., R. L. Pacula, and N. Persico (2012). A search-theoretic model of the retail market for illicit
  drugs. The Review of Economic Studies 79 (3), 1239–1269.

Geller, A. and J. Fagan (2010). Pot as pretext: Marijuana, race, and the new disorder in New York City
  street policing. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 7 (4), 591–633.

Goel, S., J. M. Rao, R. Shroff, et al. (2016). Precinct or prejudice? Understanding racial disparities in New
  York City’s stop-and-frisk policy. The Annals of Applied Statistics 10 (1), 365–394.


                                                     22
Golub, A., B. D. Johnson, and E. Dunlap (2007). The race/ethnicity disparity in misdemeanor marijuana
  arrests in New York City. Criminology & public policy 6 (1), 131–164.

Gross, S. R. and K. Y. Barnes (2002). Road work: Racial profiling and drug interdiction on the highway.
  Michigan Law Review 101 (3), 651–754.

Hall, W. (2015). What has research over the past two decades revealed about the adverse health effects of
  recreational cannabis use? Addiction 110 (1), 19–35.

Halonen, J. I., M. Kivimäki, A. Kouvonen, J. Pentti, I. Kawachi, S. Subramanian, and J. Vahtera (2013).
  Proximity to a tobacco store and smoking cessation: A cohort study. Tobacco control 23, 146–151.

Hansen, B., K. Miller, and C. Weber (2017). Drug trafficking under partial prohibition: Evidence from
  recreational marijuana. Working Paper 23762, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Harrison, L. D., S. S. Martin, T. Enev, and D. Harrington (2007). Comparing drug testing and self-report of
  drug use among youths and young adults in the general population. Technical report, (DHHS Publication
  No. SMA 07-4249, Methodology Series M-7). Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
  Administration, Office of Applied Studies.

Hasin, D. S., M. Wall, K. M. Keyes, M. Cerdá, J. Schulenberg, P. M. O’Malley, S. Galea, R. Pacula, and
  T. Feng (2015). Medical marijuana laws and adolescent marijuana use in the USA from 1991 to 2014:
  Results from annual, repeated cross-sectional surveys. The Lancet Psychiatry 2 (7), 601–608.

Jacobi, L. and M. Sovinsky (2016). Marijuana on main street? Estimating demand in markets with limited
  access. American Economic Review 106 (8), 2009–45.

Johnson, D. and N. A. Lewis (2009). Obama Administration to stop raids on medical marijuana dispen-
  saries. The New York Times, 18 March 2009. Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/19/us/
  19holder/.

Kasprak, J. (2004, February). Medical marijuana–federal appellate court decision. Technical Report 2004-
  R-0200, Office of Legislative Research, Connecticut General Assembly.

Kilmer, B. and R. L. Pacula (2017). Understanding and learning from the diversification of cannabis supply
  laws. Addiction 112 (7), 1128–1135.

Klieger, S. B., A. Gutman, L. Allen, R. L. Pacula, J. K. Ibrahim, and S. Burris (2017). Mapping medical
  marijuana: state laws regulating patients, product safety, supply chains and dispensaries, 2017. Addiction.

Kreit, A. (2016). Marijuana legalization and pretextual stops. UCDL Rev. 50, 741.

Law, S. A. (2001). In the name of federalism: The supreme court’s assault on democracy and civil rights.
  U. Cin. L. Rev. 70, 367.

Lillard, D., E. Molloy, and A. Sfekas (2013). Smoking initiation and the iron law of demand. Journal of
   health economics 32, 114–127.

MacCoun, R., R. L. Pacula, J. Chriqui, K. Harris, and P. Reuter (2009). Do citizens know whether their
 state has decriminalized marijuana? Assessing the perceptual component of deterrence theory. Review of
 Law & Economics 5 (1), 347–371.

Marie, O. and U. Zölitz (2017). “High” achievers? Cannabis access and academic performance. The Review
 of Economic Studies 84 (3), 1210–1237.

McCaffrey, D. F., R. Liccardo Pacula, B. Han, and P. Ellickson (2010). Marijuana use and high school
 dropout: The influence of unobservables. Health economics 19 (11), 1281–1299.


                                                     23
Mikos, R. A. (2009). On the limits of supremacy: Medical marijuana and the states’ overlooked power to
  legalize federal crime. Vand. L. Rev. 62, 1419.

Moore, T. H., S. Zammit, A. Lingford-Hughes, T. R. Barnes, P. B. Jones, M. Burke, and G. Lewis (2007).
 Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health outcomes: a systematic review. The
 Lancet 370 (9584), 319–328.

Mustard, D. B. (2001). Racial, ethnic, and gender disparities in sentencing: Evidence from the US federal
 courts. The Journal of Law and Economics 44 (1), 285–314.

Nelson, J. P. (2014). Gender differences in alcohol demand: a systematic review of the role of prices and
  taxes. Health economics 23 (10), 1260–1280.

Newbern, A. E. (2000). Good cop, bad cop: Federal prosecution of state-legalized medical marijuana use
  after United States v. Lopez. Cal. L. Rev. 88, 1575.

Nguyen, H. and P. Reuter (2012). How risky is marijuana possession? Considering the role of age, race, and
  gender. Crime & Delinquency 58 (6), 879–910.

Nicosia, N., J. MacDonald, and R. Pacula (2017). Does mandatory diversion to drug treatment eliminate
  racial disparities in the incarceration of drug offenders? an examination of californias proposition 36.
  Journal of quantitative criminology 33, 179–205.

Ogden, D. W. (2009). Investigations and Prosecutions in States Authorizing the Medical Use of Marijuana.
  Memorandum for Selected United States Attorneys, U.S Department of Justice, October 19, 2009.

Pacula, R. L., J. F. Chriqui, D. A. Reichmann, and Y. M. Terry-McElrath (2002). State medical marijuana
  laws: Understanding the laws and their limitations. Journal of public health policy 23 (4), 413–439.

Pacula, R. L., B. Kilmer, M. Grossman, and F. J. Chaloupka (2010). Risks and prices: The role of user
  sanctions in marijuana markets. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10 (1).

Pacula, R. L., D. Powell, P. Heaton, and E. L. Sevigny (2015). Assessing the effects of medical marijuana
  laws on marijuana use: The devil is in the details. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34 (1),
  7–31.

Pacula, R. L. and R. Smart (2017). Medical marijuana and marijuana legalization. Annual review of clinical
  psychology 13, 397–419.

Pertwee, R. G. (2014). Handbook of cannabis. Oxford University Press, USA.

Powell, D., R. L. Paula, and M. Jacobson (2018). Do medical marijuana laws reduce addictions and deaths
  related to pain killers? Journal of Health Economics 58, 29–42.

Ramchand, R., R. L. Pacula, and M. Y. Iguchi (2006). Racial differences in marijuana-users’ risk of arrest
  in the United States. Drug & Alcohol Dependence 84 (3), 264–272.

Reitzel, L. R., E. K. Cromley, Y. Li, Y. Cao, R. Dela Mater, C. A. Mazas, L. Cofta-Woerpel, P. M.
  Cinciripini, and D. W. Wetter (2011). The effect of tobacco outlet density and proximity on smoking
  cessation. American Journal of Public Health 101 (2), 315–320.

Sabia, J. and T. T. Nguyen (2018). The effect of medical marijuana laws on labor market outcomes. The
  Journal of Law and Economics 61, 361–396.

Sevigny, E. L., R. L. Pacula, and P. Heaton (2014). The effects of medical marijuana laws on potency.
  International Journal of Drug Policy 25 (2), 308–319.


                                                   24
Smart, R. (2016). Essays on the effects of medical marijuana laws. Ph. D. thesis, UCLA.

Tiersky, M. (1998). Medical marijuana: Putting the power where it belongs. Nw. UL Rev. 93, 547.

van Ours, J. C. and J. Williams (2009). Why parents worry: Initiation into cannabis use by youth and their
  educational attainment. Journal of Health Economics 28, 132–142.

Van Ours, J. C. and J. Williams (2011). Cannabis use and mental health problems. Journal of Applied
  Econometrics 26 (7), 1137–1156.

Van Ours, J. C. and J. Williams (2012). The effects of cannabis use on physical and mental health. Journal
  of Health Economics 31 (4), 564–577.

Vickovic, S. G. (2011). Medical marijuana in the news. Southwest Journal of Criminal Justice 8 (1).

Wen, H., J. Hockenberry, and J. Cummings (2015). The effect of medical marijuana laws on adolescent and
 adult use of marijuana. Journal of Health Economics 42, 64–80.

Williams, A. R., M. Olfson, J. H. Kim, S. S. Martins, and H. D. Kleber (2016). Older, less regulated
 medical marijuana programs have much greater enrollment rates than newer ‘medicalized’ programs.
 Health Affairs 35 (3), 480–488.

Williams, J. and A. L. Bretteville-Jensen (2014). Does liberalizing cannabis laws increase cannabis use?
 Journal of health economics 36, 20–32.




                                                   25
Table 1: Medical Marijuana Law (MML) Date, Legal Protection of Dispensaries, and
                              Active Dispensaries

                                 MML Legally                     Any              Legally Protected
       Any MML              Protects Dispensaries            Dispensary               Dispensary
      Date effective             Date effective              Date active             Date active

CA     11/6/1996*                  1/1/2004*                11/10/1996*               1/1/2004*
OR     12/3/1998*                  8/14/2013                11/13/2009*               3/24/2014
WA     12/3/1998*                 7/22/2011*                 10/1/2009*              7/22/2011*
AK      3/4/1999*
ME    12/23/1999*                 12/4/2009*                 3/31/2011*              3/31/2011*
HI     6/14/2000*                   1/4/2016                  8/8/2017                 8/8/2017
CO    12/28/2000*                  7/1/2010*                 10/1/2005*               6/7/2010*
NV     10/1/2001*                   7/1/2013                10/30/2009*               7/31/2015
MD     10/1/2003*                   6/1/2014                  7/6/2017                 7/6/2017
VT      7/1/2004*                  6/2/2011*                  6/21/2013               6/21/2013
MT     11/2/2004*                  12/7/2016                  3/1/2009*               12/7/2016
RI      1/3/2006*                 6/16/2009*                  4/19/2013               4/19/2013
NM      7/1/2007*                  7/1/2007*                  7/1/2009*               7/1/2009*
MI     12/4/2008*                 12/20/2016                 6/15/2009*
NJ     10/1/2010*                 10/1/2010*                  12/6/2012               12/6/2012
DC     7/27/2010*                 7/27/2010*                  7/29/2013               7/29/2013
AZ    12/14/2010*                 12/14/2010*                 12/6/2012               12/6/2012
DE      7/1/2011*                  7/1/2011*                  6/26/2015               6/26/2015
CT      10/1/2012                  10/1/2012                  8/20/2014               8/20/2014
MA      1/1/2013                   5/24/2013                  6/24/2015               6/24/2015
NH      7/23/2013                  7/23/2013                  4/30/2016               4/30/2016
IL      1/1/2014                    1/1/2014                  11/9/2015               11/9/2015
MN      5/30/2014                  5/30/2014                  7/1/2015                 7/1/2015
NY      7/5/2014                    7/5/2014                  1/7/2016                 1/7/2016
PA      5/17/2016                  5/17/2016
OH      9/8/2016                    9/8/2016
AR      11/9/2016                  11/9/2016
ND      12/8/2016                  12/8/2016
FL      1/3/2017                    1/3/2017
 Notes and sources: Asterisk indicates laws or operational dates used for identification in the empirical
 analysis. No asterisk indicates policies adopted outside of the study period.


                                                      26
                                   Table 2: Descriptive Statistics

                                    Females                                       Males
                       All    White     Black     Hispanic        All     White     Black     Hispanic
 Ever use              0.53   0.59       0.44       0.48           0.6     0.61     0.62        0.57
 Age first use         16.8   16.61     17.52      16.56         16.59    16.48     16.8        16.6
 Quit                  0.72   0.71       0.71       0.75         0.65      0.62     0.67        0.68
 Age quit             20.91   21.09     20.97      20.32         20.77    20.94     20.73      20.65
 Duration of use      4.95     5.27      4.32       4.68          5.06     5.3       4.77       4.48
 N                    2312     1357       515        440          2756     1487       713        556
Notes: Ever use is based on 8931 respondents who answered questions on marijuana use in at least
one wave of the NLSY97 survey (4369 females and 4562 males). Age of first use is based on 5068
respondents who reported using marijuana in at least one survey wave. Age quit and duration of use
are based on 3456 respondents who are observed to cease use (1665 females and 1791 males). N is the
number of respondents who have ever used marijuana.




                                                   27
                          Table 3: Quitting Marijuana use and Dispensaries

                          Medical Marijuana Law             Operating Dispensaries           Protected Dispensaries
                          No (%)     Yes (%)                No (%)     Yes (%)               No (%)     Yes (%)
All                        11.24           10.67             11.14          10.99              11.15      10.69
Non-Hispanic whites        10.49           9.28              10.42           8.98              10.31       9.21
Black or Hispanic          12.35           12.66             12.28          13.04              12.43      12.19

Males                      10.52           9.66              10.45          9.73               10.43      9.22
Non-Hispanic whites         9.54           8.46               9.52           7.92               9.4        8.12
Black or Hispanic          11.86           11.28             11.79          11.52              11.86      10.29

Females                    12.14           11.83             12.01          12.49              12.05      12.49
Non-Hispanic whites        11.59           10.18             11.45           10.2              11.35      10.49
Black or Hispanic          13.05           14.37             12.99          14.94              13.23      14.56
  Note: The table shows the average quit rate for respondents who live in a state that does not (NO) or
  does have (YES) a medical marijuana law, operating dispensaries or active dispensaries.




                                                      28
                                                          Figure 1: Quitting Marijuana Use

                                                             A. Hazard of Quitting Marijuana
                                               Females                                                                                 Males
                .3




                                                                                                      .3
                .25




                                                                                                      .25
              .2




                                                                                                     .2
    Hazard Rate




                                                                                           Hazard Rate
        .15




                                                                                               .15
   .1




                                                                                          .1
                .05




                                                                                                      .05
                0




                                                                                                      0
                             1   3      5      7         9      11      13      15                                 1   3      5      7         9     11      13      15
                                             Duration of Use                                                                       Duration of Use

                                     White           Black           Hispanic                                              White           Black          Hispanic




                                                B. Cumulative Hazard of Quitting Marijuana
                                              Females                                                                                 Males
            1




                                                                                                  1
.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                      .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
   Cumualtive Hazard Rate




                                                                                         Cumualtive Hazard Rate
            0




                                                                                                  0




                             1   3      5      7         9      11     13       15                                 1   3      5      7         9     11     13       15
                                             Duration of Use                                                                       Duration of Use

                                     White           Black           Hispanic                                              White           Black          Hispanic




                                                                                     29
          Table 4: The Impact of Dispensaries on the Hazard of Quitting Marijuana

                                                                       All      Females      Males

           A. Homogenous Policy Effects by Race\Ethnicity

           MML                                                         0.06        0.01       0.15
                                                                      (0.10)     (0.15)      (0.10)
           Operating Dispensaries                                      0.00       0.25      -0.22**
                                                                       0.13)     (0.19)      (0.09)
           Protected Dispensaries                                      -0.07      -0.06       -0.11
                                                                      (0.09)     (0.10)      (0.08)
           N                                                          30,972     13,802      17,161

           B. Heterogenous Policy Effects by Race\Ethnicity

           MML x 1(Non-Hispanic White)                                  0.14      -0.01     0.36***
                                                                      (0.14)     (0.24)      (0.12)
           MML x 1(Black or Hispanic)                                  -0.08       0.02       -0.15
                                                                      (0.11)     (0.18)      (0.18)
           Operating Dispensaries x 1(Non-Hispanic White)              -0.14       0.04      -0.33*
                                                                      (0.18)     (0.23)      (0.17)
           Operating Dispensaries x 1(Black or Hispanic)              0.21**    0.82***       -0.17
                                                                      (0.11)     (0.16)      (0.21)
           Protected Dispensaries x 1(Non-Hispanic White)               0.08      -0.02        0.13
                                                                      (0.12)     (0.11)      (0.14)
           Protected Dispensaries x 1(Black or Hispanic)               -0.11      -0.02     -0.24***
                                                                      (0.08)     (0.15)      (0.08)
           N                                                          30,716     13,681      16,988
           Time-Race Fixed Effects                                       Y          Y           Y
           State-Race Fixed Effects                                      Y          Y           Y
           Race-Demographic Controls                                     Y          Y           Y

           p-value: Non-Hispanic White=Black or Hispanic
           MML                                                        0.2154     0.9223      0.0151
           Operating Dispensaries                                     0.0935     0.0007      0.6344
           Protected Dispensaries                                     0.0590     0.9778      0.0083
           P-value jointly zero                                       0.1032     0.0000      0.0002

Note: Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Controls include: ability (standardized CAT-ASVAB score corrected for years of schooling at the
test date), indicators for year of birth, mother a teen at the respondents birth, responding parent
is very religious, parents’ education (of the mother and father separately), mother’s parenting style
is authoritarian parenting style,(log of) household income and (log of) household size, living in urban
location, indicators for state of residence, indicators for calendar year. Duration dependence is modelled
flexibly using a set of indicators for duration of use.


                                                       30
                                              Table 5: Robustness

                                                            (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)


   MML x 1(Non-Hispanic White)                           0.36***       0.31*    0.36***         0.35***
                                                          (0.12)      (0.17)     (0.13)          (0.12)
   MML x 1(Black or Hispanic)                              -0.15      -0.36*      -0.18
                                                          (0.18)      (0.19)     (0.19)
   MML x 1(Black)                                                                                 -0.41
                                                                                                 (0.33)
   MML x 1( Hispanic)                                                                              0.05
                                                                                                 (0.27)
   Operating Dispensaries x 1(Non-Hispanic White)         -0.33*     -0.38**      -0.28         -0.34**
                                                          (0.17)      (0.16)     (0.17)          (0.17)
   Operating Dispensaries x 1(Black or Hispanic)           -0.17       -0.01      -0.10
                                                          (0.21)      (0.30)     (0.24)
   Operating Dispensaries x 1(Black)                                                              0.39
                                                                                                 (0.32)
   Operating Dispensaries x 1(Hispanic)                                                         -0.61**
                                                                                                 (0.27)
   Protected Dispensaries x 1(Non-Hispanic White)          0.13        -0.26      0.02            0.13
                                                          (0.14)      (0.28)     (0.08)          (0.14)
   Protected Dispensaries x 1(Black or Hispanic)         -0.24***    -0.46***   -0.19***
                                                          (0.08)      (0.17)     (0.08)
   Protected Dispensaries x 1(Black)                                                             -0.76*
                                                                                                 (0.40)
   Protected Dispensaries x 1( Hispanic)                                                          -0.16
                                                                                                 (0.15)
   N                                                      16,988      16,988     16,470          16,959

   Time-Race Fixed Effects                                  Y           Y          Y               Y
   State-Race Fixed Effects                                 Y           Y          Y               Y
   Race-Demographic Controls                                Y           Y          Y               Y
   State-Race Time Trends                                   N           Y          N               N


   p-value for test of coefficient equality              White=Black or Hispanic            Black=Hispanic
   MML                                                   0.0151    0.0089     0.0159            0.3302
   Operating Dispensaries                                0.6344    0.2504     0.6400            0.0415
   Protected Dispensaries                                0.0083    0.4641     0.0423            0.2252
   P-value jointly zero                                  0.0002    0.0140     0.0049            0.0000

Note: Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Controls include: ability (standardized CAT-ASVAB score corrected for years of schooling at the test
date), indicators for year of birth, mother a teen at the respondents birth, responding parent is very
religious, parents’ education (of the mother and father separately), mother’s parenting style is author-
itarian parenting style,(log of) household income and (log of) household size, living in urban location,
indicators for state of residence, indicators for calendar year. Duration dependence is modelled flexibly
using a set of indicators for duration of use. Column 331drops individuals from the time they move to a
state that has operating retail dispensaries or effective laws protecting them.
                                                                                                        Figure 2: Event Analysis

                                                                    A. Events Analysis: Non-Hispanic White Males
                                Medical Marijuana Law                                                             Operating Dispensaries                                                        Law Protecting Dispensaries
          2




                                                                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                          2
          1




                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                          1
ln(-ln(1-quit rate))




                                                                                ln(-ln(1-quit rate))




                                                                                                                                                                ln(-ln(1-quit rate))
         0




                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                         0
          -1




                                                                                          -1




                                                                                                                                                                          -1
          -2




                                                                                          -2




                                                                                                                                                                          -2
                        <= -3   -2            -1           0        1     >=2                             <= -3   -2            -1           0        1   >=2                           <= -3      -2            -1           0        1   >=2
                                     years since policy in effect                                                      years since policy in effect                                                     years since policy in effect




                                                                        B. Events Analysis: Hispanic or Black Males
                                Medical Marijuana Law                                                             Operating Dispensaries                                                        Law Protecting Dispensaries
          2




                                                                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                          2
          0




                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                          0
 ln(-ln(1-quit rate))




                                                                                 ln(-ln(1-quit rate))




                                                                                                                                                                 ln(-ln(1-quit rate))
-2




                                                                                -2




                                                                                                                                                                -2
          -4




                                                                                          -4




                                                                                                                                                                          -4




                        <= -2   -1             0           1        2     >=3                             <= -2   -1             0           1        2   >=3                           <= -2      -1             0           1        2   >=3
                                     years since policy in effect                                                      years since policy in effect                                                     years since policy in effect




                    The figure shows the results of an event-time analysis of the difference on the complementary log-log
                    of the marijuana quitting rate (ie ln(-ln(1-quitting rate))) between states that have a MML, operating
                    dispensaries, and laws protecting dispensaries and those that do not before and after the change came
                    into effect. The reported coefficients are from estimating a version of the baseline model (Table 4) that
                    includes interactions between indicators for living in a state with the policy and indicators for event
                    time. Event time is defined as the calendar year of survey minus the year that the policy came into
                    effect. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals generated from standard errors clustered at the state
                    level.




                                                                                                                              32
                     Figure 3: Impact of Dispensaries Operating and Laws Protecting them on Males Cumulative Quitting Rates


                             Non-Hispanic White Males                                                                        Black Males                                                                  Hispanic Males




       .9
                                                                                           .9
                                                                                                                                                                            .9




       .8
                                                                                           .8
                                                                                                                                                                            .8




       .7
                                                                                           .7
                                                                                                                                                                            .7




       .6
                                                                                           .6
                                                                                                                                                                            .6




       .5
                                                                                           .5
                                                                                                                                                                            .5




       .4
                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                                                                                            .4




       .3
                                                                                           .3
                                                                                                                                                                            .3




       .2
                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                                                                                            .2




       .1
                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                                                                                            .1




       0
                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                            0




            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8     9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8     9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8     9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                             Years of Use                                                                        Years of Use                                                                     Years of Use




33
                    no dispnsary or policy           MML + active + protected dispensary                no dispensary or policy           MML+active+protected dispensary                no dispensary or policy           MML+active+protected dispensary




     The figures show the predicted evolution of the cumulative quitting rate for a male with the average standardized level of ability, born in 1981 living with
     both parents who each have more than a high school education, with a mother was not a teen at the time of the respondent’s birth and has an
     authoritarian parenting style, whose (log) household income and (log) family size in the first wave is equal to the sample average. Solid lines represent
     the cumulative quitting rates with no MML, no dispensaries and no laws protecting dispensaries. Dashed lines assumes a general MML, operating
     dispensaries and laws protecting them are in place.
           Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics on Control Variables: Full Sample

                                        All        Females   Males   Black   Hispanic   White
Teen mum                               0.12         0.13      0.12   0.19     0.14      0.09
Female                                 0.49         1.00      0.00   0.50     0.49      0.48
Black                                  0.26         0.27      0.25    1.00     0.00     0.00
Hispanic                               0.21         0.21      0.21   0.00      1.00     0.00
Stabdardized ability                   0.00         0.03     -0.03   -0.49    -0.29     0.37
Mom authoritarian                      0.55         0.54      0.55   0.60      0.54     0.52
Mom present                            0.92         0.92      0.93    0.88    0.93      0.94
Dad present                            0.67         0.65     0.69     0.42     0.67     0.79
Parent very religious (1997)           0.88         0.89      0.87    0.88     0.93     0.86
Log household income                   3.51         3.49     3.54     3.16     3.19     3.82
Log household size                     1.46         1.46      1.46    1.45    1.55      1.43
Mom ed high school grad                0.36         0.36     0.37     0.43     0.27     0.37
Mom ed greater than high school grad   0.40         0.39      0.40   0.32     0.23      0.50
Dad ed high school grad                0.43         0.44      0.42    0.61    0.32      0.39
Dad ed greater than high school grad   0.34         0.34      0.35    0.20     0.21     0.46
N                                      8,931        4,369    4,562   2,320    1,891     4720




                                              34
       Table A.2: Descriptive Statistics on Control Variables: Ever Used Marijuana

                                        All        Females   Males   Black   Hispanic   White
Teen mum                               0.12         0.12      0.12   0.18     0.13      0.09
Female                                 0.46         1.00      0.00   0.42     0.44      0.48
Black                                  0.24         0.22      0.26    1.00     0.00     0.00
Hispanic                               0.20         0.19      0.20   0.00      1.00     0.00
Standardized ability                   0.04         0.12     -0.03   -0.48    -0.24     0.36
Mom authoritarian                      0.53         0.51      0.54   0.60      0.51     0.50
Mom present                            0.92         0.92      0.92    0.88    0.92      0.93
Dad present                            0.66         0.65     0.67     0.42     0.65     0.77
Parent very religious (1997)           0.86         0.87      0.85    0.87     0.91     0.84
Log household income                   3.54         3.55     3.54     3.17     3.23     3.81
Log household size                     1.44         1.44      1.45    1.44    1.52      1.41
Mom ed high school grad                0.36         0.35     0.37     0.42     0.29     0.36
Mom ed greater than high school grad   0.42         0.44      0.40   0.33     0.26      0.51
Dad ed high school grad                0.42         0.42      0.42    0.58    0.35      0.37
Dad ed greater than high school grad   0.35         0.36      0.35    0.21     0.21     0.47
N                                      5,068        2,312    2,756   1,228     996      2,844




                                              35
