                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                RESOLVING DEBT CRISES: AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE




                               Barry Eichengreen




                             Working Paper No. 2555




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1988




                                                            Debt: Perspectives
Prepared for the Vina del Mar conference on Latin American
and Solutions.   The research reported here is part of a project on sovereign
debt and default in the 1930s, conducted jointly with Richard Portes of Birkbeck
College and the Centre for Economic Policy Research and partially funded by a
research grant from the World Bank. I thank the Council of Foreign Bondholders
for permission to cite from their minutes and correspondence, Harold James for
advice, Richard Grossman and Tony Hum for help with the archives, and Alison
Clayton for assistance with the statistics. Charles Kindleberger and Peter Lindert
provided helpful comments. Opinions expressed are the authors alone and should
not be attributed to any above-mentioned organizations or individuals. The research
reported here is part of the NBERs research program in International
                                                                      Studies.

Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                            NBER    Working Paper #2555
                                            April    1988




               Resolving Debt   Crises: An Historical Perspective


                                    Abstract

     Two general approaches have been offered for dealing with the
developing country debt crisis: continued reliance on case—by—case
negotiation, versus global plans for fundamentally restructuring the terms
of international  lending and repayment.    Both approaches have precedents in
earlier historical periods.   In the 1930s, for instance, when some two
thirds of foreign dollar bonds lapsed into default, several global schemes
for resolving the crisis were considered even while individual debtor—
creditor negotiations were underway.     In the end no global plan was adopted
and the debt crisis of the 30s was resolved by the muddling—through
approach of case—by—case negotiation.     This experience suggests two
questions about the efficacy of the alternative approaches.     First, what
stumbling blocks stand in the way of the adoption of global schemes?
Second, as a crisis drags on, how do the evolution of debtor and
creditor strategies permit it tø be resolved through bilateral negotiation?
In this paper historical evidence from the interwar period is addressed to
these   questions.




                                                Barry Eichengreen
                                                Department of Economics
                                                University of California
                                                Berkeley, California 94720
         The developing—country debt crisis recently celebrated its fifth

anniversary. That more than five years have passed since the Mexican

crisis of 1982 is no cause for celebration.      In the intervening years, the

collapse of long—term lending and the policies of austerity adopted by the

borrowers have combined with global economic imbalances to depress

domestic investment and economic growth through much of the developing

world.      As the crisis drags on, prospects for renewed growth continue to

be adversely affected.      This recognition has occasioned a number of

ambitious plans for resolving the crisis.     These range from the Baker Plan

to encourage concerted bank lending to developing countries, to the Kenen

Plan which would have the IMF or another international entity buy up debt

at   a   discount and pass along the benefits to the debtor countries, the

Bradley and Sachs Plans which would have the banks directly forgive

developing—country liabilities,     and the Dornbusch Plan which permit

countries to service their debt in domestic currency.1/      In contrast,

dine      (1987) and Feldatein (1987) have criticized the global approach,

urging instead reliance on the market to resolve the crisis through case—

by—case negotiation.

         This is not the first time that foreign lending has culminated in

default or that default has reached crisis proportions. Nor is it the

first time that ambitious proposals have been elicited by disarray in

international capital markets.      In the l930s, when some two thirds of

foreign dollar bonds lapsed into default, a number of global schemes for

resolving the crisis were discussed. Some,      like current proposals under

which the World Bank or International Monetary Fund would adopt a leading

role,     relied on the newly—established Bank for International Settlements

for mediation and liquidity. Others advocated instead the establishment

                                       1
of an independent facility controlled by the bankers.           Some thought the

solution lay in converting one asset into another, not through debt—equity

swaps as today but by transforming short— and medium—term obligations into

long—term liabilities. Others emphasized instead the need to index

payments to macroeconomic indicators such as the price level or the value

of exports, or to permit debt to be serviced in local currency with

                                                                       was
provision for reinvesting interest payments domestically when transfer

infeasible.     Like today, there were those who argued the inefficacy of all

global plans, insisting on the superiority of case—by—case negotiation.

      In the end, no global plan was adopted.        The debt crisis of the 1930s

was resolved by the "muddling—through" approach of bilateral negotiation.

This observation raises two questions.         First, what stumbling blocks stood

in the way of the adoption of global schemes?         Second,   as the crisis

dragged on, how did the evolution of debtor and creditor strategies permit

the crisis to be resolved through bilateral negotiation?

      In this paper I analyze global and bilateral approaches to dealing

with foreign default in the interwar years.        Part I sketches the

background to negotiations: the origins and characteristics of the debt

crisis of the l930s,     Part II then describes the global schemes and

bilateral negotiations. The conclusion suggests some implications for the

current situation.



                            Part   I:   Into the Crisis


1.   The Tapestry of Foreign Debts

      The experience with foreign lending in the 1920s has been recounted

on   more   than one occasion (viz, Fleisig, 1970;    Eichengreen and   Portes,


1986). The     aspect of the episode relevant for present purposes      is that the
                                           2
way countries got themselves into the debt crisis of the l930s shaped

their options for getting out.      The nature of the shocks which pushed the

borrowers into default conditioned debtor and creditor attitudes toward

negotiations to restart debt service.      The nature of the foreign debts

incurred ——   their   magnitude, maturity and currency composition ——   served
as the initial conditions from which negotiations would commence.        The

institutional structures linking the small investor to the foreign

government, notably issue houses, the secondary market for bonds, and

bondholders' committees, comprised the framework within which those

negotiations took place.

     Frequently it is suggested that, compared to the current environment

of gigantic bank syndicates, lengthy loan contracts, and complex

regulatory restrictions, rescheduling in the 1930s was straightforward.

The era of bond finance is portrayed as a simpler era, when bond covenants

were transparent and negotiations had to surmount only the large numbers

problem created by the multitude of small creditors, a hurdle which was

successfully overcome with the creation of bondholders' reprentative

committees.   A central message of this section is that precisely the

opposite was true.     Progress in debt renegotiation in the 1930s was

impeded by interlocking creditor—debtor relationships and by the

proliferation of debt instruments ranging from short—term acceptances to

long—term bonds, from war debts to reparations, from foreign commercial

deposits to foreign exchange reserves.     Freeing one thread from this

tapestry without unraveling the fabric was the challenge for negotiators.

     The first thread in the tapestry was made up of war debts, in Herbert

Feis's evocative words, the "sludge left after the fires of the First

World War had died down."     The stance of the United States, the principal


                                       3
creditor, toward war debts shaped the attitudes of negotiators toward

other obligations, Accounts of war debt negotiations traditionally

emphasize U.S. intransigence, an emphasis that certainly is relevant

here./     But while insisting that war debts were business transactions to

be honored like any other, by the standards of   coercial      creditors the

U.S. displayed considerable flexibility when negotiating the payment

schedule. She did not insist on    iediate   repayment in the exceptional

circumstances of the early postwar years.    The individual agreements

negotiated and ratified by Congress were adapted to the economic

circumstances of the debtor.    The agreement with Britain concluded in       ,June


1923,   for example, stretched out the repayment period to more than 60

years and reduced the interest rate from the high levels at which Britain

had been forced to borrow during the war.    Arrears from the inasediate

postwar years were capitalized at concessional rates that varied with the

debtor's ability to pay.    These concessions reflected   a   realization on the

part of business interests that U.S. prospects were linked to the

successful economic recovery of the heavily indebted nations of Europe.3/

If the U.S. was unwilling to simply cancel these debts or even to enter

into multilateral negotiations, she nevertheless exhibited some

flexibility in negotiations with individual debtors and set an important

precedent for subsequent debt negotiations by acknowledging the relevance

of ability to pay.

        The second thread in the tapestry was German reparations.     Their

story is depressingly familiar.     In 1919 signatories of the Versailles

Treaty,    unable to agree on an amount, appointed a Reparations    Coission

which in April 1921 delivered a figure of 132,000 million gold marks, an

amount roughly twice German GNP.    Payments on 50,000 million of the


                                      4
132,000 million mark total were to commence immediately. Like war debts,

German obligations were partially indexed to economic conditions: in

addition to her fixed obligation of 2,000 million gold marks annually,

German would pay 26 per cent of her export revenues. Germany's payments

in foreign exchange and kind dwindled rapidly —— whether due to calculated

German strategy or   a   sincere inability to pay is still disputed today ——

leading an exasperated France and       Belgium to occupy the Ruhr in January

1923.   Occupationled not to resumption of full payments but to passive
resistance and hyperinflation. At year's end, the exhausted British,
French and German governments agreed to a commission to reschedule
reparations in   a manner that would buttress the precariously stabilized

German currency.     Under the chairmanship of Charles Dawes, director of the

U.S. Bureau of the Budget, the Commission scaled down Germany's total


obligation and deferred the bulk of the payments.          Annual transfers

started at 1,000 million gold marks, rising gradually to 2,500 million

after five years.     In a significant departure from the manner in which

commercial bond covenants were structured, reparations were indexed to

state of the world economy (rising or falling if the price level varied by

more than ten per cent).      In addition,     the payments schedule was indexed

to   domestic economic conditions, as measured by such items as the volume

of automobile sales.     Germany's obligation ended with the deposit of

domestic currency to the reparation authority's account; responsibility

for   effecting the transfer into foreign currency rested with the
recipients. If transfer      difficulties arose, the reparations committee was

to reinvest the funds in     Germany.    A    foreign Agent—General was appointed
to monitor and enforce the provisions of the plan.          To seal the agreement,




                                          5
a loan of 800 million marks secured by the assets         of the German railway

system was floated in foreign financial centers.

        This capsule account conveys little sense of the complexity of

negotiations.      A   central source of difficulty was that reparations were

interwoven with other obligations, notably war debts              Notwithstanding

U.S     insistence that the two were unrelated, Britain, France, Belgium and

Italy, for whom reparations receipts offset war debt expenditures, were

disinclined to extend debt relief to Germany unless the U.S. similarly

relieved them of wartime obligations.4/

        The third thread in the tapestry was made up of foreign bonds floated

mainly in New York in the l920s,         These were tightly interwoven with the

intergovernmental debts just described. Not only had the process of

large—scale foreign lending in the         'twenties had been   initiated by

successful flotation of the Dawes Loan in New York and London, but a

significant share of bonds subsequently sold in New York on behalf of

foreign   borrowers were     floated on behalf of   Germany and   the successor
states of Eastern       Europe   that owed reparations. Despite its disastrous
denouement, the process was not without logic. Long—term borrowing was a
way for these countries to defer a transfer that was difficult in the
short run.    reparations obligation of, say, 1,200 million marks in 1926
              A

could be funded by borrowing an equal amount from the United States,
thereby permitting payments to be spread out over the life of the bond.
While   the present value of the obligation was unchanged, transfer was
deferred   until   a   time when the disorganized conditions of the 1920s could

be surmounted.     By delaying the transfer until the productive potential of

the German and Eastern European economies was fully restored, these




                                           6
                   COMPARATIVE DEBT/X RATIOS
                                   1 928
      2.2-
        2-
      1.8 -
1\    1.6 -
      1.4-
4-.
U
      1.2-
ta
 0
        1-
 x
      0.8-
              _ _U
-a
 a)
      0.6-
      0.4 -
      0.2 - ________
              AUSTRALIA   JAPAN   CANADA   NEW ZEALAND   INDIA
countries would have been permitted to grow        out   from under the burden of

the debt.5/

       The   final thread in the tapestry was    short—term   debt:   loans,   foreign
deposits     and acceptances. Often short—term loans were extended to long—

term   borrowers by   the syndicate of underwriting banks and         issue houses


over the period required to successfully market their bonds. To these
should be added the foreign deposits maintained by creditor—country banks

and corporations doing business abroad, for use in making payment for
goods and     services purchased from foreigners or receiving payment for

those   rendered,    Acceptances, a form of trade credit on behalf of

coercial       borrowers,   should also be   included under this heading.G/ As

the most volatile component of foreign lending, short—term debts had

considerable capacity to interfere with the balance—of—payments position

and hence with the debt—servicing capacity of foreign debtors.


2.   Origins of Debt—Servicing Difficulties

       The debt crisis of the 1930s did not result from any single cause.

As in the 1980s, it arose out of interaction of a sequence of unantici-

pated disturbances with a set of fragile initial conditions. Over the

period of large—scale foreign lending (1924—1928),          the sheer volume of

debts to be serviced had increased enormously. Annual interest and

amortization payments could amount to ten per cent of the debt

outstanding; thus in relatively heavily indebted Latin American countries

like Bolivia, Uruguay and Chile, upwards of 15 per cent of export receipts

were required to service the central government's external debt alone (see

Figure l).7/ In other countries where the absolute value of the debt was
                                                               burden
greater (such as Australia and Canada, shown in Figure 2), the

relative to exports was less.        In Latin America, with such a large share

                                             7
               COMPARATIVE DEST/X RATIOS
                              LATIN AMERICA 1928
    3.5-7
           7   -
    2.5-
I
                                                              /
           MEXICOARCENTINA CHILE URUCUAY BRAZIL CUBA   PERU   BOLIVIA
of export revenues already going to debt service, once new lending

evaporated in 1928    a   significant transfer from debtor to creditor could be

required to keep service current.       The indebted countries were clearly

vulnerable to export and price—level shocks.

     Shocks came not in isolation but in rapid succession.             The terms of

trade of primary—product exporting countries had already been deteriorating

over the 1920s.     They then plunged downward with the onset of the Great

Depression. The United States was the leading market for primary products,

accounting for nearly 40 per cent of the consumption of the 15 leading

industrial countries, and the severity of the Depression in the U.S. was

unparalleled. Between 1929 and 1930, the terms of trade of wheat and tin

exporters declined by roughly 10 per cent, of cotton, sugar and silk

exporters by 20 per cent, of      rubber   exporters by 30 per cent.8/ By

increasing the cost of inelastically—demandedimports,            the   terms—of—trade

shock left a smaller trade surplus for use in debt service.             That shock was

reinforced by the global deflation; since external debt was denominated in

foreign currency (mainly dollars) and bore fixed interest rates, the decline

in wholesale prices in the United States of approximately 10 per cent

between 1929 and 1930 reinforced the shock to the debt—servicing capacity of

borrowing countries.       Sovereign debt/export   ratios of most borrowing
countries rose more dramatically after 1928, when foreign borrowing had
virtually halted, than before. In other words, the shock to export markets
contributed more dramatically than the preceding wave of borrowing to the
alarming rise     in the debt burden.      Difficulties at the   periphery were
exacerbated by     increased protectionism at the core, especially since the new

tariffs imposed after 1929 discriminated against agricultural goods.9/

Together,   depression and protectionism reduced the export revenues of 41


                                             8
primary—product exporting countries by some 50 per cent between 1928—29 and

1932—33. The magnitude of the shock suggests that the extent to which the

indebted countries squandered the funds they borrowed on unproductive

projects,   while relevant,   is of secondary importance.

      The weight of the debt and the magnitude of the external shock, while

critically important, were not the only determinants of default.

Eichengreen and Fortes (1986) have presented      a   multivariate analysis of

the incidence and extent of default in the 1930s.         The probability of

default was found to rise with both the debt/income ratio and the percent

deterioration in the terms of trade.        But in addition, domestic policy

responses to the Depression, notably the change in the government budget

deficit, also affected the tendency to default,        Countries which adopted

draconian fiscal responses to the budget deficits induced by the

macroeconomic slump were less likely to default than other countries with

similar debt/income ratios, similar terms—of—trade shocks, but more

expansionary fiscal policies. Default depended not only on the external

shock but on the domestic response.



                           Part II: Out of the Crisis


1.   Global Plans

      The challenge facing those attempting to renegotiate debts in the

1930s was how to deal with the overlapping nature of different

liabilities.      These interdependencies were what gave special appeal to

global   plans.




                                        9
(i)      The Bank for International   Settlements (1930—32)

        The moat straightforward global approach to the debt crisis would

have been to empower the Bank for International Settlements. The B.I.S.

had been founded in 1930 as part of the Young Plan rescheduling of German

reparations. France and    Britain    had never been satisfied with the Dawes

Plan apparatus on the grounds that achieving the transfer was not properly

the responsibility of Germany's creditors and their Agent—General. At the

sane time, they hesitated to place discretionary power in German hands.

Hence the establishment of an international bank to perform these

financial functions.10/

        Having been established to manage reparations, it was logical to ask

whether the B.I,S. might be used to address other debt problems.

According to J.W. Beyen (Alternate of the President of the B.I.S. from

1935 to 1937, President from 1937 to 1940, and author of the Beyen Plan

discussed below), the B.I.S. was initially conceived not just to

administer reparations but "also for international loans floated either in

connection with reparation payments or for other purposes."ll/ In a

proposal reminiscent of those for an expanded role for the IMF today,

Hubert Henderson of the British Economic Advisory Council suggested that

the B.I.S. might issue unbacked "International Certificates," to be

allocated to countries in proportion to the gold value of their exports in

1928.    The receipts could be used for any purpose,    including presumably

the maintenance of debt service. 12/

        The suggestion bore no fruit, due in part to the financial position

of the E.I.S. itself.     Having made unsuccessful loans in defence of the

gold standard to Austria, Germany and Hungary in 1931, many of Bank's

assets were frozen.     The profits derived from the everyday business of


                                        10
collecting German reparations in Reichsmarks and converting them to francs

and sterling were eliminated by the Hoover Moratorium.           The balance sheet

total of the 8.1.5. fell from two billion Swiss gold francs at the

beginning of 1931 to barely one—third that amount in 1933.           The 8.1.5. had

little liquidity of its own to inject into the international system, while

creditor—country governments hesitated to entrust new foreign lending to

an institution with so dismal a record of loan administration.

       B.I.S. officials took little initiative to raise additional capital

or to lobby for a more active role, and concentrated instead on fostering

cooperation among central banks.       Exchange—rate stability rather than

foreign debts became their primary concern.         This is unsurprising since

the 8.1.5. was a creature of the creditor countries and since the

governors of their central banks dominated its Board.           These officials

attached priority to the instability of currencies rather than to the

collapse   of   foreign lending.   Indeed,    to insulate efforts to insure

international currency stability from impinging political pressures,             the

statutes of the 8.I.S. prohibited the new institution from extending loans

directly to governments.fl/ After their unsatisfactory encounter with

sovereign lending in 1931, central banks were disinclined to alter these

statutes or to contemplate yet more ambitious initiatives.           If   a   global

solution to the debt crisis was in the offing,         it would not originate with

the B.I.S.


(ii)    The Kindersley—Norman Plan (1931)

       Attributed variously to Sir Robert Kindersley, Chairman of Lazard

Brothers and a director of the Bank of England, Sir Charles Addis, one

time British representative to the Reichsbank, and Montagu Norman,

Governor of the Bank of     England,   this   scheme came   to be known as the
                                         11
Norman Plan once the lovernor presented it at a meeting of the directors

of the B.I.S.         Resembling ideas offered previously by Hjalmar Schacht

among others, the plan was        to   establish a special international facility,

resembling the Bretton Woods         institutions       to be founded after World War

II, to make loans to foreign countries and corporations incapable of

obtaining them through normal channels.                 The facility would be

independent, not a branch of the B.LS.14/

        The corporation, to be headquartered in Holland or Switzerland for

fiscal reasons, would be endowed with              a   board of directors on which the

bankers    and other     financiers would be represented. While Britain and
possibly      also   Switzerland and Holland would help fund the facility, the

major    contributions were to come from the U.S. and France, the two

countries running significant balance—of--payments               surpluses. "World

recovery will be impeded," read the original version of the Plan "by the

fact that the U.S. and France, instead of lending back to the world their

surplus for a usable       balance   of payment, have been taking this surplus in

the    form   of gold."15/ Signficiantly, however, most of the money to be
lent   would come not from governments but from private investors. The

scheme envisaged a corporation with 25—5O million of ordinary capital,

put up by governments and the B.I.S., and the power to issue bonds in

amounts up to three times the value of subscribed capital. The

corporation would lend to "such Foreign Governments, Municipalities,

Mortgage Banks, Harbour Boards, Railways and Public Utility Companies, as

are in need of funds which cannot be obtained at the time through

customary channels,        and are in   a   position to offer really good security."

These loans would have the effect "of reestablishing the credit of the

foreign Governments, corporations, etc., to whom the money is lent, to


                                              12
[sic] improving the price of their securities in all markets of the world,

and the purchasing power of their nationals. .   .




       This   debt would take the form of debentures purchased in the creditor

countries by banks, issue houses, and corporations and companies "of any

magnitude." Trust     and   insurance companies, as owners of     existing bonds,
were   likely   customers since they were "vitally interested" in steps that

might repair the credit of foreign debtors,          Industrial firms dependent on

export markets similarly might be willing to subscribe. Other investors

could be encouraged through moral suasion. The cost to the borrowers

would be one to two per cent over the yield to the bondholders, the margin

to be placed in the corporation's reserve for contingencies.

       Memos describing the plan fail to explain why banks and issue houses,

otherwise disinclined to lend to illiquid debtors in 1931, might willingly

contribute HOO—150 million to such a facility.          One possibility is that

underwriting governments might have guaranteed the loans to financially

embarrassed borrowers,      although this would have    greatly   increased their
financial commitment.17/ Another is that      new loans    might be granted
seniority relative to old ones.lB/ By backing not specific loans but its

entire portfolio with its !25—50 million of capital, the corporation might

have been able to pool default risk more effectively than smaller

creditors.      Debtor—country authorities might have been less inclined to

default on loans extended by an international facility,           extending them the

kind of favored treatment usually reserved for League of Nations loans.

Perhaps the corporation's loans to fund private investment or public works

would succeed in restarting growth, thereby reducing debt/income ratios

and restoring creditworthiness.




                                        13
     To what extent was    the Kindersley—Norman Plan a sincere effort to
deal specifically with    default and the collapse of foreign lending, not

simply a device to prop up sterling by inducing France and           the U.S.    to

stimulate the demand     for   British exports by debtor nations? The Plan was

developed   and   presented   to the B.I.S. at the same   time   other talks were

underway for strengthening sterling.          In November and December 1930,

Norman was discussing the possibility of Britain floating a long—term loan

in France to reduce its short—term liabilities to foreigners.19/ Clarke's

(1967, p.181) view is that the proposal as presented to the B.l.S. was at

bottom an attempt to obtain "indirect support for Britain's financial

position:" This seems more plausible than to assume that the British were

operating out of altruism,        While it remains true that loans to indebted

countries would have helped them keep current the service on their

sterling debts1 the tendency of this to buttress Britain's financial

position would have been only one effect of the initiative,

     Insofar as the Kinderaley—Norman Plan represented an effort to deal

with the problems of debtor nations1 it is not entirely clear which

nations British officials had in mind.         Skidelsky (1967) and Kindleberger

(1973) suggest that they were concerned mainly to assist Britain's

traditional export markets: Germany, Eastern Europe, Australia and South

America.    Except for Australia (where the threat of default by New South

Wales in 1931 did not turn into actuality),         these were the principal

regions where default ultimately took place.          Hel)ce   an amply—funded

institution directing foreign capital to these regions might have done

much to head off the debt crisis.

     In the end, the Kinderaley—Norman Plan came to naught.            As early as

January 1931 Norman confessed that the plan was not particularly


                                         14
practical,   by which he meant    that   it was   unlikely   to be favorably

received.Q/     As Thomas Lamont's Paris partner reported following the 9

February 1931 meeting of the B.I.S. at which Norman's memo was             read,   "no

comments were made and    no   special interest was shown in       it."J       Merle

Cochran,    the Aserican Consul in Basle, was more blunt, describing how the

plan was poorly received since it placed the blame for the collapse of

foreign lending on France and the United States.22/

     A related problem, as Norman admitted to his Awerican colleague

Harrison,    was "the unwillingness, which we have seen in certain quarters,

to support a scheme of which the control and the funds           are   truly

international."23/      J.E. Crane, Deputy Governor of the New York Fed in

charge of foreign affairs, concluded that U.S. reluctance to lend abroad

would not be dissipated by a scheme over which New York had little

control.     J.P. Morgan and colleagues voiced their unwillingness to

purchase foreign bonds through the agency of an international corporation

over which they had only limited control, and which might be influenced by

foreign politicians and attacked by Populist Congressmen. Rather than

create artificial agencies, Morgana insisted that new loans meet the

market test.    The most that should be done was to appoint an advisory

committee to stimulate private bankers "to go ahead with their own

projects."24/ Even this modest proposal to improve the climate for

lending met a mixed reception.

     France's resistance was even stronger.           Since the lion's share of the

funds was likely to come from France, the Paris commercial banks and even

the Bank of France insisted that control over any new corporation rest in

French hands.     In the event such a scheme was adopted, the French favored

several separate institutions,      one for agricultural loans, one for railway


                                          15
construction,    and so forth.25/ But the French and Belgians agreed that

the initiative for formulating such a pian properly rested with bsnkers,

not governments.26/


(iii)     The Beyen and Crena de Jongh Plans (1932)

        The Beyen and Crena de .Jongh Plans were floated in the winter of

1931—32.     Compared with other plans discussed here, their scope was

limited:    they were designed to address the problem of short—term debts,

not default on long—term bonds.

        Beyen made his proposal to the Standstill Conferance in the winter of

193L27/ This conference arose out of         the threat to creditor—country

banks    and acceptance houses due   to the German financial crisis,2B/    German

banks and firms    relied   heavily on short—term credits from abroad.29/ The
prospect    that the repayment of credits might be interrupted by the German

financial crisis posed a serious threat to the London acceptance houses.

These institutions specialized in the extension of trade credits,

advancing to foreign exporters the funds they would receive once their

goods were shipped and payment was received,       Payment when   received was
passed along to the owner of the acceptance, interest earned taking the
form of the spread between the payment received and the amount advanced to
the exporter. In practice, British acceptance houses resold their paper
to the market,   functioning as intermediaries rather than investing their

own capital in the acceptance business.       Their reputation served as

guarantee in the event that the debtor failed to deliver the money on the

date required.    So long as default on these short—term debts was

exceptional, the acceptance houses could treat it as a cost of doing

business. But if many debtors defaulted simultaneously or their



                                        16
governments imposed exchange control, the acceptance houses themselves

could be pushed into default.

     This delicate mechanism functioned smoothly because the acceptance

houses could count on support from the Bank of England. But the Bank of

England had its own regulations to obey; it could not extend loans to the

acceptance houses on unacceptable collateral,      or so its Governor,    Montagu

Norman,   argued.30/   Hence for the Bank to lend in 1931 it was     necessary to
maintain the pretence that German credit was      still good.    Under the

provisions of the first German Standstill Agreement concluded in Basis

under the auspices of the B,I.S. on August 19, 1931, participating bankers

agreed not to call in outstanding credits nor to cancel the credit lines

under which German debtors could draw bills.       Bankers who refused to sign

could of course call in their credit outstanding but would receive only

blocked Reichsmarks under the provisions of German exchange control.31/

The governments involved put considerable pressure on the bankers to sign.

     In Beyen's view, this charade would eventually be seen through,

leading to runs on financial institutions.       Default on short—term debts,

in his view, was more serious than default on long—term loans.           While not

belittling the seriousness of default on bonds, he concluded that

"whatever   the loan contracts may say to the contrary,      the capital is in

fact not called for, and the default on interest payments does not

seriously hamper the economic life of the debtor country until it needs to

borrow again."32/      As a banker, he regarded default on short—term debts

the more serious threat to financial stability.

     Beyen's proposal to the second Standstill Conference that met in

Berlin in December 1931, at which he was a member of the Dutch delegation,

was to convert   short—term credits   into   long—term   loans repayable in

                                       17
installments over    a   period of of 20 years.   There was no plan for

government to assume obligations incurred by the private sector or for

other administrative changes.       Each debtor was to be considered

individually.     If the problem was not one of illiquidity, which could be

resolved simply by lengthening the maturity of the debt, but one of the

insolvency of a foreign corporate debtor, then the remaining assets of the

company should be allocated among the creditors, natives and foreigners

receiving equal treatment.       But in Beyen's view the problem was mainly one

of illiquidity, not insolvency,       If this could be dealt with by

lengthening the maturity of the debt, repayment could begin and German

exchange controls could be lifted,       The creditworthiness of the debtor

having been restored,      the normal operation of international capital

markets could recolmsence,

     In the event that a debtor country did not succeed in earning foreign

exchange adequate to service the long—term debt, there would be provision

for payment in local currency.       In the event of a foreign exchange

shortage,   debtor countries would be permitted to extend preferential

treatment to creditor countries who were their best customers; creditors

running bilateral deficits would have first claim on the available foreign

exchange.

     To say that the Beyen Plan was unenthusiastically received is to put

it mildly.      The bankers preferred to maintain the charade of business as

usual in the hope that events might turn for the better.        Germany,

embroiled in reparations negotiations,       insisted that servicing even long—

term loans was impossible in light of the limited availability of foreign

exchange. Given the interlocking nature of different debt instruments,         a

global plan limited to short—term debts was not global enough.


                                        18
       An alternative to the Beyen Plan was submitted to the Standstill

Committee by another Dutch banker, Crena de Jongh,             It took a different

approach to lengthening the maturity structure of the debt.             In contrast

to the Beyen Plan, creditors were to repay their short—term debts on

schedule,    but in local currency rather than foreign exchange. A central

administrator would issue foreign—currency—denominatedbonds to be

serviced with the return from investing the funds            stemming from   the

repayment of short—term loans by domestic debtors. Where the Beyen Plan

relieved domestic debtors of the obligation to repay in the short run, the

Crena de Jongh Plan would have required domestic debtors to make prompt

payment,    albeit in local currency.     If Crena de   Jongh viewed the crisis

simply as a transfer problem, Beyen viewed it principally as a problem of

domestic illiquidity that would have interrupted service even had the

short—term obligations been     denominated in domestic currency. In contrast
to   the Beyen Plan, which   failed to specify the composition of the agency
which   would collect and   adminiater   the foreign exchange, under the Crena

de Jongh Plan administration was    placed firmly       in   the hands of creditor—
country    banks.

       As Beyen (1951, p.69) put it, the Crena de Jongh Plan          "met with as
little response from the Standstill creditors as my suggestions."
(iv)    The World Economic Conference (1933)

       The World Economic Conference which convened in London on 12 June

1933 was an outgrowth of the conference on intergovernmental debts held at

Lausanne in 1932.     Part of the rationale for the London Conference was the

feeling,    especially prevalent in Europe, that the problems of war debts,

commercial debts, deflation, exchange—rate stability and trade warfare

could only be resolved if all were addressed simultaneously. Despite or

                                         19
perhaps because of these interconnections,    debts remained,   in the view of

the Europeans, one of the central issues to be taken up in London.       But

the United States still regarded war debts as off limits.       Consequently,

the agenda for London was limited to money and credit policies,     exchange—

rate stabilization, and tariff and and nontariff barriers to trade,       With

the dollar's devaluation on the eve of the conference and President

Roosevelt's refusal to agree to its early stabilization, European

delegations increasingly focused on what they perceived as the ongoing

disintegration of the international monetary system.

     The heavily indebted countries of Latin America and Eastern Europe

saw things differently and did their utmost to remind creditor—country

governments of the urgency of the debt crisis.     In a series of preparatory

meetings with U.S. officials in Washington, D.C., they advocated ambitious

initiatives to restart international capital flows.      The idea of a

"normalization fund" to funnel capital to countries requiring foreign

funds in order to restart debt service and to fund public works programs

had been mooted by the Special British Mission.33/ Britain proposed an

international fund of $1500 to $2000 million, to be subscribed by

creditor—country governments    and designed to make   loans to debtor—country

central   banks,   which would respond by lifting trade barriers and exchange

controls.   One after another, debtor—country delegations endorsed the

proposal. The Rumanians argued that this initiative was essential for the

recovery of countries with no domestic financial market to finance deficit

spending. Their representative stated "with great emphasis that it should

be clear that some international arrangement simply has got to be worked

out to help them."34/ Turkey proposed the establishment of an

"international credit bank" to promote international capital      flows.35/

                                      20
Czechoslovakia,      though not among the most heavily indebted nations,

acknowledged the dependence of its economic prospects on the recovery of

its trading partners and attached great importance to "the general

alleviation of the indebtedness of the Central and Eastern Europen

agricultural countries which were formerly her best customers."36/

      But with intergovernmental debts off limits,       it was hard to hold a

productive discussion of commercial obligations. Had she entertained

Latin American and European proposals for a wide—ranging solution to the

problem of commercial debts, the U.S. would have undermined the official

position that it was inappropriate to reconsider intergovernmental debts.

In private, U.S. officials admitted that an international fund to lend to

countries requiring capital inflows to aid recovery could not be pushed

through Congress. As they put it to the Polish ambassador, "American

experience with respect to international       loans has not been sufficiently

happy to encourage it to enter into additional obligations,"37/ In the

end, debt was not extensively discussed in London.         The atmosphere was

best summed up by Beyen, who again appears on the scene this time as

deputy delegate from the Netherlands.        "We met in the Geological Museum at

Kensington," he subsequently wrote, "and none of our activities disturbed

the fossils."38/


 2.   Negotiations Setweeen Governments

      With the rejection of global plans, negotiations were officially left

in private   hands, One wonders how     the give   and take   between debtor and

creditor    would   have been shaped had governments been more intimately

involved.    Some light can be shed on the question by considering war debts

and reparations,     where official involvement was inevitable because

governments were both the major creditors and the major debtors.

                                        21
      The Dawes Plan under which German reparations had been rescheduled

in 1924 was never conceived as a permanent solution.     A   new committee

which differed from the Dawes Committee by virtue of Germany's full and

equal representation was appointed in January 1929 to effect such a

solution,   Fatigued by endless disputes,   those involved hoped for a

settlement that would entail early evacuation of the Rbinelsnd, which had

been occupied in the course of previous reparations quarrels,      and

elimination of the extraordinary provisions of the Dawes Plan, notably a

foreign Agent—General on German soil to collect earmarked revenues and

administer their transfer into foreign currency.

     In line with previous policy, the U.S. government did not participate

in the conference out of fear that its involvement would be seen as

acknowledgement of the linkage of war debts and reparations. Instead it

provided the committee's neutral chairman, Owen 0. Young (corporate

executive, former Agent—General for reparations, and current director of

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York),      Negotiators eliminated those

provisions of the Dawes Plan that Germany found most objectionable,

notably a reparations agency to monitor German finances.       Not only waa the

bill scaled down and pushed further into the future, but Germany's

obligation was once again indexed to economic conditions:       the total was

split, with provision that the second, or conditional, tranche could be

deferred in the event of transfer problems.

     The Young Plan represented a significant reduction of Germany's

reparations payments.   The principal stumbling block to further steps       in

the direction of realism remained U.S. intransigence on war debts.         The

relationship of reparations to war debts was readily acknowledged by other

governments:   under the Young Plan Germany's reparations bill would be


                                     22
reduced automatically by at least two—thirds of any war debt relief

extended by the U.S.    To circumvent U.S. objections,   this rider was

contained in a separate "concurrent memorandum."

     The prominent feature of the Young Plan was its short life.      The

Great Depression underscored the fantastic nature of the transfer

schedule, swiftly rendering the plan redundant. The problem of

acknowledging this reality was again the linkage with war debts.

President Hoover vacillated out of fear that a moratorium on reparations

and war debts would destroy once and for all U.S. ability to deny the

existence of a link,39/ In the event, the severity of the Depression and

the outbreak of financial crisis in Austria and Germany left little

choice.   The Hoover Moratorium announced on 20 June 1931 suspended all

payments on all intergovernmental debts.

     The moratorium was designed to last for a year.     To negotiate a more

durable solution,   national delegations assembled once more in Lausanne in

June 1932.   The U.S. was absent yet again, this time because Congress,     in

an election year, had passed a resolution prohibiting the Administration

from negotiating any reduction in foreign debts.    In light of the

continued deterioration of economic conditions,    radical concessions were

made on reparations. To extinguish her obligation, Germany was required

only to deliver   H50 million   (or }4 3 billion) of five per cent redeemable

bonds to the 8.1.3., which amounted to about one year's transfer under the

1921 plan.   But under "the Gentlemen's Agreement," ratification of this

plan was made contingent upon the successful conclusion of parallel

negotiations on war debts.

     British officials argued that concessions were in the interest of

even the United States.   They regarded debt relief not simply in terms of


                                     23
the feasibility of repayment but in terms of global repercussions.

"Experience has, in fact, shown," Sir H, Lindsay wrote, "that when dealing

with international transfers of the character and of the unprecedented

magnitude of the post—war intergovernmental obligations, the principle of
                                                            —— can only be
"the capacity to pay" of the debtor —— even if thus applied

regarded as of secondary importance compared with an even wider principle,

viz,,    that of the capacity of the world to endure the economic and

financial consequences which those transfers would involve."Q/

        By insisting on prompt payment of intereet and principal, the British

argued,    the United States was worsening the Great Depression. Between

1929 and 1932 manufacturing production in the U.S. had fallen by 48 per

cent,    and unemployment had   risen to nearly   24   per cent of the American
lshor force, Under such circnmstances it was unrealistic to suppose that
the U.S. would willingly increase its imports from Britain. It was
equally difficult for the U.K. to increase exports since, in contrast with
                                                     ——       what the British
coercial      debts incurred for productive purposes

called "self—liquidating" loans ——      it had not been possible to invest the
war loans productively. Absent the option of increasing exports, the U.K.

could service its debts only by shipping gold.           British gold exports would

add to the concentration of reserves in the U.S., forcing monetary

contraction on the rest of the world.4l/ The balance—of—payments

difficulties caused by such transfers encouraged exchange control,

bilateral clearing and the further disintegration of the international

monetary system, whose reconstruction the British viewed as essential to

recovery from the slump.        As a result of U.S. war debt policy, the British

argued,    "The international monetary mechanism without which the modern

world cannot effectively conduct its daily life is being broken into


                                         24
pieces with all the manifold forms of privation and distress which this

involves."42/ Even the U.S. would benefit from wiping the slate clean of

debts if this permitted reconstruction of the international financial

system.

       British observers did not overlook the irony of American inability to

see the logic of their position,    especially when exceptional measures like

farm foreclosure moritoria were being adopted domestically. Sir Frederick

Leith—Ross, chief economic advisor to the British government,     submitted

the following satire to the editor of Punch.43/


                          "A Tip to our Statesmen"

"'You cannot expect,' said my American friend, 'the farmer of Iowa to
understand the advantages of debt cancellation.  It is no good preaching
economics to him; he is a hard—boiled fellow who considers that a debt is
a debt and a debtor is a dog. What you have got to do is to follow his
methods.

     Now, in Iowa, debt cancellation is unknown.  Debt repudation is
unheard of. Debts must be honoured.   How are they honoured? A farmer
can't pay debts out of deficits. His Bank forecloses, A salesman comes
down to collect.  How does he collect? Lie advertises the property.  The
neighbours attend. They stand around, and to make sure that the
proceedings are all correct and above board and that the saleman does not
quit betimes they put a halter around his neck, Then the bidding opens.
It is not brisk.  Prospective purchasers find a gun firmly planted in
their ribs. It discourages them. Finally, the farmer concerned, or a
friend, bids a dollar, and the debt is settled.

     This procedure is simple, practical and perfectly effective: and
there seems no reason why it should not be given a wider application. The
World Conference is to meet in in London. As its first proceedings, the
Chairman will no doubt emphasise the need for getting together.  He will
quote amid resounding cheers the encouraging references     to
                                                           good
neighbouring relations uttered by Mr. Franklin 0. Roosevelt. He will then
call upon the American representatives to deal with the question of debts.
The representatives of the United States will place on the table the Bonds
of the Allied Governments and will express the unanimous conviction of
Senate and Congress that these debts must be encashed

       'Well,' says the Chairman,   'let's see what we can get for them,   Any
bids?'

       No bids forthcoming from the United Kingdom? From France? no: Italy?
No: Belgium? No: Holland?     No: Germany? at this point Hitler raises his

                                      25
arm with a gesture that commands attention, 'Fin Mark'. From the opposite
end of the Conference room the representative of the Soviet Union shouts
'Em rouble'. He is hastily ejected.   Hitler has it. He collects the
bonds and from henceforward the world is his debtnr. Hail Hitler!

     After all, it might not be a bad way out."


     As the Depression deepened,   U.S. officials hesitantly began to

entertain alternatives. Hoover's Secretary of State, Henry Stimson, while

opposing unilateral cancellation, in 1932 suggested trading debt

concessions for access to British and Commonwealth markets.M/ Progress

slowed and rhetoric escalated with the approach of the 1932 presidential

election.   The Hoover Moratorium having expired in the autumn of 1932,

immediately following the election France and Britain requested a

suspension of the December 1932 installment,    which the Americans refused.

France then defaulted on her payment, and Britain took the symbolic step

of paying the entire installment in gold to protest against U.S.

accumulation of gold and hesitancy to reflate. When the next installment

came due six months later, Britain made only token payment and six other

debtors defaulted,     In June 1934, Congress condemned token payments,   in

response to which the British, like the others, paid nothing at all.      War

debts and reprations sputtered out like a candle in the rain.

     Whet do these negotiations reveal about governments' attitudes toward

the renegotiation of foreign debts? Three points emerge.      First, to a

greater degree than many private lenders, public officials acknowledged

the relevance of ability to pay.     Had governments participated more

actively in the renegotiation of commercial debts in the 1930s, commercial

creditors might have been forced to more quickly accept ability—to—pay

criteria,   Second,   although govenments should have been best eble to

appreciate the impact of default on the world economy as a whole, U.S.


                                      26
attitudes toward war debts reveal that some major governments appreciated

these impacts incompletely.     Third, because of the existence of

interlocking debtor—creditor relationships, governments found it

impossible to reschedule one form of foreign debt without at the same time

considering the others.


3.   Bilateral Negotiations

      The alternative to global approaches to the debt crisis was to deal

with defaults on a case—by—case basis.     The difficulty with initiating

negotiations between borrowers and bondholders was determining who

represented the latter.     Typically, representative committees of

bondholders were organized.     It is tempting to view these committees as an

efficient solution to the bargaining game between creditors and debtors.

All parties could gain if through negotiations they moved toward the core

of cooperative solutions.     The bondholders would gain if at least token

interest payments were restarted. The debtors would gain if, through the

payment of some interest,    sanctions prohibiting the flotation of new

issues on behalf of foreign borrowers in default,    like those regularly

imposed by the London market, were removed,     By facilitating negotiation,

a bondholders representative committee might improve the position of all

those involved and still keep a slice of the pie for itself.

      In Britain, the mechanism through which negotiations took place was

firmly established by the lB3Os.     The Corporation of Foreign Bondholders

(CFBH)   was   universally acknowledged to speak for the bondholders. Founded

in 1868, the CFBH was composed initially of representatives of the issue

houses and of individual bondholders.45/ In 1898 it was reorganized by an

Act of Parliament;    henceforth the Council of the Corporation, its

governing body, was made up of representatives of the British Bankers'

                                      27
Association, representatives of the London Chamber of Commerce, and
miscellaneous members at least six of whom were substantial bondholders.

Removing representatives of the issue houses was designed to allay fears

that the CFBH was   a mere organ of   the underwriters, thereby permitting the

government to delegate to the Council responsibility for all disputes over

defaulted debts.    By the 1930s, representatives of the British Bankers

Association, the London Chamber of Commerce and individual bondholders

were joined on the Council by representatives of the Association of

Investment Trusts and the British Insurance Association    — representing
                                                        ——
institutions with substantial holdings of foreign bonds       along with   the

Stock Exchange and the Bank of England.

     The official British government position was that default on foreign

loans was a private matter.     Officials found it convenient to have a

reputable bondholders' committee to which disgruntled investors could be

referred,   To infer from this that the British government did not involve

itself in debt negotiations would be incorrect,     however. Rather than

divorcing itself from negotiations, when bondholders and issue houses

attempted to enlist government assistance,     they were required to do so via

the CFBH.   The CFBH's minutes noted in 1937, for example, "We know that

the Treasury expect any request for Government action to be made to them

by this Council and Messrs Lazards, have, I understand, been informed of

this attitude. "46/

     Government assistance took various forms.      Upon learning of

developments that improved the prospects for productive negotiations,      the


government might pass the information to the Council.      Information on the

political and economic situation might be obtained from the local Embassy.

To initiate negotiations,     the CFBH might rely on the local Embassy staff


                                       28
and the Ambassador himself. Although communications from the CFBH to

foreign officials might be conveyed by the Ambassador,       the CFBH did not

hesitate to remind Embassy officials that the Council did the negotiating.

When the British Ambassador to Brazil hesitated to convey a sharply worded

memorandum and recommended specific revisions, the CFBH instructed the

Foreign Office that "the Memorandum should be delivered to the Brazilians

without further delay...we have no reason to modify its terms."47/ The

price paid for government assistance was pressure when settlement was

desired for diplomatic or military reasons. In July of 1939, with the

British government anxious to conclude a political treaty with Greece as a

bulwark against German expansion,    the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the

Foreign Secretary pressed the Council to accept Greece's debt offer to

facilitate the successful conclusion of treaty negotiations. According to

the CFBH, the Chancellor "in so many words...,      advised us to take whatever

was available."48/ The CFBH refused.       Thus,   there is no evidence that the

price of government assistance was particularly high.

     In the United States, the mechanism for negotiations remained

incompletely formed when default broke out.        As late as 1913 the U.S. had

remained a net foreign borrower. Foreign flotations on the scale of those

witnessed in the 1920s were   a   new phenomenon for the American capital

market.49/   There had been no occasion to establish a standing committee

representing American bondholders. Initially,       ad hoc committees were

established to negotiate resolutions to individual defaults.        As default

spread,   the shortcomings of the approach became evident.50/ Committees

set up to negotiate over individual bond issues had higher administrative

expenses than an ongoing organization.      Temporary committees,   with little

reputation to protect, might be set up by questionable individuals lured


                                      29
by generous coissions into preying on ill—informed bondholders. Rival

coittees set          up by issue houses, disaffected bondholders and independent

entrepreneurs might compete for bondholder allegiance.                        Each wishing to be

first to conclude        a   negotiated settlement, the debtor could play off one

coamdttee   against another.               Ad hoc   coittees      lacked established      ties with
government and,        unlike    the British Council, were unable to credibly

threaten   sanctions prohibiting future                    flotations,
        In response to these problems,                the Foreign Bondholders Protective

Council (FBPC) was founded in 1933.                   As Herbert Feis (the State Department

official    involved)     tells the story,            government officials were       intimately
involved.5l/ Having published in                    1930   his classic study of prewar         lending

(Feis,   1930), Feis      explicitly adopted the British Council                as the model       for
the   new American      organization,         battling both sceptical officials           who

opposed government        support      for the   organization and bankers who wished
                                                     new

to    control   it.    Because    requests for intervention from bondholders were
absorbing so      much   time, the idea         of    a bondholders' association was

favorably received           in the   Hoover    Athsinistration's State Department in
1932.    A conittee       was    set up under State Department sponsorship to draw

up plans    for   a   private organization.                One problem was how to     finance the

committee without        relying      on    public funds or the banks, either of which
might undermine the independence                of    the new association.      The     solution was
to solicit finance from charitable foundations and the Stock                          Exchange

until    commissions rendered the             FBPC    self—sustaining. Another problem was
determining whether the           FBPC      would conduct negotiations         itself    or simply

discourage the formation              of   competing committees by conferring            its   stamp

of    approval on a     particular committee.                The 1933   banking crisis did     more

than    Feis's arguments to defeat the proposal that the bankers form the

                                                     30
committees and the FBPC play only a facilitating role.      A final problem

was enlisting the support of both the banks and the Roosevelt

Administration, each of whom feared that any new organization would fall

under the influence of the other.   Here again the spread of default and

the drain on the time of both State Department officials and private

bankers did much to induce their accession.

     Like the British Council, the FBPC liasoned with the government and

enlisted the State Department in its negotiations. In turn, the State

Department sent visitors (Feis and William 0. Douglas) to consult with the

FBPC at its New York office.   Owing to the predilictions of the Roosevelt

Administration, however, relations between the FBPC and State remained

more distant than those between the British Council and the Foreign

Office.   The Administration remained suspicious that the FBPC was little

more than a mouthpiece for the banks.       Compared to sterling bonds,

defaults on dollar bonds were both numerous and geographically widespread;

active support for the bondholders would have required modifications in

U.S. foreign policy not just in Central Europe, as was the case for

Britain, but globally.   Still more influential was the priority the

Roosevelt Administration attached to trade liberalization. Cordell Hull

in particular viewed trade warfare as both an economic evil and a source

of diplomatic tension.   With the passage of the Reciprocal Trade

Agreements Act in 1934 the U.S. began to move back toward freer trade, in

part to strengthen its international    alliances.    Effective U.S. pressure

on governments in default had to involve, at least implicitly, the threat

of trade sanctions, which Hull viewed as incompatable with broader

American objectives.




                                       31
     A telling example of government involvement took place in connection

with the 1933 German standstill.52/ That summer the German government

declared a moratorium on the foreign transfer of interest payments on

national,    municipal and corporate bonds.          The Dutch and Swiss threatened

to impose trade sanctions against Germany, with whom they ran balance of

trade deficits, The Germans then settled with both countries, whose

nationals were to receive full interest on their Dawes and Young Plan

bonds and 3 1/2 to 4 1/2 per cent on most other German bonds.            Sweden,

France and Belgiwn followed suit.           The British Government no sooner

prepared to ask Parliament for power to establish a clearing arrangement

than a German financial delegation traveled to London.            Following

negotiation,    an agreement was reached under which Britain would impose no

sanctions against Germany, in return for which Germany would continue to

service Dawes and Young Plan bonds held by British citizens.53/ That

arrangement survived until the outbreak of World War II.

     The contrast with the American response is striking.            U.S. officials

had been    warned by Schacht    that a moratorium was imminent. Although the
Roosevelt Administration    expressed its "shock" at Germany's decision,           in

response to Schacht's request for help in opening channels of

communication with the bondholders, the Secretary of State responded,

according to Herbert Feis, that "the American government could not get

involved in these private debts.      .   . "54/   Despite official protests,

American bondholders received nothing.             The contrast with the experience

of Germany's European creditors drove home the influence governments

exercised over negotiations between debtors and bondholders.

     It was through such negotiations that the debt crisis of the l930s

was ultimately resolved.        The process was far from efficient and painless,


                                            32
requiring up to a quarter of a century to complete.       Bolivia, the first

country to default in 1931, was the last to settle in 1955.       The

expectations    of the bondholders and foreign governments differed widely,

and considerable time could be required for their convergence.

     Each negotiation between bondholders and foreign governments is a

story unto itself.     Both sides offered concessions as time dragged on:

after   having received nothing for years the bondholders grew increasingly
willing to   accept any reasonable offer, while foreign governments grew

increasingly anxious to settle in anticipation of the prospect of renewed

international    lending.   The compromises accepted by the bondholders'

representatives   were significant.     Using Eichengreen and Werley's (1988)

sample of foreign dollar bonds issued in the United States in the l920s,

the spread between the ex ante yield and the internal rate of return (IRR)

realized on these loans can be regressed on the years elapsed between

default and settlement, yielding:


        Ex Ante Yield — IRR = 0.006 + 0.00245 Years Elapsed             R2 =   .68
                               (3.22)   (20,65)
                                                        t—statistics    in parentheses


The return realized by the bondholders relative to the contracted rate

declines significantlywith the length of the period between the early

l930s and the time of settlement,       indicatinghow the bondholders moderated

their demands as the period progressed.55/

     Often a negotiated solution required many years to achieve.          That the

bond market never recovered fully from the defaults of the 1930s and that

large—scale foreign lending through other channels only reappeared 40

years after the iriterwar defaults must be attributed in large part to the

difficulty of negotiating cooperative solutions to those defaults.             It is



                                         33
not obvious that creditor—government intervention could have expedited the

process.    As described above, the British and American governments were

not adept in their use of moral suasion to influence the stance of

bondholders' committees.      Had they been more effective arm twisters,         it is

not clear that it would have been feasible to induce the bondholders to

accept the same terms at an earlier date       The bondholders' committees

were   engaged in a bargaining game with    the foreign governments.   If
creditor   governments   had somehow compelled the bondholders to settle

earlier without altering the behavior of the debtors at the same time,

this would have weakened the bargaining position of the creditors and

forced them to settle for less.      Achieving the same outcome at an earlier

date through pressure on the creditors would have required matching

pressure on the debtors,      The obvious way of accomplishing this was by

increasing the cost to the debtors of remaining in default, which accrued

in the form of inability to borrow.56/ Only by promoting the reactivation

of the international market could the creditor—country governments have

brought    this about. In a   sense, their inability to agree on global plans

for restarting lending also impeded the ability of creditor—country
governments to expedite privately negotiated solutions to the crisis,

3     Conclusion
       Comparing current proposals for   achieving a global solution to the

LDC debt crisis with their interwar antecedents reveals how little          is
novel   or unprecedented in recent plans.     Interwar proposals for dealing

globally with the problem of defaulted foreign loans included schemes to

swap one liability for another, to encourage creditor—countrybanks and

bondholders to engage collectively in additional lending, to lengthen the

maturity structure of the debt, to service the debt in local currency,             and

                                       34
to establish an international fund to lend to indebted countries who

private markets would not touch.    Each of these suggestions has its

counterpart in recent discussions of the debt crisis.

     Individuals   currently advocating global solutions will not be

heartened by the failure of the interwar schemes.    At the same time, there

are lessons to be derived from these earlier failures.    First, bankers

will actively resist any plan that limits their control over negotiations

or commits them to a specific course of action.     Governments will need to

be exceptionally adept in their exercise of moral suasion to elicit

cooperation. Second, governments must be exceptionally enlightened to

recognize the benefits of global plans.    As in tariff negotiations, the

benefits of debt relief or new money at concessional terms, which accrue

to the creditor countries largely in the form of a more stable world

economy, are diffuse relative to the costs, be they capital losses on

existing loans or the budgetary cost of new ones.    Government officials

are more inclined to pursue other issues whose payoff is more apparent.




                                     35
                                    FOOTNOTES



I. See dine (1987) and Fischer (1987) for reviews and critiques of the
alternative proposals.

2,  The standard work on the subject is Moulton and Pasvolsky (1932).
Recent revisionist accounts have offered a more nuanced view of the
American position, incluencing the interpretation I offer here. See
Parrini (1968), Murray (1969) and Wilson (1971). An account which
phasizes French rather than American intransigence is Rhodes (1969).
3.    Leffler (1972), pp.586—589.

4. The debate resembles current discussions in which even those with
sympathy for the principle of debt relief find it difficult to agree who
is deserving and to know where to stop once the process of extending
relief has begun.

5.    Feis (1966), p,15—16.

6.    For details,   see Eichengreen and Fortes (1987).

7.  Total external central government public debt is taken from United
Nations (1953), exports from League of Nations (various years).   A problem
in constructing these ratios was created by the fact that, in aggregating
total foreign—currency debt and expressing it in domestic currency, the UN
attempted to remove the impact on domestic—currency values of short—run
exchange—rate fluctuations, therefore using artificial exchange rates
(often the official rate where it differed from the market rate) for the
conversion into domestic currency.   I used these same artificial rates to
convert the debt back into dollars. Market rates were used to express
exports in dollars. Because only sovereign debt is included, these
figures differ from total—foreign—debt—to—exportratios like those in
Cardoso and Dornbusch (this volume).

8.    Eichengreen and Fortes (1986), p. 612,

9.    See Eichengreen (1988).

10. Establishing an international bank to replace the Dawes Plan agencies
was not universally supported. See Dulles (1932).

11.    Dulles (1932), pp. 45—46.

12.  Henderson seems to have been concerned more with the global reserve
shortage constraining moetary reflation than with the foreign debt
crisis.  See Henderson (1932).

13.  Beyen (1951), p.51. There was disagreesient between U.S. and European
officials about the scope of the new bank. The Europeans, notably
Schacht, urged the creation of an institution with ample resources for use
in stimulating long—term credit flows and promoting international trade.
The Americans, George L. Harrison of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York

                                       36
 prominent among them, preferred a modest institution that would
 concentrate on stabilizing exchange rates. See Costigliola (1972).

14. Clarke (1967), p.179.   In one variant of the plan, however, the
B.I.S, would be responsible for appointing its president and the majority
of its directors.

15.  Cited by Kunz (1987), p.37. This passage was struck from the
memorandum following its icy reception at the B.I.S. For the original
memo, see National Archives RG39, Box 104, M.H. Cochran to J. Cotton, 11
February 1931. The revised memo can be found in this same source and in
the Lamont Papers (Baker Library, Harvard University), 181—19,
                                                               copy of
proposal, 2 February 1931.

16.   Lamont Papers (Baker Library, Harvard University), 181—19, Copy of
proposal,  2 February 1931.

17.   Bennett (1962), p.104.

18.   I am aware of no conversations to this effect.

19.   Clarke (1967), p.178.

20.   Kunz (1987), p.35.

21.  Lamont Papers (Baker Library, Harvard University), 181—19, N.W. Jay
to Thomas W. Lamont, 14 February 1931.

22.  National Archives RG39, Box 104, M.H. Cochran to J. Cotton, 11
February 1931.

23. Norman letter to Harrison, 3 March 1931, quoted in Clarke
                                                              (1967),
p.179. The remainder of this paragraph draws on Clarke, pp.179—80.

24.   NA RG39, Box 104, M.H. Cotton to W.R. Castle, Jr., 11 March 1931.

25.   NA RG39, Box 104, M.H, Cochran to J.     Cotton,   26 February 1931.

26.  A proposal to establish a holding company, or investment trust, to
handle foreign bonds, to be made up of the three or four largest
international banking houses in New York, had been circulated in December
1930 by Max Winkler of Griscom and Company. National Archives RG39, Box
104, M.H. Cochran to J. Cotton, 11 February 1931.

27.  What follows  is   from Beyen (1951).    Harold James informs   me that more
information can be   found    in the records of the Reichsbank's Committee on
External Debts.

28.   The difficulties created by short—term credits in 1931 are recounted
by Eichengreen and   Portes    (1987).




                                         37
29.  James (1986) describes this situation in detail. Forbes (1987, p.
574) reports that in the summer of 1931 as much as I50 million of credit
was extended to German banks and to German enterprise by British banks and
acceptance houses.
30.        conceivable that the Bank of England could have bent or broken
        It is
its    rules, as it had
                     done on a number of prior occasions. See
Kindleberger (1978), pp. 174 ff. But there was the counterargument  that
doing so would itself serve to undermine confidence in sterling.
31,  Standstill Agreements were also arrangd with Austria and Hungary,
the Austrian Agreement serving as a model for the German Standstill. See
Forbes (1987).

32.     Beyen (1951), p. 62.

33.     Kindleberger (1973), p.211.

34.     United States (1933), p.563.

35.     United States (1933), p.571.

36. United States (1933), p.530.    In an intriguing departure from the
borrowing—country line, the Chilean representative, Benjamin Cohen,
suggested that the initiative fell on Chile to take measures to restart
debt service.   Too much of Chile's borrowing had been squandered on
"trivial" expenditures such as sending military missions abroad and
                                                                      for
holding a 100 per cent gold cover on central bank liabilities purely
reasons of national pride. Although raising taxes or reducing government
                                                                      and
expenditures to fund debt service threatened to provoke civil unrest
naval mutiny, Chile had recently reorganized the Nitrate Sales
Corporation, which marketed one of its principal exports, permitting 25
                                                                      If
per cent of its profits to go toward rehabilitatingChilean credit.
the Chilean delegate to the London Conference dramatically announced the
measures that had been taken, as Cohen proposed, perhaps other countries
might be provoked to similarly resume some service on their foreign debts.
                                                A hint may lie in the fact
Why the Chilean approach differed is unclear.
that Cohen's discussions in Washington proceeded from debt to commercial
policy,   It could be that the Chileans' ultimate concern was market access
and that they viewed concessions on debt as a way to secure favorable
treatment for their exports.   United States (1933), pp,518—519.

37.     United States (1933), p.561.

 38.    Beyen (1951), p.82.

 39.    Kindleberger (1973), p.154.

40.     United Kingdom (1932), p.7.

 41.  The assumption was that the U.S. would not expand its money supply in
                                                                         to
 response to gold inflows, thereby failing to "recycle" its gold imports
 the rest of the world.


                                       38
42. United Kingdom (1932), p.S.

43. Leith—Ross (1968), pp.155—l56.     For obvious reasons the satire never
made its way into print.

44. Stimson (1932), p.3.  The occasion for these suggestions was Britain's
decision to extend preferential tariff treatment to the Dominions as part
of the 1932 Ottawa Agreement. On the Ottawa Agreement, see Cairncross and
Eichengreen (1983), chapter 3.

45.  Jenks (1927), pp.288—289.  For details, see Eichengreen, Huam and
Fortes (1987), from which the present discussion draws.

46.   CFBH Minutes, Poland, 23/2/37.

47.   CFBH Minutes, Brazil, 14/7/38.

48.   CFBH Minutes, Greece, 18/7/39.

49.  The shifts in America's external position described here are
elaborated upon in Eichengreen (1987).

50.   Eichengreen and Fortes (1986), p.622.

51.   Feis (1966), pp.266—278.

52.   This discussion is taken from Eichengreen and Fortes (1986),
pp.619-620.

53.   Leith—Ross (1968), pp.186—187.

54.  Feis (1966), p.141. The sentence continues, '. ..but that perhaps the
Treasury or the Federal Reserve System might be able to suggest a
procedure for arranging consultation with the bond holders."

55.  A problem with interpreting this equation as evidence of how
creditors' demands for compensation declined with time is the possibility
of heterogeneity, or "sorting," on the side of the debtors. The
alternative interpretation is that the creditors' demands for compensation
on each type of loan were inelastic with respect to time, that they
demanded less of countries perceived to have less ability to pay, and that
the countries with the least ability to pay were the least inclined to
settle.  In reality, it is likely that both effects were operative.

56.  There is little evidence that an individual country's ability to
borrow in the l940s and l950s depended on its debt service record in the
l930s.  But default in the 'thirties and delays in settling thereafter
interfered with the ability of all developing countries to borrow
subsequently. In other words, much of the impact on creditworthiness of
interwar default took the form of an externality. See Eichengreen (1987).




                                       39
                                  REFERENCES



Bennett,    Edward W, (1962), germany and the Diplomacy of   the    Financial
Crisis,    1931, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Beyen, J.W.    (1951), Money in a Maelstrom,   London: Macmillan.

Cairncross, Alec and Barry Eichengreen (1983), Sterling in Decline,
Oxford:    Blackwell.

Clarke, S,V.O. (1967), Central Bank Cooperation, 1924—31, New York:
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

dine, William  (1987), "Mobilizing Bank Lending to Debtor Countries,"
Institute for International Economics, Policy Analyses in International
Economics no. 18, June.

Costigliola, Frank (1972), "The Other Side of Isolationism: The
Establishment of the First World Bank, 1929-1930," Journal of American
           LIX, pp.602—620.

Dulles, Eleanor Lansing (1932), The Bank for International Settlements at
Work, New York: Macmillan.
                           "
Eichengreen, Barry (1987),   The U.S. Capital Market and Foreign Lending,
1920-1955," in Jeffrey Sacha (ed.), The Developing Country Debt Crisis,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press (forthcoming).

Eichengreen, Barry (1988), "The Political Economy of the Smoot—Hawley
Tariff," Research in Economic History (forthcoming).

Eichengreen, Barry, Tony Husmi and Richard Fortes (1987), "Sovereign
Default in the 1930s and the Council of Foreign Bondholders," unpublished
manuscript.

Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Fortes (1986), "Debt and Default in the
1930s: Causes and Consequences," European Economic Review 30, pp.599—640.

Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Fortes (1987), "The Anatomy of Financial
Crises," in Richard Fortes and Alexander Swoboda (eds), Threats to
International Financial Stability, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp.lO—58.

Eichengreen, Barry and Carolyn Werley (1988), "How Foreign Bondholders
Fared: Realized Rates of Return on Foreign Dollar Bonds Floated in the
l920s," Institute of Business and Economic Research Working Paper,
University of California, Berkeley.

Feis, Herbert (1930), Europe: The World's Banker, 1870—1914,        New Haven:
Yale University Press.

Feis,     Herbert (1966), 1933: Characters in Crisis, Boston: Little, Brown.


                                       40
Feldstein, Martin (1987), "Latin America's Debt: Muddling Through Can Be
Just Fine," The Economist, June 27, 1987.

Fischer, Stanley (1987), "Resolving the International Debt Crisis,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2373.

Fleisig, Heywood (1970), 'Long Term Capital Flows and the Great
Depression: The Role of the United States, 1927—1933," unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Yale University.

Forbes, Neil (1987), "London Banks, the German Standstill Agreements, and
'Economic Appeasement' in the 1930s," Economic History Review, 2nd Ser.,
XL, pp. 571—587.

Henderson, Hubert (1932), "A Monetary Proposal for Lausanne," Memorandum
written while Secretary of the Economic Advisory Council, 17 May 1932, in
Henderson (1955), The Inter—War Years and Other Papers, Henry Clay (ed.),
Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 103—106.

James, Harold (1986), The German Slump, Oxford: Clarendon.

Jenks, Leland (1927), The Migration of British Capital, London: Allen and
Unwin.

Kindleberger, Charles (1973), The World in Depression,   1929—1939,
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Kindleberger, Charles (1978), Manias, Panics and Crashes, New York:    Basic
Books.

Kunz, Diane B. (1987), The Battle for Britain's Gold Standard in 1931,
Beckenham, Kent: Croom Helm.

League of Nations (various years), Balance of Payments and Foreign Trade
Balances, Geneva: League of Nations.

Leffler, Melvyn (1972), "The Origins of Republican War Debt Policy,
1921—1923: A Study in the Applicability of the Open Door Interpretation,"
Journal of American History LIX, pp.585—601.

Leith—Ross,   Sir Frederick (1968), Money Talks, London: Hutchinson.

Moulton, Harold G. and Leo Pasvolsky (1932), War Debts and World
Prosperity, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Murray, Robert K. (1969), The Harding Era, Minneapolis.

Parrini, Carl P. (1969), Heir to Empire: United States Economic Diplomacy,
1916—1923, Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Press.

Rhodes, Benjamin D. (1969), "Reassessing "Uncle Shylock": The United
States and the French War Debt, 1917—1929," American Historical Review LV,
pp.787—803.


                                     41
Skideisky, Robert (1967), Politicians   and     SlJ,   London: Macmillan.


Stimson, Henry (1932), "Further Note Addressed by the United States
Government to His Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom Relating to
the British War Debt," Washington, December 7, 1932, Gad. 4211, London:
14SO.

United Kingdom (1932), "Further Note Addressed by His Majesty's Government
in the United Kingdom to the United States Government Relating to the
British War Debt," Washington, December 1, Cad. 4210, London: BMSO.

United   Nations (1953), Public Debt, Lake Placid, N.Y.: United Nations.

United States, Department of State (1933), "Monetary and Economic
                            — July 27, 1933," Foreign Relations of the
Conference, London, June 12
United States, vol. I, Washington, D.C.: GPO, pp.452—762.

Wilson, Joan Huff (1971), American   Business and Foreign   Policy,   1920—1933,
Lexington, Ky.




                                     42
