                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     VISIBILITY BIAS IN THE TRANSMISSION OF CONSUMPTION BELIEFS AND
                               UNDERSAVING

                                            Bing Han
                                         David Hirshleifer
                                          Johan Walden

                                       Working Paper 25566
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25566


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 2019, Revised October 2020

We thank Pierluigi Balduzzi, Martin Cherkes, Marco Cipriani, Douglas Bernheim, Andreas
Fuster, Giacomo de Giorgi, Mariassunta Giannetti, Luigi Guiso, Robert Korajczyk, Theresa
Kuchler, Chris Malloy, Timothy McQuade, Peter Reiss, Nick Roussanov, Erling Skancke, Andy
Skrzypacz, Tano Santos, Siew Hong Teoh, Bernie Yeung, Youqing Zhou, David Benjamin
Zuckerman, and participants at the Amerian Economics Association meetings in Boston, the MIT
Conference on Evolution and Financial Markets, the National Bureau of Economic Research
Behavioral Finance Working Group meeting at UCSD, the OSU Alumni Conference at Ohio
State University, the Miami Behavioral Finance Conference at the University of Miami, the SFS
Finance Cavalcade at the University of Toronto; the WISE18 Workshop on Information and
Social Economics at Caltech; and seminar participants at Arizona State University, Boston
College, Calgary University, Caltech, Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business, Columbia
University, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, London Business School, National University of
Singapore, New York Federal Reserve Board, Peking University, Renmin University, Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics, Southwest University of Finance and Economics, Stanford
University, University of Hong Kong, University of Houston, University of International
Business and Economics, University of Texas Austin, and York University for very helpful
comments; and Lin Sun and Qiguang Wang for very helpful comments and research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Bing Han, David Hirshleifer, and Johan Walden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Visibility Bias in the Transmission of Consumption Beliefs and Undersaving
Bing Han, David Hirshleifer, and Johan Walden
NBER Working Paper No. 25566
February 2019, Revised October 2020
JEL No. D14,D83,D84,D85,D9,D91,G02,G11,G41

                                         ABSTRACT

We model visibility bias in the social transmission of consumption behavior. When consumption
is more salient than non-consumption, people perceive that others are consuming heavily, and
infer that future prospects are favorable. This increases aggregate consumption in a positive
feedback loop. A distinctive implication is that disclosure policy interventions can ameliorate
undersaving. In contrast with wealth-signaling models, information asymmetry about wealth
reduces overconsumption. The model predicts that saving is influenced by social connectedness,
observation biases, and demographic structure; and provides a novel explanation for the dramatic
drop in savings rates in the US and several other countries in recent decades.


Bing Han                                       Johan Walden
Department of Finance                          Haas School of Business
Rotman School of Management                    University of California at Berkeley
University of Toronto                          545 Student services building, #1900
105 St. George Street                          Berkeley, CA 94720
Toronto, Ontario                               walden@haas.berkeley.edu
Canada
Bing.Han@Rotman.Utoronto.Ca

David Hirshleifer
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu
1        Introduction

Several authors have argued that people have little idea how much they should save for retire-
ment (e.g., Akerlof and Shiller (2009)), owing either to lack of relevant information, or failure to
process it effectively. It is hard to know what stream of satisfaction will actually result from a
consumption/savings rule chosen today.1 Future wealth realizations are risky, and it is hard to
forecast remaining lifespan or health in old age. For the latter, most people do not process the
relevant public but technical information contained in mortality tables and medical research.
        This suggests that people are often ‘grasping at straws’ in their savings decisions, and that
people look to social cues for help.2 (We discuss evidence about saving and psychology that
motivate our model in Section 2). Surprisingly, however, there has been little formal modeling of
how biases in social learning processes affect lifetime consumption/savings choices. The nature
of such effects is not immediately obvious. There is evidence of contagion of consumption and
investment behaviors, but contagion can potentially spread either a decision to consume more
or a decision to consume less. Notably, little is known about whether biased social learning
implies over- versus underconsumption, and whether policy interventions can help remedy such a
directional bias.
        We address this topic in a model in which people are more likely to observe potential consump-
tion events that do rather than do not occur. For example, a boat parked in a driveway draws
the attention of neighbors more than the absence of a boat. Similarly, it is more noticeable when
a friend or acquaintance is encountered eating out or reports taking an expensive trip than when
not, or buys an enjoyable product as compared with not doing so. We call the greater availability
and salience of engaging in a consumption activity visibility bias.
        We further assume that people do not adequately adjust for the selection bias toward noticing
the consumption rather than nonconsumption events of others. This causes undue updating to-
ward the belief that others are consuming heavily. So observers conclude that future consumption
prospects are good, and therefore that low saving is appropriate. Observers therefore choose a
high level for their own actual consumption. We refer to average levels of consumption higher
    1
      Allen and Carroll (2001) point out that “...the consumer cannot directly perceive the value function associated
with a given consumption rule, but instead must evaluate the consumption rule by living with it for long enough
to get a good idea of its performance. . . . it takes a very large amount of experience . . . to get an accurate sense
of how good or bad that rule is.’
    2
      A large analytical literature shows that socially inefficient outcomes can arise from rational or biased social
learning (e.g., see the survey of Golub and Sadler (2016)), and there are models of how social interaction affects
investment and saving behaviors such as market participation, house purchases, and the aggressiveness of trading
in individual stocks (Hong, Kubik, and Stein 2004; Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo 2016; Han, Hirshleifer, and
Walden 2020).



                                                          1
than would occur with zero visibility bias as overconsumption.
      As a result, visibility bias effects are self-reinforcing. Each agent becomes an overconsuming
model for others. This positive feedback can cause severe undersaving in society as a whole, even
when visibility bias is mild. Also, in market equilibrium, the reluctance of agents to save results
in a higher interest rate.
      Furthermore, in a social network setting, we find that such effects are amplified when in-
degree is positively associated with out-degree, as is likely the case since people differ in their
overall sociability. Intuitively, agents who observe others heavily (high in-degree) will be especially
influenced by visibility bias, causing them to overconsume heavily. If such agents are the ones
who are most heavily observed by others (high out-degree), then the heavy overconsumption of
these agents is especially influential for others as well.
      The two premises of our model—that consumption activities are visibility biased (more avail-
able and salient to others than nonconsumption); and that people do not adequately adjust for
selection bias in their attention toward consumption—are motivated by the psychology of at-
tention, salience, and social communication (see Section 2).                  Visibility bias in our model need
not be viewed as a cognitive failure; it is a source of bias in the social transmission of informa-
tion. There are good reasons to allocate more attention to occurrences (more generally, to salient
events) than to nonoccurrences. However, failing to adjust appropriately for this selection bias in
attention/observation is an error—one that produces a directional bias in inferences.
      The model also has implications for how saving rates change through time. A well-known
puzzle is that personal saving rates in the U.S. have declined dramatically since the 1980s, from
10% in the early 1980s to a low of about 3% in 2007, while national debt has increased. This
has raised concerns among many observers about whether Americans will be able to sustain their
standards of living in retirement. A similar trend has occurred in many OECD countries, with
ratios of household debt to disposable income often reaching well over 100% (OECD 2014).
      The visibility bias approach offers a novel explanation. The model is driven by observation of
the consumption of others; greater observability of consumption intensifies the overconsumption
effect. The rise of electronic communications reduced the cost of observing the behaviors of distant
individuals. For example, the drop in costs of cell phones and long-distance calls, the rise of cable
television and VCRs (video cassette recorders), and subsequently the rise of the internet, greatly
increased people’s ability to observe others’ consumptions, as people are able to hear, view, or
report via social networks about consumption experiences.3 So even prior to the internet, the rise
  3
      The rise of an increased diversity of cable television offerings (including channels devoted to shopping, travel,



                                                           2
of electronic communications was transforming social observation of others’ consumption. Such
biased observation is the driving force behind overconsumption in our model.
    There are also notable differences in savings rates across countries and ethnic groups which are
not well-explained by traditional economic models (Bosworth 1993). A new possible explanation
suggested by our approach is that cultural differences affect communication about, or observability
of others’ consumption or wealth.4 Our model also implies that urbanization will be negatively
related to saving, as urbanization is associated with a higher intensity of social interaction and
observation of the consumption of others. This prediction (which derives from the social feature
of our approach) is consistent with the evidence of Loayza, Schmidt-Hebbel, and Serven (2000).
    Overconsumption in our approach derives from underestimation of the risk of adverse economic
shocks. Under some assumptions, there are also biased beliefs about the behaviors of others. Such
mistakes can potentially be corrected. So a distinctive empirical and policy implication of the
visibility bias approach is that salient public disclosure of accurate information about wealth risks,
such as of layoffs or of high health care bills, can help reduce overconsumption.
    However, in practice, announcements of probability estimates may be hard for people to pro-
cess and convert into consumption plans. This suggests saliently disclosing information about
how much others actually consume. Under appropriate conditions, such disclosures reduce over-
consumption. Furthermore, accurate disclosures that make saving behavior more salient (i.e.,
disclosures that are visibility-biased toward saving) can be especially effective in reducing over-
consumption.
    The model offers new insight into extensive evidence from social psychology and economics that
people often have biased perceptions about the popularity of different attitudes and behaviors of
others. Social psychologists have argued that overestimation of the popularity of a behavior causes
people to wrongly perceive it to be normative, and that in some cases disclosure interventions can
help remedy the problem.
    In our model, agents neglect the selection bias toward observing consumption events, and
therefore update toward overoptimistic beliefs about future prospects that favor higher consump-
tion. Nevertheless, the equilibrium consumption levels confirm agents’ high beliefs about others’
consumption. So there is, on average, no overestimation of others’ consumption. The model there-
home remodeling, and other costly leisure pursuits, as well as dramas that indirectly highlight consumption activ-
ities) further increased visibility. People often report by phone or other electronic networks on such activities as
traveling, eating out, and recent product purchases. Social media for sharing pictures and videos, such as Instagram,
have heavy emphasis on travel, fashion, and celebrities, all of which are associated with high observation of others’
consumption.
    4
      Carroll, Rhee and Rhee (1994, 1999) provide divergent evidence as to whether culture affects savings. Guin
(2017) provides evidence of a strong effect of culture, proxied by language, on saving.


                                                         3
fore provides a surprising contrast with the intuition from the abovementioned social psychology
literature, by showing how mistaken learning from others can increase a behavior without any
overestimation of how much others engage in it.
   In the special case of the base model, in which all agents are ex ante identical, disclosure
of others’ average consumption does not correct agents’ average beliefs. However, when there
are heterogeneous agents, we explore the conditions under which different types of agents either
overestimate or underestimate others’ consumption. These provide insight into the conditions
under which disclosure increases saving, and about how to attune the disclosure policy to these
conditions to maximize effectiveness. For example, in reality some people have more accurate
prior knowledge than others about the risk of adverse wealth shocks, or are less naive than others
about visibility bias. In a simple special case of the model with such “smart agents,” a disclosure
of actual average consumption causes non-smart agents on average to revise their consumptions
downward more than smart agents revise upward. This reduces average consumption. The effect
of disclosure on consumption is driven by differences across types in their prior knowledge. There
is evidence consistent with this direction of effect (D’Acunto, Rossi, and Weber (2020)).
   Furthermore, in reality some people observe social signals more heavily than do others (rel-
ative to information not obtained by observing others’ consumption). Holding all else equal, we
find that agents who observe others heavily overconsume more than those who observe others
lightly. In consequence, public disclosure of the low average consumption of those who observe
others lightly on average pulls down the consumption of heavy observers, reducing per capita
consumption. But in surprising contrast, disclosure of population-wide per capita consumption
increases overconsumption. This is because a greater number of social observations gives an agent
higher subjective certainty about the risk of adverse wealth shocks. So the disclosure of aggregate
consumption pulls upward the consumption of the light observers more than it pulls down the
consumption of heavy observers. This effect is driven by differences across types in their amount
of social observation.
   We call agent types that on average consume less than other types at date 0 low-consumers,
and agent types that on average consume more than other types at date 0 high-consumers. Then
overall, a key determinant of whether disclosure of aggregate consumption reduces average con-
sumption is whether high consumers on average have higher or lower subjective confidence about
possible wealth shocks than low consumers. If a type is low-consuming because this type has
greater genuine knowledge (relatively high observation of many unbiased private signals), the low
consumers will have higher confidence in their beliefs. But if a type is low-consuming because


                                                4
this type makes relatively few social observations, the low consumers will have lower confidence
in their beliefs.
    So empirically, the predicted effect of disclosure of aggregate consumption depends on the
dispersion across agents in amount of unbiased information they possess, versus dispersion in how
much they observe others. If agents differ mostly in amount of unbiased information (number of
nonsocial signals), then we expect disclosure to reduce per capita consumption. If instead agents
differ mostly in how heavily they observe others, then we expect disclosure to increase per capita
consumption. Empirically, there are proxies for both the amount of social observation engaged
in by different individuals (e.g., using social media or survey data), and individuals’ degree of
education or quantitative sophistication. So these predictions are potentially testable.
    The conclusion that agents overconsume when they are young, at the expense of consumption
when old, extends to an overlapping generations setting in which the young can observe old as
well as young agents. Overconsumption by the young is decreasing with the extent to which their
observations are tilted toward the old. This tilt depends on the age distribution of the population,
and on how visible and salient consumption by members of the two groups is to young observers.
These distinctive empirical implications of our approach are as yet untested. Furthermore, since
the old on average consume less than the young, in this setting there is another policy intervention
that can reduce overconsumption—salient disclosure of the consumption of the old.
    We are not the first to study how psychological bias affects consumption. A plausible alterna-
tive theory of overconsumption and undersaving is that people are present-biased (i.e., subject to
hyperbolic discounting, Laibson (1997)). Present bias is a preference effect, whereas the visibility
bias approach is based on belief updating. Also, present bias is an individual-level bias, whereas
the visibility bias approach is based upon social observation and influence. The visibility bias
approach therefore has the distinctive implications that the intensity of social interactions and
shifts in the technology for observing the consumption of others affect how heavily people con-
sume. It also implies that population level characteristics such as population density, sociability,
demographic structure, and wealth dispersion affect average consumption outcomes, in contrast
with approaches based upon pure individual-level biases.
    Another appealing approach to overconsumption is based on Veblen effects (Cole, Mailath,
and Postlewaite 1995; Bagwell and Bernheim 1996; Corneo and Jeanne 1997; Charles, Hurst, and
Roussanov 2009), wherein people overconsume to signal high wealth to others. In such models,
beliefs are rational, whereas the visibility bias approach is based upon biased updating. The
visibility bias approach has distinct empirical implications as well. Information asymmetry about


                                                 5
others’ wealths is the source of Veblen effects, which are not present when wealths are equal. In
contrast, as shown in Section 4.2, in the visibility bias approach, overconsumption is strongest
when there is low wealth dispersion and information asymmetry about wealth.
   A third approach is based on agents deriving utility as a function of the consumptions of
other agents (Abel 1990; Galı́ 1994; Campbell and Cochrane 1999), or alternatively having payoff
complementarities between the actions of different agents. The concern for relative consumption
is often referred to as the ‘keeping up with the Joneses’ approach. These approaches do not
in general necessarily imply overconsumption (Dupor and Liu (1993), Beshears et al. (2018)),
but this does arise in some settings (Harbaugh 1996; Ljungqvist and Uhlig 2000). In addition
to unambiguously predicting a specific direction of effect, overconsumption, the visibility bias
approach offers various distinctive implications about the effects of disclosure and of shifts in
visibility bias, wealth dispersion, and demographics.
   We have mentioned that a further empirical and policy implication of the visibility bias ap-
proach is that salient public disclosure can help correct people’s beliefs, reducing overconsumption.
That a relatively simple policy intervention can potentially ameliorate the undersaving problem
is a distinctive feature of the visibility bias approach to the consumption/saving decision.
   Jackson (2019) considers a setting with utility or payoff interactions that generate strate-
gic complementarity between agents’ actions, a possible example being recreational drug use
as a social activity. In Jackson’s model, misestimation of the average actions of others affects
behavior, which can also occur in our setting. However, in our setting there is no strategic
complementarity—utility of consumption does not depend upon others’ consumption. So we pro-
vide a model of general consumption and savings levels, rather than of those activities that have
positive strategic complementarities. Also, Jackson’s model is based on the interplay between
strategic complementarity and the “friendship paradox” in social networks. In contrast, our main
results (e.g., overconsumption) do not rely on the friendship paradox.
   Finally, another approach that can lead to overconsumption is based on speculative disagree-
ment; see Heyerdahl-Larsen and Walden (2017). When investors with heterogeneous beliefs bet
against each other in an asset market, they may all expect to profit, at least some of them mistak-
enly. Depending on agents’ elasticity of intertemporal substitution, this can result in equilibrium
overconsumption. Several of the implications discussed above also distinguish our approach from
theirs. For example, the speculative disagreement approach does not share the implications here
about network properties and overconsumption.




                                                 6
2        Motivating Evidence

We next discuss evidence that motivates our approach, starting with evidence about saving be-
havior. In deciding how much to save, people make very basic mistakes, and rely on noisy cues.5
There is also considerable evidence that social interactions affect several dimensions of consump-
tion, saving, and investment choices.6
        Based on evidence about retirement investment, many economists argue that US households
undersave, though there are other viewpoints.7 A further notable stylized fact in household finance
is the drop in the savings rate in the U.S. and several other countries over a period of decades.8
Our model offers an explanation for both phenomena.
        We next turn to institutional background and evidence from the psychology of attention and
salience that motivate our modeling approach. The two key assumptions of our model are that
consumption activities are more available and salient to others than nonconsumption; and that
people do not adequately adjust for the selection bias in their attention toward these consumption
events.
        With regard to the first assumption, there is extensive evidence that occurrences are more
salient and more fully processed than nonoccurrences (e.g., Neisser (1963), Healy (1981), the
review of Hearst (1991), and Enke (2020)). Occurrences provide sensory or cognitive cues that
trigger attention. In the absence of such triggers, an individual will only react if (as is usually not
the case) the individual is actively monitoring for a possible absence. This is what is striking about
the famous phrase “The dog that did not bark” in the Sherlock Holmes story; his stroke of genius
is to recognize the importance of an absence. An example of the low salience of non-occurrences
is neglect of opportunity costs, i.e., hypothetical benefits that would occur under alternative
courses of action. Consistent with the application of these ideas to consumption, Frederick (2012)
    5
     See Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988), Shefrin and Thaler (1988), Madrian and Shea (2001), Beshears et al.
(2008), Benhassine et al. (2015).
   6
     Duflo and Saez (2002, 2003), Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004), Brown et al. (2008), Charles, Hurst, and
Roussanov (2009), Kaustia and Knüpfer (2012), Georgarakos, Haliassos, and Pasini (2014), Shemesh and Zapatero
(2016), Giorgi, Frederiksen, and Pistaferri (2016), and the evidence reviewed in Hirshleifer and Teoh (2009).
   7
     See Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (1998), Madrian and Shea (2001), Poterba, Venti, and Wise (2012),
Poterba (2014), U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015), Stanford Center on Longevity (2016), and Gomes
et al. (2020), and the divergent viewpoint of Scholz, Seshadri, and Khitatrakun (2006)). Over 50% of U.S. adults
say that they could not easily come up with $400 to cover an emergency expense (Federal Reserve Board 2018).
More than half of households with bank cards carry debt from month to month, almost always at high interest
rates; a substantial fraction borrow at close to their credit limits (Gross and Souleles 2002).
   8
     Some review articles argue that this drop is hard to explain with existing models (Parker 1999; Guidolin and
Jeunesse 2007), but economists have proposed a wide range of potential explanations. Parker (1999) concludes
that “Each of the major current theories of the decline in the U.S. saving rate fails on its own to match significant
aspects of the macroeconomic or household data.” Guidolin and Jeunesse (2007) argue that factors such as greater
capital mobility, new financial instruments, and aging populations do not suffice to explain the phenomenon, and
conclude: “The recent decline of the U.S. private saving rate remains a puzzle.”


                                                         7
concludes that “purchasing and consumption are more conspicuous than forbearance and thrift,”
and gives the example that “Customers in the queue at Starbucks are more visible than those
hidden away in their offices unwilling to spend $4 on coffee.”
       One reason that consumption activities are highly visible is that many are social, such as
eating at restaurants, wearing stylish clothing to work or parties, and traveling. Furthermore,
physical shopping is itself a social activity. Shopping and product evaluation are also engaging
topics of conversation. Many television dramas display glamorous consumption activities, travel,
entertaining, and dining, and some media channels explicitly focus on shopping and other costly
leisure activities. In contrast, saving for retirement is typically a private activity with very low
visibility to others.
       With regard to the second key assumption of our model, evidence from both psychology,
experimental economics, and field studies of selection neglect confirms that observers often fail
to adjust appropriately for data selection biases (Nisbett and Ross 1980; Brenner, Koehler, and
Tversky 1996).9 Neglect of absences is also reflected in the principle of WYSIATI, “What you see
is all there is,” one of the key features of System 1 thinking (Kahneman 2011). In general, neglect
of selection bias is implied by the representativeness heuristic of Kahneman and Tversky (1972).
Owing to limited cognitive resources, adjusting for selection bias requires attention, and effort.
Selection bias is especially hard for people to correct for because adjustment requires attending to
the non-occurrences that shape a sample. The combination of visibility bias and selection neglect
in our model can be viewed as endogenizing the availability heuristic of Kahneman and Tversky
(1973), so the tendency in the model to update toward thinking others are consuming heavily can
alternatively be interpreted as coming from the use of this heuristic.10
       Potentially consistent with the idea that the combination of visibility bias and selection ne-
glect distort perceptions, Frederick (2012) provides experimental evidence that the salience of
consumption results in overestimation by observers of how much other individuals value certain
consumer products. Consistent more broadly with the idea that visibility bias affects consumption
behavior, there is evidence that people are influenced in car purchase decisions by observation
of the purchases of others (Grinblatt, Keloharju, and Ikäheimo (2008), Shemesh and Zapatero
   9
     People often naively accept sample data at face value (Fiedler 2008). Mutual fund families advertise their better-
performing funds; in the experimental laboratory both novice investors and financial professionals misinterpret
reported fund performance owing to selection neglect (Koehler and Mercer 2009). Auction bidders in economic
experiments tend to suffer from the winner’s curse (neglect of the selection bias inherent in winning), and hence
tend to lose money on average (Parlour, Prasnikar, and Rajan 2007).
  10
     According to the availability heuristic, people overestimate the frequency of events that come to mind more
easily, such as events that are highly memorable and salient. The availability heuristic is therefore a failure to adjust
for the selection bias in information brought to conscious attention—this being the subset of information that was
stored into memory and is easy to retrieve from it (e.g., consumption rather than nonconsumption activities).


                                                           8
(2016)), and that effects are stronger in areas where commuting patterns make the cars driven by
others more visible (McShane, Bradlow, and Berger 2012). There is also evidence that the ob-
servability of others’ choices is important for social influence in financial decision-making (Lieber
and Skimmyhorn 2018).
    Generally it is more interesting to hear about an action than inaction. So those who consume
may chooses to discuss their action more than those who do not. As a result, the consumption
activities of others may be more cognitively available than non-consumption. Berger and Milkman
(2012) provide evidence that online content is more likely to go viral when it is positive than
negative, and more rather than less arousing. This evidence suggests that people are more prone
to sharing news about consumption activities, which are enjoyable and arousing, than news about
stoical restraint from consuming. Finally, survey evidence is consistent with several ingredients of
the model’s line of reasoning for why there is overconsumption as outlined in the introduction.11


3     The Model

To capture some basic insights parsimoniously, we start with our primary framework, and consider
extensions in Section 4. Consider an economy with N agents, where N is large. Each agent
maximizes a quadratic expected utility function with zero subjective rate of discount over two
dates,
                                                 ρ        h     ρ i
                                     U = c0 −        c20 + E c1 −    c2 ,                                           (1)
                                                   2               2 1

where c0 and c1 are consumptions at dates 0 and 1. We permit possible negative consumption,
c1 < 0. The two dates can be viewed as reflecting consumption early versus late in the life cycle.
    At date 0, each agent chooses how much to consume and how much to borrow or lend at the
riskfree interest rate r = 0, so each agent’s budget constraint is


                                                 c1 = W − c0 − ,                                                   (2)
  11
     Consistent with high salience of consumption activities, the 2019 Modern Wealth Index Survey by Charles
Schwab finds that three in five Americans pay more attention to their friends’ spending activities than friends’
saving. Consistent with observation of others affecting behavior, nearly half of millennials (49%) say that their
spending habits have been influenced by the photos and experiences their friends share on social media. Consistent
with observation of others potentially affecting welfare outcomes, in the Fidelity Investments 2018 Millennial Money
Study, 63 percent of social media users report that social media has a negative influence on their financial well-being.
Consistent with Fidelity regarding visibility bias as a problem, Fidelity offers the following advice: “focus on your
own opportunities, and not on those in your network. Often, the life one portrays on social media does not show
the full picture, so take all those photos, snaps, stories and tweets for what they are: a curated snapshot of one
moment. Remind yourself to remain focused on your goals, not the moments others may be displaying through a
rose-colored filter.”




                                                           9
where W is date 0 wealth, and  is a potential wealth shock at time 1. We assume that ρW < 1,
to ensure that utility is increasing in consumption. We assume that
                                   
                                    0          with probability p
                                =                                                                              (3)
                                    W          with probability 1 − p,

so with probability 0 < p < 1, an agent’s date 1 wealth is high, and with probability 1 − p it is
low, where p is common to all agents. There is indeed evidence that fear of adverse wealth shocks
strongly affects consumption/savings decisions (Malmendier and Shen 2018).
       The distribution of  is the same for all agents, and can have any correlation across agents.
So this negative wealth shock can represent a systematic outcome such as a major depression, or
an underfunded pension system; or an idiosyncratic outcome that all agents are symmetrically
exposed to, such as the possibility of a financially costly illness, disability or job loss. The
key is that agents draw inferences about the common probability p of such an event from their
observations of the consumption of others.12
       We will refer to beliefs formed before any social observation as “prior beliefs.” Based on prior
beliefs and observation of others, each agent forms a probability estimate that date 1 wealth will
be high ( = 0), which we denote p̂. Based on this estimate, an agent chooses date 0 consumption
to maximize expected utility, which by (1) yields optimal consumption
                                                                  
                                                               W
                                                 c0 = p̂               .                                        (4)
                                                               2

So date 0 consumption is proportional to the estimated probability that future consumption will
be high. If people were sure of the good outcome (p̂ = 1), they would consume half their total
wealth; otherwise they consume less than half.
       To obtain implications for how people save out of available income, we can think of wealth,
W , as being a discounted value of income that is generated over time. Since the interest rate is
zero, the agent’s opportunity set as given in equations (2) and (3) is consistent with the agent
receiving a cash flow of W/2 in each of the two periods, where if the wealth disaster strikes, a
further incremental cash flow of  = −W is obtained at date 1. Under this assumption, the agent’s
  12
     The possibility of wealth disasters is a convenient way to capture the idea that there is a random outcome that
affects the benefits from deferring consumption. Alternative modeling approaches that would yield similar results
would have agents learning from others about the probability of dying young, of experiencing adverse health events,
or of experiencing rapid salary growth, each of which would also affect the benefits of saving.




                                                        10
saving (at time 0) is                                           
                                                             W
                                         s0 = (1 − p̂)               .                              (5)
                                                             2

    The total date-0 potential consumption of an agent, W/2, is divided into K different activities
which we call bins (K large), where each bin represents potential consumption of W/(2K). We
refer to a bin as full if it contains consumption and empty otherwise. An agent who chose to
consume W/2 at date 0 (which, by equation (4), is consistent with belief p̂ = 1, i.e., no risk
of a negative shock) would then have all bins full, whereas an agent who chooses to consume 0
(consistent with belief p̂ = 0, i.e., certainty of the adverse outcome) would have all bins empty.
As seen above, neither c0 nor s0 depend on the correlation of  shocks across investors, since those
shocks are not realized until date 1. So we do not need to make any assumption about the value
of this correlation.
    There are G ≥ 1 different groups, or types, of agents, where group/type can refer, for example,
to how well informed an agent is, how heavily an agent engages in social observation, or how
heavily the agent is observed by others. For readers who seek a quick basic intuition, the case
G = 1 is covered in Section 3.1.
   The number of agents of each type is large. The fraction of type g in the population is fg ,
                 P
g = 1, . . . , G, g fg = 1. Agents have two sources of information that they use to estimate p.
First, each agent of type g observes Lg i.i.d. unbiased private signals about p. So different types
may observe different numbers of signals. Specifically, agent n observes the private signals x̃nk ,
k = 1, . . . , Lg , where x̃nk ∼ Ber(p) is Bernoulli distributed with expected value p. These signals
represent the information an agent gathers through sources other than observing the consumption
and savings of others.
    Second, each agent observes a subset of other agents’ consumption bins. Specifically, an agent
n of type g observes Mg independently drawn Bernoulli distributed consumption bins of other
agents, ỹkn , k = 1, . . . , Mg .
    Crucially, we assume that each agent believes that the probability of observing a full bin
(indicating that ỹkn = 1) is p, i.e., that ỹkn ∼ Ber(p). We will see that when observations of others’
bins are unbiased, in equilibrium this belief is correct. So our assumption is consistent with agents
believing that all agents are sampling others’ consumption bins without bias.
    Each agent is Bayesian, with an improper Beta(0, 0) distributed prior belief about the prob-
ability p of a wealth disaster. The Beta distribution is standard for tractably describing how a
Bayesian updates beliefs about a Bernoulli probability based on observations of Bernoulli out-



                                                  11
comes. From an agent’s perspective, each of the observed Lg + Mg signals is equally informative
about p. The Lg signals are probability-p Bernoulli signal drawings, and the Mg signals are
Bernoulli observations of whether other agents’ bins are full, with probability also perceived to
be p.
       By a standard formula for Bayesian updating of beliefs about a Bernoulli distribution param-
eter based on observation of Bernoulli outcomes (DeGroot and Schervish (2012), Theorem 7.3.1,
p. 395), agent n updates to the posterior belief

                                                Lg x̄n + Mg ȳ n   x̄n + mg ȳ n
                                        p̂n =                    ≡               ,                                (6)
                                                  Lg + Mg             1 + mg

             def    1   PLg                                                                     def    1   PMg
where x̄n =        Lg
                               n
                         k=1 x̃k   is the average of the agent’s private signals, and ȳ n =          Mg
                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                            k=1 ỹk   is
                                                                                 def
the average of the agent’s social observations. The parameter mg = Mg /Lg is the total weight an
agent of type g puts on the consumption bin observations relative to the agent’s private signals.
Without loss of generality, we order the types so that mg is increasing in g, m1 < m2 < · · · < mG ,
i.e., the higher the type, the higher is the weight the type places upon social information.
       For most of the paper (with the exception of Section 3.3 on disclosure interventions), we
assume that Lg = L for all g, so that the types differ only in the number of signals Mg about the
consumption of others that agents observe. In particular, suppose that all of the Mg bins that an
agent observes belong to different agents. Then the agent is observing Mg different agents. So
using network terminology, mg is proportional to the in-degree of agents of type g. This parameter
is a driver of some of the model’s distinctive empirical implications.
       The bins an agent observes are randomly chosen from the rest of the population with possible
overweighting of some types relative to others.13 The probability that a chosen bin comes from
                                             P
an agent of type g is ug , g = 1, . . . , G,  g ug = 1. If ug = fg , this probability matches the

population fraction of the type, so that selection is unbiased across types. Otherwise, some types
are disproportionately influential.
       A key assumption of the model is that a full consumption bin is disproportionately likely to
be observed relative to an empty bin, where observation of a full versus empty bin is independent
of which agent type the bin is selected from. The higher likelihood of drawing a full bin derives
from what we call visibility bias, the tendency to notice and recall occurrences rather than non-
occurrences.14 Agents mistakenly form beliefs as if there were no visibility bias. The failure of
  13
     Technically, since we assume that the observer never draws bins from the same agent twice, drawings are
non-independent. However, since the number of agents of each type is large, this dependence vanishes.
  14
     In reality, the occurrence versus non-occurrence distinction that we focus upon is not the only source of differ-



                                                            12
the agent to adjust for this overrepresentation of full bins in their samples is a type of selection
neglect. This neglect causes them to update their beliefs incorrectly.
    If B F of the B bins in the population are full and B E are empty, then the chance that an
observed bin is full is

                                                          BF
                            kF B F                        B                     b    def
                                        =                               =           = Sτ (b),                       (7)
                        kF B F + kE B E
                                                           
                                               BF
                                                    +   kF
                                                              1−   BF        b + 1−b
                                                                                  τ
                                                B       kE         B


where k F is the probability that a bin is observed conditional upon it being full, k E is the
                                                                                         def                         def
probability that a bin is observed conditional upon it being empty, τ = k F /k E ≥ 1, and b =
B F /B is the consumption fraction. We call Sτ (b) the visibility bias function. It plays a central
role in our analysis.
    The parameter τ measures the overrepresentation of full bins in an observer’s sample, i.e.,
visibility bias, where τ = 1 indicates no visibility bias. When τ > 1, there is overrepresentation of
draws of consumption bins over non-consumption bins.15 It follows immediately from (7) that the
function Sτ (b) is strictly increasing in τ and b ∈ (0, 1), is concave in b under our assumption that
τ > 1, and satisfies Sτ (0) = 0, Sτ (1) = 1, and S(b) > b when 0 < b < 1. In contrast, S1 (b) ≡ b.
    Letting the average fraction of full bins among agents of type g be denoted p̄g , and recalling
that the probability that an observed bin drawn from a type-g agent is ug , the probability that
                                                                   P
a random bin of an observed agent in the population is full is r̄ = g ug p̄g , and the probability
that a bin observation from such an agent is full is Sτ (r̄). If many agents of type g independently
observe such draws and update according to (6), by the law of large numbers, their average
probability estimate will in the limit almost surely be their expected probability of observing a
full bin, which is
                                                          p + mg Sτ (r̄)
                                              E[p̂n ] =                  .                                           (8)
                                                             1 + mg

Since an agent’s consumption in (4) is proportional to the agent’s probability estimate, this
quantity is proportional (with factor W/2) to per capita consumption in the population.
    Neglect of visibility bias tends to increase probability estimates, and thereby consumption,
ences in the salience of different consumption behaviors. For example, extreme outcomes also tend to be psycho-
logically salient. Other things equal, we might expect this to cause observers to notice especially when others have
either unusually low or unusually high total consumption, with no clear overall bias toward either over- or under-
estimation of others’ consumption. Our modelling focus is on an attentional bias—neglect of nonoccurrences—that
has a clear-cut directional implication.
   15
      We refer to agents as observing a biased sample of target activities. However, the algebra of the updating
process can equally be interpreted as reflecting a setting in which observers draw unbiased random samples of full
versus empty bins, but are biased in their ability to retrieve different observations for cognitive processing and belief
formation.



                                                             13
above that in a rational setting with no visibility bias. With visibility bias, if (out of equilibrium)
the average probability estimate of each type were correct, p̄g = p, where 0 < p < 1, then we
would have r = p, so by (8) and since Sτ (x) > x, the expected probability estimate of an observing
agent of type g would be

                              p + mg Sτ (p)
                                            > p,           when τ > 1, 0 < p < 1,                  (9)
                                 1 + mg

which would contradict the premise.
    An equilibrium is now defined by a set of self-confirming average probability estimates of the
different types, p̄g , g = 1, . . . , G, such that

                                                   p + mg Sτ (r̄)
                                            p̄g =                                                 (10)
                                                      1 + mg
                                                   X
                                              r̄ =     ug p̄g .                                   (11)
                                                       g


In other words, for each type, the average probability estimate for agents of that type is the naive
Bayesian update based upon observing a biased sample of bins from a population of agents who
choose consumption based upon the same specified probabilities p̄g for each type. The population-
average probability estimates and consumption in equilibrium are then

                                                       X
                                                p̄ =            fg p̄g ,                          (12)
                                                            g
                                                           p̄W
                                               c̄0 =           .                                  (13)
                                                             2

    The above argument relies on the law of large numbers, so the number of agents of each type
needs to be large. In the appendix, we define equilibrium rigorously as a limiting concept as
the economy becomes large. Also, we have presented here a static equilibrium concept in which
agents simultaneously choose consumption and observe samples of others’ consumption. In the
appendix we allow agents to observe each other and make decisions sequentially. We introduce
there a growing sequence of economies and study the large economy limit as the number of agents
tends to infinity. We divide the initial time period into many sub-periods of very short length. In
each period a fraction of agents are selected who observe bins from the consumption of previous
sub-period agents and choose their consumption. We show that the subperiod average probability
estimate and consumption in the limit converge almost surely to p̄ and c̄0 , as defined above. This
gives:


                                                       14
Proposition 1 The average probability estimate in a large economy is almost surely equal to

                                          G
                                          X
                                  p̄ =           fg p̄g ,        where                           (14)
                                          g=1
                                          p + mg Sτ (r̄)
                                 p̄g =                   , g = 1, . . . , G,                     (15)
                                             1 + mg

and where r̄ as defined in equation (11) is the unique root within the unit interval of the equation

                                                                             G
                                                                       def
                                                                             X       ug
                        0 = αp + (1 − α)Sτ (r̄) − r̄,            α =                      .      (16)
                                                                                   1 + mg
                                                                             g=1


                                                                  p̄W
Per capita consumption is almost surely equal to c̄0 =              2 .


   The solution to (16) when τ > 1 is
                        p
                  V +    V 2 + 4pα(τ − 1)                        def
           r̄ =                           ,          where V = αp(τ − 1) + (1 − α)τ − 1,
                         2(τ − 1)

and the solution when τ = 1 is r̄ = p. When τ = 1, (15) then immediately implies p̄g = p, for
all g, and (14), moreover, implies that p̄ = p. Agents learn correctly, because in the absence of
visibility bias, agents update rationally based on their consumption bin observations. In this case
agents are correct in believing that these observations are Ber(p) distributed. Agents of type g
therefore use the total L + Mg signals optimally to form beliefs about p.
   If τ > 1, agents still believe that the consumption of each type is optimal i.e., that p̄g = p—
agents fail to adjust for how visibility bias affects others’ behavior. It is easy to verify that when
τ > 1,
                                                     p + mg Sτ (p)
                                              p̄ >                 .                             (17)
                                                        1 + mg

So there is a positive feedback effect—p̄ is higher than the LHS of equation (9), the upward-
biased expected probability estimate of an observing agent of type g if all agents consumed based
upon the true probability p. In equilibrium an agent has higher consumption owing to visibility
bias, which induces higher consumption by other agents. This in turn further encourages high
consumption by the original agent.
    We call p̄ the equilibrium probability estimate. It is proportional to per capita consumption,
c̄0 = p̄ W
           
         2 . Since per capita consumption is proportional to the equilibrium probability esti-

mate, throughout the paper we use the two terms interchangeably. The ratio of actual average
                                                 p̄( W )
consumption to rationally optimal consumption is p W2 = p̄/p ≥ 1, with strict inequality when
                                                   (2)

                                                            15
there is visibility bias.
    Recalling that the levels of observation of different types, mg , are increasing with g, the next
proposition shows that people who engage in greater social observation will overconsume more.

Proposition 2 In equilibrium p̄g is increasing in g.

The result follows directly from (15) and the fact that Sτ (r̄) > p. This implication could poten-
tially be tested with survey data, which has been used to study reported investment behavior in
relation to households’ sociability or intensity of social interaction, in the form of self-reports of
interactions with neighbors or regular church-going (Hong, Kubik, and Stein 2004; Georgarakos
and Pasini 2011)). Furthermore, some studies have exploited information about actual social
media connections in relation to financial decisions (Heimer (2016), Bailey et al. (2018, 2019)).


3.1    The base model: homogeneous agents

Much insight is gained by studying the case of homogeneous agents, so that there is only one
type, G = 1, M1 = M , f1 = u1 = 1 , m1 = m = M/L. We call this case the base model. In the
base model, equations (10)-(12) reduce to the condition

                                                     p + mSτ (p̄)
                                              p̄ =                ,                              (18)
                                                        1+m

with solution
                         p
                   V +      V 2 + 4p(1 + m)(τ − 1)
            p̄ =                                   ,         where V = (p + m)(τ − 1) − 1.       (19)
                            2(τ − 1)(1 + m)

    The solution has the following properties.

Proposition 3 In the base model:

   1. The equilibrium probability estimate, p̄, and per capita consumption are increasing in visi-
      bility bias, τ , i.e., ∂ p̄/∂τ > 0;

   2. As visibility bias tends to infinity, p̄ approaches (p + m)/(1 + m) < 1;

   3. If τ > 1, the equilibrium probability estimate, p̄, and per capita consumption are increas-
      ing with m, the intensity of observation of others. As m → ∞, p̄ → 1, and per capita
      consumption approaches its maximum possible value, c̄0 → W/2.




                                                        16
Proposition 3 generalizes immediately to the case G > 1 if mg = m and ug = fg for all g. Under
this assumption, agents are still in effect identical.
    Part 1 of Proposition 3 says that owing to visibility bias in consumption observations and
neglect of sample selection bias (or equivalently, use of the availability heuristic) in assessing
bin fullness, people update more strongly toward a belief that others are consuming heavily. In
consequence, observers infer too strongly that a wealth disaster is unlikely, which causes them to
overconsume. The greater the visibility bias, the larger the effect.16
    Part 2 indicates that when visibility bias becomes maximally strong, beliefs become maximally
overoptimistic, but that agents’ private observations have a moderating effect. So equilibrium
beliefs do not spiral upward to p̄ = 1. Agents put some weight on their private observations, so
even if 100% of observed bins are full, observers only update their average belief to (p + m)/(1 +
m) < 1. The private signals thus limit the severity of overconsumption.
    Part 3 says that owing to visibility bias, greater observation of others, as reflected in m,
implies more optimistic beliefs and greater aggregate consumption. As m approaches infinity, the
amount of observation of others becomes large relative to the prior precision, and there is drastic
overconsumption (agents consume as if they were sure there were no risk of the adverse wealth
shock). New biased observations dominate prior information, so that people become certain of a
high outcome, even if visibility bias is small (τ ≈ 1) and the probability of a high outcome, p, is
low.
    This is because when agents place heavy weight on socially derived information, the feedback
effect becomes very strong. This strong feedback effect also implies that equilibrium consumption
is very sensitive to changes in τ for large m.17 Together, Parts 2 and 3 suggest that the feedback
effect inherent in social transmission may be more important in generating severe overconsumption
than the direct effect of visibility bias, as long as there is some visibility bias.18
    Several psychological studies have found that college students overestimate the frequencies of
salient behaviors relating to drinking, drug use, and sexual activity.19 Social psychologists have
  16
     Although we do not explicitly derive this, allowing for a few agents with deviant values of τ provides the
additional empirical implication that those with higher visibility bias overconsume more than those with lower τ .
So empirically, the model implies greater overconsumption on the part of individuals and groups that have lower
education and IQ. Psychometric indices such as scores based upon the Cognitive Reflection Task (see the discussion
in Frederick (2005)) provide more direct ways of measuring whether an individual is likely to fail to adjust for
selection bias (in this case, visibility bias).
  17
     When τ = 1, p̄ = p regardless of m. When m ≈ 0, as τ becomes large, updated beliefs are still close to p. In
contrast, when m is large, as τ increases from τ = 1, beliefs approach 1.
  18
     Empirically, social learning can indeed induce strong feedback effects in consumption behavior. Moretti (2011)
provides evidence that social learning about movie quality induces a large ‘social multiplier,’ wherein observation
of others greatly increases the sensitivity of aggregate demand to quality.
  19
     For example, studies find that college students overestimate how much other students engage in and approve



                                                        17
argued that when people believe, even mistakenly, that others are engaging in a behavior heavily,
they regard the behavior as validated, and engage more in the behavior themselves. Proposition
3 verifies that such an effect does indeed occur in a setting in which agents update their beliefs
based upon biased observation of others.

    As discussed in the introduction, personal saving rates have plunged in the U.S. and several
other OECD countries over the last 30 years, and existing rational theories do not seem to fully
explain this phenomenon. Parts 1 and 3 of Proposition 3 provide a possible explanation.
    Over the last several decades, improvements in electronic communications by such means as
telephone (the drop in cost of long-distance phone service), the rise of cell phones and email in
the early 1990s, the rise of internet in the late 1990s, and blogging and social networking (such
as Facebook) over the last decade have dramatically reduced the cost of conveying information
about personal consumption activities. This is reflected in our model as an increase in both τ and
m, as in Parts 1 and 3 of Proposition 3. Greater observation and communication in general about
the behavior of others is reflected by higher m in the model. Greater m intensifies the effects of
visibility bias by increasing the weight on social observation relative to the prior, and implies a
reduction in the savings rate.
    Crucially, these technological changes also strongly suggest an increase in bias toward observ-
ing consumption over nonconsumption, i.e., visibility bias τ . The activities that are noteworthy
to report on very often involve expensive purchases, as with eating out or traveling. Numerous
television dramas and reality shows have long had a focus, implicit or explicit, on such consump-
tion activities. The explicit side includes travel and shopping channels. For example, the first
national shopping network began in 1985 as the Home Shopping Network. The implicit side in-
cludes dramas, not limited to those centered upon the antics of the wealthy (“Who shot JR?”).
The shift to reality television also induced greater observation of the consumption activities of
others.
    In more recent years, social media and review sites have been organized around consumption
activities, such as Yelp and TripAdvisor. The universe of YouTube video postings includes travel
and other consumption activities. On Facebook, a posting about a consumption event triggers
a notification to friends; a non-posting about not engaging in a consumption event does not.
Participants in special interest online discussion sites (e.g., focused on high tech or classical
music) often post about associated product purchases. Such postings are more interesting, and
of uncommitted or unprotected sexual practices (Lambert, Kahn, and Apple 2003) and heavy alcohol use (Prentice
and Miller (1993), Schroeder and Prentice (1998), Perkins and Haines (2005)), and overestimate the use of various
other drugs (Perkins et al. (1999)).


                                                       18
therefore more likely to occur, than postings to announce the news that an individual did not buy
anything today.
    In contrast, in-person unmediated observation of physically proximate friends or acquaintances
are likely to often include even nonconsumption activities. So the rise in modern communications
results in an increase in visibility bias (i.e., larger τ ) and lead to higher overconsumption.20
    Past social research has also employed other proxies for the intensity of social interaction
and observation (m), such as population density (e.g., urban versus rural).21 This leads to the
empirical implication that after appropriate controls, greater population density is associated with
lower saving. In the time series, this suggests that the secular increase in U.S. population over
time may also have contributed to the decline in the savings rate.
    A surprising feature of the base model is that, despite naivete about visibility bias, agents
end up with correct beliefs about others’ average consumption and beliefs. To see why, recall
that all agents expect others on average to consume based on the correct value of p. In other
words, agents do not recognize that others overconsume. Similarly, each agent thinks that the
agent’s own consumption is on average based on the correct value p. So each agent believes that
the consumption of peers is on average the same as the agent’s own. Since all agents are ex ante
identical (apart from their unbiased prior signals), they are correct in thinking so. In other words,
on average agents correctly assess the average consumption of others.
    This may seem counterintuitive, since agents are updating naively about the consumption of
others based upon upward-biased samples. However, this is counterbalanced by the fact that on
average each agent’s prior implies an underestimate of others’ equilibrium consumption. (Each
agent thinks that others are not overconsuming. At the average prior of p, this implies an average
belief that others are consuming based upon p. But in equilibrium, other agents on average
consume based upon a belief above p.) So people start out with a belief about others that is
on average too low, and update too strongly toward a high belief. On average these two effects
exactly offset, as must occur by the reasoning in paragraph above.
  20
     Increased internet usage—especially through online social networking platforms—is associated with a larger
number of ‘weak ties’ (merely casual acquaintances) in ones’ social network. Such weak ties are especially useful for
acquiring information and ideas (Donath and Boyd 2004; de Zúñiga and Valenzuela 2011). Also, a social networking
platform that relies on advertising for its revenues may have an incentive to disproportionately convey notifications
that relate to consumption activities.
  21
     People who are geographically closer tend to interact more (Borgatti et al. (2009)), even after the rise of the
internet and low-cost telephony (Mok et al. (2010)), and even in online social networks (Scellato et al. (2010)).
Sociologists have argued that people in urban areas have more voluntaristic social linkages, as contrasted, e.g.,
with family ties (White and Guest 2003). These findings suggest that greater population density increases the
opportunities for people to interact and observe each other.




                                                         19
3.2      Interpretation as an Observation Network

In a social network environment, the number of other agents observed by a type g agent, Mg , can
be thought of as the in-degree of an agent of type g in the observation network, so that with Lg
                                                                                        def
independent of g, mg is proportional to in-degree. On the flip side, ωg = ug /fg can be thought of
as being proportional to the agent’s out-degree, i.e., the number of other agents that observe an
agent of type g in the social network. Specifically, ωg is proportional to how many other agents are
followers who potentially receive information from an agent of type g.22 In other words, linkage
between agents is directed.
       The following proposition characterizes how the properties of the observation network affect
equilibrium consumption:

Proposition 4 In the model:

   1. The per capita consumption of any type, g 0 = 1, 2, . . . , G and overall per capita consumption
         are increasing in the in-degree of any type, mg .

   2. Consider two economies, A and B that are identical except for the fractions of agents of
         different types, such that {fgA }g=1,...G first order stochastically dominates {fgB }g=1,...G . Then
         per capita consumption is higher in economy A than in B. In other words, higher agent
         in-degrees promotes aggregate overconsumption.

   3. Consider two economies, A and B, that are identical except for the out-degrees of different
                                                        fg                     fg
      agent types, such that αA < αB , where αA = G
                                                 P           A    B
                                                                       PG           B
                                                  g=1 1+mg ωg , α =      g=1 1+mg ωg . Then per

         capita consumption is higher in economy A than in B, i.e., greater association of out-degree
         with in-degree across types promotes aggregate overconsumption.23

Part 1 shows that higher in-degree on the part of agents of a given type always increases per
capita consumption in society at large. The effect on consumption also applies to the effect upon
any type, i.e., for any g, g 0 , an increase of in-degree among type g agents increases per capita
consumption of type g 0 . Intuitively, owing to neglect of visibility bias, high in-degree biases
agents’ beliefs more heavily in favor of high consumption. Their high consumption has a positive
                                                                                                                        def
  22
      Each agent of type g 0 observes Mg0 other agents, and the fraction fg0 are of type g 0 . So in total N g0 Mg0 fg0 =
                                                                                                            P
N κ observations are made by agents of all types. The parameter κ represents the number of observations per capita.
Fraction ug of these are observations of group g’s consumption bins. So in total there are ug N κ such observations
from the bins of the fg N agents of type g. The average number of observations made (per capita in the population)
of an agent in group g is therefore ug N κ/(fg N ) = ωg κ. In other words, ωg is proportional to the out-degree of
group g agents.
                                                                              ug
   23
      To see that α is a measure of association, observe that α = G                            (1 + m)−1 ) + v(1 + m)−1 =
                                                                     P
                                                                        g=1 1+mg = cov(v,
                                                                                      c
cov(v,
 c     (1 + m)−1 ) + (1 + m)−1 . So α is a measure of negative covariation of v and m across types.


                                                            20
feedback effect on the consumption of others. A similar intuition applies to Part 2, which shows
that when the population is more heavily tilted toward types with high in-degree, per capita
consumption is higher.
   Part 3 provides a precise measure of how out-degree affects consumption. It implies that
overconsumption is especially severe in social networks where agents with high in-degrees (mg )
are also those with high out-degrees (ug ). Intuitively, agents with high in-degree are more biased
toward high consumption. When such agents also have high out-degree, this high consumption
is disproportionately influential in encouraging other agents to consume heavily. As discussed
earlier, it is likely that high in-degree is positively associated with high out-degree, since in reality
people differ in overall sociability, which promotes both observation of others and being observed
by others. Krapivsky, Rodgers, and Redner (2001) provide a model of network formation with
this property. This effect further amplifies the tendency toward overconsumption identified in the
base model.
   An implication of Proposition 4.1 is that if a subset of the population, through trends such
as the rise of low-cost travel, electronic communication, and social media, become more heavily
connected, overconsumption will increase, in aggregate, even among groups that do not increase
their social connections.


3.3   Policy Interventions

Overconsumption in our model derives from underestimation of vulnerability to adverse wealth
shocks (overestimation of p). This suggests that a relatively simple policy intervention—saliently
publicizing valid information about the risk of wealth shocks—can help alleviate overconsumption.
For example, publicity about the frequency of layoffs or of expensive illness could be beneficial.
Interpreted more broadly, low p could be the risk of living a long time, resulting in higher-than-
expected post-retirement consumption needs. So salient publicizing of life expectancy information
could help.
   However, in practice, such disclosure may be non-salient and hard for people to interpret.
Research on heuristics and biases consistently finds that people tend to put little weight on base
rate frequency or probability information (Kahneman and Tversky 1973; Borgida and Nisbett
1977). So a numerical report about frequency of layoffs is likely to have little effect. Furthermore,
people may have trouble interpreting mortality or life-expectancy tables, which require significant
cognitive processing to translate into an optimal plan for how much to save. We therefore consider
other possible types of disclosure.


                                                   21
       A possible policy intervention suggested by the visibility bias approach is to publicize some-
thing simple which translates fairly directly into a consumption/savings recommendation: the
average consumption or saving rate of peers. Under plausible variations of the base model as-
sumptions, we shall see that people can end up with biased perceptions about what others believe
and how much they consume. If so, saliently publicizing accurate information about peers can
help alleviate overconsumption. Specifically, if people overestimate how optimistic their peers
are, and how much others consume, then accurate information about others would correct that
mistake, reducing overconsumption.24
       Empirically, in tests covering a very wide range of activities, people often misperceive the
beliefs or behaviors of peers, and the intervention of providing accurate information about peers
tends to cause behavior to conform more closely to the disseminated peer norm.25 So “social
norms marketing,” or dissemination of information about the behavior or beliefs of one’s peers,
can be an effective policy tool for correcting inaccurate beliefs about peers, and to makes peer
actions more salient.
       We now extend the model to allow for unbiased public information disclosure about the con-
sumptions of other agents. Specifically, the disclosure provides each agent n with Q visibility-
unbiased i.i.d. signals, zkn , k = 1, ...Q, about the equilibrium consumption of other agents. We
denote by vg the fraction of these Q signals that come from type g agents (a fraction that does
not depend on the agent n).26
       When the fraction of visibility-unbiased signals that are about type g is in proportion to
population share, vg = fg for all g, the new signals may be viewed as being about per capita
consumption, p̄ = Q1 E[ z̃kn ]. We also allow for other signal weights, since the policy maker may
                       P

  24
     This raises the question of what the relevant set of peers is, and how people recognize peers. In the context
of our model, in which agents are learning from others about the risk of wealth disaster, peers are agents who
have identically distributed wealth shocks. People probably recognize peers via geographical proximity (neighbors),
social and professional relationships (coworkers and people at a similar professional or socioeconomic level that they
transact with) and extended family.
  25
     See e.g., Schroeder and Prentice (1998). Frey and Meier (2004), Cialdini et al. (2006), Salganik, Dodds, and
Watts (2006), Goldstein, Cialdini, and Griskevicius (2008), Cai, Chen, and Fang (2009), Gerber and Rogers (2009),
Chen et al. (2010) and Bursztyn, González, and Yanagizawa-Drott (2020). However, there are exceptions in which
people adjust their behavior away from the disclosed actions of others. In an experiment on retirement savings
behavior in a large manufacturing firm, Beshears et al. (2015) document that information about the high savings
rates of other employees can sometimes lead low-saving individuals to shift away from the disclosed savings rates,
which Beshears et al. suggest may derive from a discouragement effect. This result holds only for the subpopulation
of employees with low relative incomes who had never participated in the firm’s 401(k) plan. Such employees may
regard the higher-income employees who were plan participants as not truly peers (e.g., in our model, having
non-identically distributed wealth shocks). So our theory does not make a prediction about the outcome of this
experiment.
  26
     We can alternatively think of
                                 Pthis signal structure as representing a common public disclosure signal, about the
weighted average consumption, g vg p̄g , which agents observe with agent-specific noise. Then the higher is Q, the
lower is the noise.



                                                         22
be able to provide a disclosure focused upon the consumption of specific groups (where everyone
accurately understands this focus).
   Since agents believe that the average consumption of each type is optimal, i.e., that p̄g = p for
all g, they treat each additional signal provided by the policymaker as being exactly as informative
as the other signals agents receive. By an argument similar to the basic analysis, we obtain the
following updating rule for type g agents:

                                                    x̄n + mg Sτ (ȳ n ) + qg z̄ n
                                          p̂n =                                   ,                                      (20)
                                                          1 + m g + qg

           def   1   PQ
where z̄ n =     Q
                             n
                       k=1 z̃k ,   and qg = Q/Lg . Proposition 1 can now be generalized to allow for
disclosures about agents’ consumptions.

Proposition 5 The average probability estimate in a large economy in which agents observe
additional disclosure signals of other agents’ equilibrium consumption is almost surely equal to

                                        G
                                        X
                               p̄ =           fg p̄g ,       where                                                       (21)
                                        g=1
                                                                   P
                                        p + mg Sτ (r̄) + qg            g vg p̄g
                             p̄g =                                                , g = 1, . . . , G,                    (22)
                                                   1 + mg + qg

and where r̄ is the root within the unit interval of the equation


                                           0 = βp + (1 − β)Sτ (r̄) − r̄,                                                 (23)


where
                                                                                                                 
               G                                                     G                             G
         def
               X         ug              1                          X          ug qg               X         vg
        β =                      +    PG     v q
                                                                                                                   . (24)
                     1 + mg + qg   1 − g=1 1+mgg g+qg                      1 + m g + qg                  1 + mg + qg
               g=1                                                  g=1                            g=1


                                                                                   p̄W
The per capita consumption is almost surely equal to c̄0 =                           2 .


Equation (22) provides a linear system of equations for p̄g , which can easily be solved once r̄ is
known. The general model we have studied so far corresponds to the case when Q = 0, in which
case β = α, where α is defined in (16).
   For tractability, we study the special case of two groups, G = 2. The in-degrees and number
of private observations can differ for groups 1 and 2, with m1 = M1 /L1 and m2 = M2 /L2 , so
that some agents are more prone than others to be influenced by biased social observations. The


                                                              23
out-degrees ω1 = u1 /f1 and ω2 = u2 /f2 can also differ, so that some agents are more influential
than others. Specifically, agents of a type with a very high Lg will have a very precise estimate
of p from private signals, and will only change this estimate marginally when incorporating social
consumption bin (and disclosure) observations. We think of such agents as being “smart.”

Proposition 6 In the model with public disclosure and with G = 2 types:

  1. A sufficient condition for per capita consumption to be decreasing in the amount of disclo-
             ∂ p̄
     sure,   ∂Q     < 0, is that ω1 be sufficiently high,

                                               def                           1
                                         v1 > v̄ =                                           .
                                                      L1 (1+m1 )            1
                                                      L2 (1+m2 )       f1 max(1,ω1 )     −1 +1


  2. A sufficient condition for per capita consumption to be increasing in the amount of disclo-
             ∂ p̄
     sure,   ∂Q     > 0, is that ω1 be sufficiently low,

                                                def                          1
                                         v1 < v =                                          .
                                                      L1 (1+m1 )            1
                                                      L2 (1+m2 )       f1 min(1,ω1 )   −1 +1


  3. When L1 = L2 , per capita consumption is decreasing in the consumption disclosure signal’s
                                                                                            ∂ p̄
     weight on agents with low equilibrium consumption, v1 , i.e.,                          ∂v1    < 0.

Proposition 6 has several immediate implications.

Corollary 1 In the extended model with public disclosure and G = 2 types:

  1. If disclosure is solely about the consumption of type 1 agents, v1 = 1, then per capita
                                                                                              ∂ p̄
     consumption is decreasing in the amount of public disclosure,                            ∂Q     < 0.

  2. If disclosure is solely about the consumption of type 2 agents, v2 = 1, per capita consumption
                                                                           ∂ p̄
     is increasing in the amount of public disclosure,                     ∂Q     > 0.

  3. If disclosure is about per capita consumption, i.e., v1 = f1 , then:

      (a) When the number of private observations is the same for both groups, L1 = L2 , as
             is out-degree, ω1 = ω2 , then per capita consumption is increasing in the amount of
                           ∂ p̄
             disclosure,   ∂Q     > 0.

      (b) When the number of private observations for type 1 agents is sufficiently high,
                                                                                           
                                             L1   1 + m2                     1/f1 − 1
                                                >        max                          − 1, 1 ,
                                             L2   1 + m1                     1/u1 − 1

                                                             24
                                                                               ∂ p̄
           per capita consumption is decreasing in the amount of disclosure,   ∂Q     < 0.

   Several conclusions can be drawn from Proposition 6 and Corollary 1. First, Corollary 1 Parts
1 and 2, and Proposition 6 Part 3 jointly suggest that if possible, the policy maker should focus
on disclosing the consumption of low-consumption agents. This is a straightforward consequence
of the neglect of selection bias in our approach. Since agents believe that all types have the
same consumption, they revise down their estimates when being informed about agents with low
consumption.
   Proposition 6 Parts 1 and 2 provide sufficient conditions for consumption to be decreasing or
increasing in the amount of disclosure. Both conditions are feasible, 0 < v < v̄ < 1, so disclosure
can either increase or decrease consumption, depending upon how heavily the disclosure signal is
weighted toward type 1 versus type 2 agents. In comparison, for the base model, with G = 1,
v1 = v = v̄ = 1, so disclosure never affects consumption.
   Focusing on the case when all agents make the same number of private observations (L1 =
L2 ), Parts 1 and 2 of Proposition 6 show how agents’ in-degrees (measured by mg ), out-degrees
(measured by ωg ) and the fraction of each type (measured by fg ) jointly determine how much
weight needs to be put on the low-consumption agents of type 1 in the disclosure signal, v1 , for
public disclosure to reduce overconsumption.
   If all agents have the same out-degree, so that ω1 = ω2 = 1, we are in the benchmark case
in which the bound is tight, v = v̄. In this case, the higher the fraction of low-consuming type
1 agents, the more weight needs to be put on low-consuming agents in the disclosure signal for
consumption to decrease (i.e., the higher v1 needs to be), because these agents’ consumptions are
already well-reflected in the public observations. A low ratio of in-degrees between the two types,
1+m1
1+m2   lowers the threshold for reducing overconsumption, by making the lower consumption of
type 1 agents more surprising for the visibility biased population, when disclosed.
   When the out-degree of type 2 agents is higher than that of type 1 agents, ω2 > 1 > ω1 ,
the weight on type 1 agents needed in the disclosure signal to ensure that overconsumption is
reduced increases compared with the benchmark case, i.e., v̄ increases. Intuitively, it becomes
harder to offset the disproportionate influence of the high consumers through public disclosure, so
even more weight needs to be put on the low-consuming agents. The effect is the opposite when
the out-degree of type 1 agents is higher than of type 2 agents, ω1 > 1 > ω2 , for which v is lower
than in the benchmark case.
   Corollary 1 Part 3(a) focuses on the case when disclosure is about per capita consumption,
and where there is neither heterogeneity in agent “smartness” nor in out-degree. In this case,

                                                25
disclosure unambiguously increases per capita consumption. The reason for this result is that
agents with lower-than-average consumption will tend to increase their consumption when seeing
the disclosure, whereas agents with higher-than-average consumption will tend to decrease theirs.
When L1 = L2 , the lower-than-average consumption agents are more influenced by the disclosure
signal than the higher-than-average consumption agents, since the reason why they consume less
than average is that they have relatively few social consumption bin observations, i.e., they have
low perceived belief precision. Overall, per capita consumption increases.
   In contrast, Corollary 1 Part 3(b) indicates that when agents chose low consumption because
they are very smart, i.e., because L1  L2 , disclosure decreases per capita consumption. The rea-
soning is the opposite in this case. The smart low-consumption agents, being confident about the
optimal consumption, barely revise their probability estimates upward when observing the dis-
closure signal, whereas the “dumb” high-consumption agents substantially revise their estimates
substantially downward. So overall per capita consumption decreases.
   So a key determinant of whether disclosure of per capita consumption is helpful in reducing
consumption, is whether agents who consume less than others have higher or lower subjective
confidence about their beliefs than agents who consume more than others. If a set of agents
consumes less than another set because the low consumers have greater genuine knowledge (ob-
servation of many unbiased signals), the low consumers will have higher confidence in their beliefs.
In contrast, if a set of agents consumes less than another set because the low-consumers make few
social observations, the low consumers will have lower confidence in their beliefs.
   So empirically, the predicted effect of disclosure of aggregate consumption depends on the
dispersion in the population of genuine information versus the dispersion in social observation. If
agents differ mostly in how genuinely informed they are (number of nonsocial signals), then the
first effect is the relevant one, and we expect disclosure to reduce consumption. If instead agents
differ mostly in how heavily they observe others (number of social signals), then the second effect
is the relevant one, and we expect disclosure to increase consumption.
   A possible proxy for agents being privately well-informed is level of education or socioeconomic
status. A possible proxy for number of social signals observed is social connectedness, which has
been measured in empirical studies using survey proxies, population density, or social media
datasets. Our model implies that such data, along with consumption data, can be exploited to
predict whether disclosure with increase or decrease per capita consumption.
   The effect of disclosure has been tested by D’Acunto, Rossi, and Weber (2020) in a field
experiment using a smartphone app. They disclose the average of (income-normalized) spending of


                                                26
other subjects to overspenders (those with above-average spending) and underspenders (those with
below-average spending). This disclosure causes overspenders to decrease spending on average by
3%, whereas underspenders increase their spending by 1%. The result that low-spenders adjust
up less than high-spenders adjust down is in line with the smart agent effects of disclosure in our
model. Our model implies that when disclosure has this asymmetric effect, underspenders are
more knowledgeable or sophisticated than overspenders. This is potentially testable by examining
the educational or financial literacy status of these two groups.
   Later, in our extension to a setting with overlapping generations, we show that a different kind
of disclosure of consumption of a subset of the population—older agents—can also help reduce
overconsumption.
   The friendship paradox in social networks is the fact that the average number of friends
(connections) of agents’ friends is higher than the average number of friends agents have. This
occurs because well-connected agents are friends of more agents. In some settings, the friendship
paradox can cause well-connected agents to be disproportionately influential. As discussed in the
introduction, Jackson (2019) examines a setting in which, owing to naivete about the friendship
paradox in combination with strategic complementarities (which are not present in our model),
people misestimate the average actions of others. As a result, beliefs and aggregate actions can
sometimes be corrected by public disclosure. Even in our network setting, where we allow for
effects that relate to the friendship paradox, our model differs in deriving implications for general
consumption/savings levels without the requirement of strategic complementarities.


3.3.1   Visibility-Biased Disclosures

We now examine disclosure that is subject to an opposite visibility bias: it increases the salience
of nonconsumption/saving relative to consumption. We first show that accurate public disclosures
that are visibility-biased toward nonconsumption encourage saving. This effect does not require
the agent heterogeneity considered in the preceding subsection, so we return to the base model
in which all agents are ex ante identical. We then discuss how disclosure in practice can highlight
saving behavior.
   Consider an accurate public information disclosure that calls attention to saving, i.e., calls
attention more to empty consumption bins than to full bins. Just as before, the signal is accurate—
it never misrepresents whether a disclosed bin is empty or full.
   For example, people could be given stickers to post on their cars or in personal spaces, saying
“Proud Retirement Saver.” The policymaker could publicize that these signs or stickers are given


                                                 27
to anyone who is saving more than some prespecified absolute amount or fraction of income. The
visibility bias derives from the greater salience of the presence of the sign or sticker than the
absence of one.27 This induces visibility bias toward observation of heavy contributions.
       In the model, if there is visibility bias in the disclosure toward the occurrence of saving
behavior, and observers neglect this visibility bias, then investors update strongly toward a belief
that others are saving heavily. For presentational simplicity, we assume that the visibility bias
toward observing empty bins in the disclosed signal has the same value, τ , as the visibility bias
toward observing full bins in the direct observation of others. In other words, for the disclosed
signal about saving, the same visibility bias function Sτ is applied, but it is applied to the amount
saved rather than the amount consumed. It follows that the equilibrium average belief satisfies

                                           p + mSτ (p̄) + q(1 − Sτ (1 − p̄))
                                    p̄ =                                     .                                  (25)
                                                      1+m+q

                                                    def
Here Q savings signals are disclosed and q = Q/L. The (1 − Sτ (1 − p̄))-term in this expression
reflects an agent’s neglect of visibility bias about saving. The agent believes that the agent is
observing a signal about 1 − p̄ (proportional to saving, i.e., the fraction of empty bins), when the
agent is actually observing a signal about the visibility-biased quantity Sτ (1 − p̄). This leads to
the observer to infer that the average belief (proportional to consumption) of those observed via
the disclosure is 1 − Sτ (1 − p̄), rather than p̄ = 1 − (1 − p̄).
       Equation (25) has a unique closed form solution, and it is not hard to derive that:

Proposition 7 Per capita consumption when there is visibility bias toward a disclosure of higher
saving, as given in (25), is lower than when there is no disclosure, as given in (18).

Disclosure of a signal that is visibility-biased toward saving fights visibility bias with visibility
bias. Visibility biased disclosure encourages saving, thereby partly offsetting the basic tendency
toward overconsumption of Proposition 3.
       For several reasons, interventions by policymakers to make saving behavior more salient, as
reflected in the q term in the numerator of equation (25), is unlikely to fully offset the spontaneous
visibility bias toward observing the consumption activities of others, as reflected in the m term.
People are heavily and frequently exposed to the consumption of others as people interact with
  27
     This procedure provides little incentive to post the stickers, and some people may want to avoid the appearance
of bragging. A more nuanced scheme might be localized by neighborhood. Locations could be established for
neighbors to post their stickers anonymously in addition to possible posting on cars, homes or at the workplace.
The policymaker publicizes a count of the number of stickers posted on the public sign locations, or a count of total
self-reports about meeting the saving criterion. Savers as a group are given monetary bonus when the neighborhood
count is higher.


                                                          28
others in person or electronically. In contrast, policy campaigns are likely to be episodic and
observed by their targets only occasionally. Nevertheless, if sufficiently salient, disclosure may
have a beneficial effect.


4    Extensions

To address the generality of our conclusions and to examine additional issues, we now consider
variations of the base model. For tractability we assume that G = 1, though we allow for agent
heterogeneity in other ways; and, as needed, make some stronger assumptions.
    First, in reality people observe others at different life-cycle stages. Does observation by the
young of low consumption by seniors alert the young to the dangers of consuming too heavily,
undermining the conclusion that the young overconsume? Also, does a bias toward observing the
young versus the old have empirical implications for how heavily people consume? We address
these topics in Subsection 4.1.
    Second, in reality people do not perfectly know each other’s wealths. This adds noise to
the learning problem, because observed consumption is influenced by the wealths of observation
targets, not just their information signals about the probability of not experiencing a wealth
disaster. This suggests that wealth dispersion may affect overconsumption, a topic we address in
Subsection 4.2.
    Third, we have so far assumed an exogenous riskfree interest rate. We allow for increasing
supply of credit as a function of the interest rate in Subsection 4.3. We show that overconsumption
is obtained in this setting too, and that interest rates are higher when visibility bias is present
than when it is not.
    As a matter of robustness, we also show in the appendix that results similar to those in the
base model arise under two technical variations. We verify that similar results apply with other
possible utility functions in Appendix A.
    We then depart from the assumption that the maximal fraction of full consumption bins is
100% in Appendix A. Specifically, our base model made the assumption that when the agent
is maximally optimistic, and therefore consumes W/2 at date 1, that this is achieved when all
the bins are full. Our extension allows for consumption of W/2 to leave some bins empty. This
variation is also useful for the analysis in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
    For the variations we study in this section, we make the additional assumption that the
numbers of private signals and consumption observations, L and M , are large, so that agents’



                                                 29
priors are very close to p and the fraction of observed full bins, ȳ n , is very close to E[ỹ n ]. The
fraction m = M/L is still an arbitrary positive number. We can think of this as studying the
limit of a sequence of economies as L → ∞, with M = mL in each economy.


4.1      Age Differences: An Overlapping Generations Setting

In the base model, all agents observe each other and make their savings decision at the same
time, when young. What if young people observe the consumption of seniors who are consuming
from their savings? If the young overconsume, then as in the base model, observations of the
young promote an inference of low disaster risk, which encourages the young to consume heavily.
However, if the young overconsume, the old, on average, underconsume. If young observers see
low consumption of the old (owing to visibility bias, this may not be the case), the observer may
infer that disasters were realized heavily, reducing consumption. This implies an inference by
young observers of high disaster risk. This raises the question of whether the young will actually
overconsume.
       An alternative perspective also raises possible doubt about the prediction that the young over-
consume. Suppose that owing to visibility bias, young observers think they see high consumption
by old agents. Then young agents may infer that old agents had saved a lot when they were
young, which would occur if they had viewed the risk of a wealth disaster as high. This inference
discourages young observers from consuming heavily.28
       Fortunately, explicit modeling brings clarity. When modelled in a straightforward way, just as
in the base model, unambiguously, the young overconsume. To allow for observation of the old,
we extend the base model to include an overlapping generations (OLG) structure in which there
are both young and old agents at any given point in time.
       We now assume that the -shock is independent across agents (though still identical in distri-
bution), which rules out fluctuations in aggregate consumption across time. Moreover, we study
a stationary equilibrium in which the average estimated probability of no wealth disaster, p̄, is
constant over time.
       We also assume that fraction λ ∈ [0, 1] of the bin observations are of the young, and the
remaining fraction 1 − λ of observations are of the old. So young agents observe a random
sample of consumption from each cohort, i.e., λM observations are from the young generation,
and (1 − λ)M from the old.
  28
    Alternatively, a young observer might conclude that in the current period old agents have generally had favorable
wealth realizations (not disasters). That suggests an inference of low disaster risk, which encourages young agents
to consume heavily. The overall outcome is not immediately obvious.


                                                         30
       The case λ = 1 corresponds to the base model. The young might, for example, dispropor-
tionately observe each other rather than the old, owing to homophily (the tendency for people to
interact with others who are similar), leading to higher λ. On the other hand, the old may act as
role models for the young, leading to lower λ.
       In addition to possible bias toward observing young or old, λ reflects the fractions of the
population that are in these two groups. If, for example, there is no bias in observation of young
versus old, we can think of λ as capturing population growth, with λ high in rapidly growing
populations. Alternatively, it can inversely capture longevity, since long lifespan increases the
fraction of the population that is old.
       Introducing observation of the old requires a slight extension of the base model to address a
technical issue. A senior who is unlucky and hit with disaster potentially has a negative level of
consumption, but it does not make sense to talk about a negative fraction of full consumption
bins. Likewise, a senior who is lucky and not hit with a disaster potentially consumes more than
W/2, the expenditure that corresponds to all bins being full. Since the reasoning of the model
is based on average levels of consumption within the population or subpopulations, we address
these issues by assuming a date 1 transfer of consumption from the lucky old to the unlucky old
that brings the consumption level of the unlucky up to zero, and ensures that the consumption
levels of the lucky old are never greater than W/2.29
       We assume that visibility bias, as previously specified in (7), is the same for observations of
either the young or the old. As before, observers think there is no visibility bias, and believe
that the average consumption of the young is optimal, pW/2, where as before, p is the true
probability of non-disaster. It follows that observers believe that the average consumption of the
old is also pW/2, corresponding to the fraction p of full consumption bins by the old.30 The young
therefore view consumption bin observations of the old as having identical information content as
observations of the young.
       A consequence of this is that it does not matter for the analysis whether observers can see
whether any given consumption bin observation is drawn from the old or from the young. Even
if an observer can see the identity of the agent corresponding to an observed bin, the observer
  29
      Specifically, at date 1, unlucky seniors work for lucky seniors (e.g., shopping for them or mowing their lawns),
the payment thereby increasing the consumption level of the unlucky to zero, and reducing the average consumption
of the lucky seniors accordingly. We further assume that the utility gains from this exchange are zero, so that the
disutility of work of the unlucky offsets their consumption benefit, and the utility benefit to the lucky of hiring the
unlucky is also zero. Since these transactions leave everyone indifferent ex post, the ex ante optimization problem
at date 0 is unchanged.
   30
      The average consumption of old who consumed pW/2 when young is, by the law of large numbers,
p (W − pW/2) + (1 − p)(W − pW/2 − W ) = pW/2.



                                                          31
ignores the identity information.
                                                                                        W
                                                                                            
   Given a cohort’s estimated p̄ when young and their associated consumption of p̄    , by the
                                                                                        2

law of large numbers their average consumption in the next period, when old, is (2p − p̄) W
                                                                                            
                                                                                           2 ,

where p is the true probability. When p̄ > p, there is underconsumption by the old generation
compared with the social optimum, pW/2, since 2p − p̄ < p.
   Owing to visibility bias, observation of the bins of the young and the old are biased toward
full bins, as reflected in the Sτ function. So by reasoning very similar to that leading to (6), the
equilibrium condition is
                                         p + mSτ [λp̄ + (1 − λ)(2p − p̄)]
                                  p̄ =                                    .                     (26)
                                                      1+m

In the benchmark case of no visibility bias (τ = 1), in equilibrium p̄ = p and both cohorts consume
on average pW/2. In this case, observations of young and old consumption are consequently
equally informative, and agent beliefs and behavior are rational.

Proposition 8 In the OLG extension of the base model, there is a stationary equilibrium satis-
fying the following properties:

  1. The equilibrium probability estimate of the young generation satisfies p̄ > p, so the young
     generation overconsumes.

  2. The equilibrium probability estimate, p̄ is increasing in the fraction of young agents, λ.

  3. When λ = 0,
                                                              √
                             1 + m(τ + 1) + p(3 + 2m)(τ − 1) − V
                        p̄ =                                     ,            where             (27)
                                        2(1 + m)(τ − 1)
                       V = (1 + m(τ + 1) + p(3 + 2m)(τ − 1))2

                           − 4p(1 + m)(τ − 1)(1 + 2p(τ − 1) + 2mτ ).                            (28)


An implication of Proposition 8 Part 2 is that overconsumption is greater in economies with
rapid population growth, low longevity, or in which observation is more heavily tilted toward the
young. It is of course crucial to have appropriate controls (e.g., for investment opportunities) in
cross-economy tests.
   Proposition 8 shows that the young unambiguously overconsume in equilibrium, even when the
young predominantly observe the old, or even entirely do so (λ = 0). This may seem surprising
given the mixed intuitions at the start of this subsection. The first intuition started from the
fact that if the young on average overconsume, then the old on average underconsume. So a

                                                      32
tilt of observation toward the old tilts the inference toward low p (high disaster risk), favoring
underconsumption. This suggests that heavy overconsumption by the young may not be self-
confirming.
   Nevertheless, this effect cannot reverse equilibrium overconsumption by the young. If, out of
equilibrium, the amount of overconsumption by the young were arbitrarily small, then the average
consumption of the old would be almost as high as average consumption of the young. Visibility
bias in observation of others—even of the old—would then result in a high inference about the
consumption of others, which non-negligibly favors overconsumption.
   The alternative argument given at the start of this subsection for why there might be under-
consumption was that owing to visibility bias, observers think they see seniors consuming heavily.
Such apparent high consumption by seniors might be taken to mean that seniors, when young, had
adverse information about the wealth shock. Why doesn’t this lead young observers to conclude
that they need to save heavily rather than consume heavily?
   The flaw in this argument is that observers believe that the old, when young, were on average
consuming optimally, i.e., consuming pW/2, which implies that the average consumption of the
older generation when old is the same, pW/2. In other words, the young think that the probability
that any observed bin is full (regardless of whether it is drawn from a young or old agent) is p. So a
full bin is always indicative of a high probability of non-disaster. So visibility bias in observations
of others, old as well as young, encourages high consumption.
   This insight makes clear why in equilibrium, overconsumption is greater when observation is
more heavily tilted toward the young (λ high). Relative to observation of the young, observation
of the old acts as a partial reality-check on belief bias. Observers mistakenly think that on average
consumption is equally divided between an agent’s youth and old age, but owing to overconsump-
tion, in equilibrium, actual average consumption is lower for old agents. So observations of the
consumption bins of the young are more often full than observations of the bins of the old. So
higher λ (sampling from the young) leads to more favorable inferences about p, and therefore
greater overconsumption.
   This reasoning provides insight into a possible objection to the basic implication of our ap-
proach that visibility bias induces overconsumption. The purchase of a house could be an indicator
that an individual had saved heavily to accumulate enough funds for a substantial down-payment.
It might be argued that others will infer from this that it is important to save heavily. However,
as the preceding paragraph makes clear, when young agents observe high consumption (includ-
ing housing consumption) by seniors, there is a favorable inference about disaster probability,


                                                  33
resulting in overconsumption.31
    These findings have an implication for optimal disclosure policy—that salient public disclosure
of the consumption of the old can help reduce overconsumption. This intervention consists of
disclosing the average consumption of a subset of the population. The effect of such disclosure
is effectively to push the model in the direction of low λ (in which there is more observation
of consumption of the old). As we have shown, lower λ decreases aggregate consumption. It is
interesting that even in scenarios where disclosing aggregate consumption of the entire population
does not help, disclosing the consumption of the right subset does help. However, such disclosure
does not fully remedy the problem. At best it only reduces overconsumption to that of the λ = 0
case.


4.2     Uncertainty about Wealth

So far, we have assumed that all agents have the same non-disaster wealth level W . We now gen-
eralize to allow for ex ante wealth dispersion in the population (even apart from ex post disaster
realizations), and ignorance of the wealths of others. Intuitively, the inference an observer draws
about others’ signals based upon observing others’ consumption is diluted by ignorance of the
wealth of the observation target. High apparent consumption of an observation target could come
either from the target possessing a favorable signal (indicating low risk of disaster), or from the
target having higher ex ante wealth. Observers will therefore not, on average, revise their proba-
bility estimate p̂ upward as aggressively as they do when there is no information asymmetry about
wealth. Wealth uncertainty (and wealth dispersion associated with such uncertainty) therefore
reduces equilibrium overconsumption. This contrasts sharply with the Veblen wealth-signaling
approach discussed in the introduction, in which it is uncertainty about wealth that is the source
of overconsumption signaling.
    To allow for wealth uncertainty and dispersion, we now assume that a fraction λ (not the λ
of the preceding section) of the population has non-disaster wealth level (1 + ∆)W (the wealthy
group), where ∆ > 0, a fraction λ has non-disaster wealth (1 − ∆)W (the poor group), and the
remaining fraction 1 − 2λ has non-disaster wealth W (the medium group). Henceforth we refer
to “non-disaster wealth” more briefly as “wealth.” The average wealth is then still W , but the
   31
      Buying a house is an example of the general high visibility of engaging in consumption activities. The purchase
of a house is usually a shift to a higher flow of current consumption of housing services financed by a major increase
in indebtedness (mortgage down payments are usually much smaller than the size of the loan). Indeed, real estate
equity is often accessed to finance non-housing consumption expenditures as well (Chen, Michaux, and Roussanov
2019). Lusardi, Mitchell, and Oggero (2018) report that in recent years, older Americans close to retirement hold
more debt than earlier generations, primarily owing to the purchase of more expensive homes with smaller down
payments.


                                                         34
higher ∆ is, the higher the wealth uncertainty and the wealth dispersion in the economy.32 We
continue to assume that there is a probability 1 − p that any given agent (rich, poor, or medium)
experiences a disaster (negative value of ) that entirely wipes out an agent’s wealth at date 1.
       So far, we have assumed that when the agent consumes half of potential wealth at date 0,
c0 = W/2, that all consumption bins are full. To explore the effects of wealth dispersion,, we
now need to allow for the possibility that someone with maximally optimistic beliefs, p̂ = 1, still
has some empty consumption bins. We now instead assume that when p̂ = 1,, only a fraction
0 < h ≤ 1 of the bins are full. To prevent the wealthy group from consuming so heavily that
more than 100% of the consumption bins are full, we assume that (1 + ∆)h < 1. In addition, we
impose the technical condition that
                                                          1
                                                 ∆≤          2 .                                               (29)
                                                       1 + τ −1

For large τ , this implies ∆ < 1. Since poor agents have wealth (1 − ∆)W , for large τ this imposes
the mild restriction that even poor agents do not have wealth very close to zero.
       Agents know the economy’s wealth distribution (λ and ∆), and for simplicity we assume that
each agent’s consumption bin observations come from one or more agents of the same wealth
type (where the agent does not know which type). Based on these observations, an agent forms
a posterior belief about p, taking into account that an observation of high consumption could
reflect high wealth, not just an optimistic belief, on the part of the target of observation.
       The following proposition confirms the intuition that wealth uncertainty reduces overconsump-
tion:

Proposition 9 Under the above assumptions, the equilibrium probability estimate p̄ and overcon-
sumption are decreasing in wealth uncertainty, ∂ p̄/∂∆ < 0.

Proposition 9 predicts that savings rates increase with wealth uncertainty. This is the opposite
of what is expected based upon Veblen wealth-signaling considerations.
       Specifically, in the Veblen approach to overconsumption, people consume more in order to
signal the level of wealth to others (Bagwell and Bernheim 1996; Corneo and Jeanne 1997),
so there is no motive to overconsume when wealth uncertainty is zero. A comparison of the
cases of zero versus positive wealth uncertainty indicates an average tendency for greater wealth
uncertainty to induce greater overconsumption, though not necessarily monotonically.33 This
  32
      We do not focus upon learning about mean wealth in the population. Extending our setting to allow for learning
about mean population wealth (in the absence of wealth uncertainty) would not affect agents’ decision problems,
since each agent is concerned about the probability of disaster, not about how wealthy others are per se.
   33
      Consistent with this idea, Charles, Hurst, and Roussanov (2009) find empirically that greater dispersion in



                                                        35
intuition is reflected, for example, in a comparative statics of Charles, Hurst, and Roussanov
(2009) in which a parameter shift that increases wealth uncertainty by reducing the lower support
of wealth results in greater consumption signaling.34 Furthermore, and also in contrast with our
approach, in at least one version of the keeping-up-with-the-Joneses approach, income dispersion
encourages the non-wealthy to consume more in emulation of the wealthy (Bertrand and Morse
2016).35
    Using survey evidence from Chinese urban households, Jin, Li, and Wu (2011) find that greater
income inequality is associated with lower consumption and with greater investment in educa-
tion, where income inequality is measured within age groups by province. Similarly, using high
geographical resolution 2001-12 data, Coibion et al. (2014) provide strong evidence that low-
income households in high-inequality U.S. locations accumulated less debt (relative to income)
than their counterparts in lower-inequality locations. These findings are consistent with Propo-
sition 9, in contrast with the idea that greater information asymmetry about wealth increases
wealth-signaling via consumption, or with the intuitive idea that low income individuals borrow
and consume more in order to try to keep up with high income households.
    Several studies report that wealth dispersion has increased in the United States since the
1980s (e.g. Card and DiNardo (2002), Piketty and Saez (2003), Lemieux (2006)). Given an in-
crease in wealth dispersion, all else equal, Proposition 9 counterfactually implies a rising savings
rate. However, the time series shift in information asymmetry about others’ wealth may have
been downward rather than upward, potentially reversing the implication. Our result that wealth
dispersion reduces overconsumption derives from asymmetric information—the unobservability of
others’ wealths—rather than dispersion per se. The rise of the internet has likely made obser-
vation of others’ wealths or incomes easier than in the past in some countries through search of
government or other archives. To the extent that this is true, this effect reinforces the other time
series shifts we’ve described, implying a shift over time toward greater overconsumption.
    Furthermore all else was not equal in this time series shift. From the standpoint of our
model, a more fundamental effect (which holds even in the base model) comes from the dramatic
reference group income is associated with significantly lower White visible spending. On the other hand, greater
dispersion of reference group income is associated with higher visible spending for minorities.
   34
      A key parameter in wealth signaling models is the lower support of wealth, which acts as a starting point for
the signaling schedule. For any class of bounded wealth distributions that are symmetric with given mean, and
such that higher dispersion is associated with more extreme wealth outcomes, it is equivalent to express a result in
terms of wealth dispersion or lower support.
   35
      Concern for relative consumption, as in ‘keeping up with the Joneses’ preferences can also induce a fear of
falling behind which raises precautionary savings (Harbaugh 1996). Other than Bertrand and Morse (2016), we are
not aware of any results in the keeping-up-with-Joneses approach relating overconsumption to wealth dispersion
(holding constant the average level of wealth).



                                                        36
transformation of electronic communications and social networks. As discussed in Section 3.1, this
has increased the visibility of the consumption activities of others (both absolutely, and relative
to non-consumption), which implies greater overconsumption in our model. Also as discussed
earlier, the trend toward rising population density, and associated increase in social observation
intensity, further reinforces the implication of stronger overconsumption in the base model.
   Although overconsumption is decreasing with wealth variance, two considerations are likely to
weaken this effect in practice. First, people draw inference from people they regard as peers, who
are often in a similar wealth and social class, so that relevant wealth variance may be modest.
Second, it is not sheer wealth variation that counts, it is information asymmetry about wealth.
Much of real-world variation in wealth is known to others—most people know they are not as rich
as Bill Gates or Mark Zuckerberg.


4.3     The Equilibrium Interest Rate

In the base model, the riskfree rate is exogenously set to zero. This corresponds to having storable
consumption or, equivalently, to having riskfree bonds in perfectly elastic supply offered at a zero
interest rate. We now modify the model to allow for endogenous determination of the interest
rate.
   When the interest rate can vary, potentially a high interest rate could imply negative date 0
consumption. That does not correspond well with the idea that at worst all consumption bins are
empty. We therefore adjust the model to preclude this possibility.
   As in the base model, agent utility is defined by (1), where we focus on the case ρ = 1/2.
Given a one-period interest rate of r, an agent’s budget constraint is now


                                    c1 = (1 + r)(W − c0 ) − ,                                 (30)


For tractability, in this section we assume a less severe possible wealth disaster than in the base
model to preclude negative date 0 consumption over a range of potential interest rates. We
therefore assume that
                               
                                0       with probability p
                            =                                                                 (31)
                                W       with probability 1 − p,
                                    2


and without loss of generality we focus on the case W = 1.
   Solving for the optimum of an agent whose probability estimate for a high outcome is p̂ yields


                                                37
consumption
                                      1 − r + 2r2 + (1 + r)p̂ def
                                                              = h + j p̂,                                       (32)
                                           4 + 4r + 2r2

with g and f defined in the obvious way. With average agent probability estimate of p̄, aggregate
per capita consumption is then
                                                   c̄0 = h + j p̄.                                              (33)

       We assume that there is an equally large number of agents who are not subject to  risk, i.e.,
for whom c1 = (1 + r)(1 − c0 ). Since these outsiders face no disaster risk, their consumption does
not depend on their inferences about p. We can think of them as outsiders such as institutional
investors or foreign lenders that supply capital to the individual investors that our analysis focuses
upon. Their role in the model is to increase trading opportunities in our exchange economy, so
that optimistic beliefs of the individual investors can increase equilibrium per capita consumption,
rather than just the interest rate.36
       Institutional investors are willing to lend to (or borrow from) the agents that are the main focus
of our analysis. Since they have no disaster risk, the optimal date 0 consumption of institutions,
given r, is
                                                           1 + r2
                                                c̄I0 =               .                                          (34)
                                                         2 + 2r + r2

We assume free disposal of the consumption good, so the equilibrium interest rate satisfies r ≥ −1.
We focus on the region of interest rates in which the institutional investors’ lending increases in
the interest rate, and therefore require that r ≤ 1/2.37
       The per capita endowment of the consumption good at date 0 is fixed, c̄e . Specifically, we
assume that the total endowment is such that in an equilibrium with unbiased beliefs (i.e., p̄ = p),
the market clears at interest rate r = 0. The market clearing condition is


                                                   c̄e = c̄I0 + c̄0 ,                                           (35)


where the terms on the right are functions of r. By (33) and (34), and by our assumption that
  36
     The consumption of outsiders are excluded from our measure of aggregate consumption; their sole role is to
supply capital as an increasing function of the interest rate. Including outsiders in the model is a simplified way
of reflecting the idea that in general when the current consumption good is scarce, more can be generated via an
aggregate production function for transformation between current and future consumption.
  37
     For r > 1/2, it is easy to verify that lending decreases in the interest rate. This comes from the standard
result in intertemporal choice that an increase in the interest rate has both a substitution effect (which encourages
lending) and a wealth effect (which can discourage lending). To illustrate basic insights simply, we focus on the
case in which the substitution effect, which is highly intuitive, dominates.




                                                           38
when r = 0 a market with unbiased agents would clear, we have

                                                     1 1+p
                                             c̄e =     +   ,                                      (36)
                                                     2   4

so (35) becomes
                                                         1 1+p
                                          c̄I0 + c̄0 =     +   .                                  (37)
                                                         2   4

    Regardless of the level of visibility bias, market clearing implies that r adjust so that aggregate
demand is equal to the endowment, so in equilibrium

                                          (8 − 5r)r + p(2 + 2r + r2 )
                                   p̄ =                               .                           (38)
                                                   2(1 + r)

It is easy to verify that p̄ is strictly increasing in r in the relevant region of r.
    Along the lines of the arguments in the base model, given r and p̄, the fraction of bins that
are full is given by (33). Since agents suffer from visibility bias, the fraction of bins observed to
be full is Sτ (h + j p̄). By Bayes’ rule, the agents then arrive at the posterior probability estimate


                                     p̂ = R(p, Sτ (h + j p̄), m, h, j),                           (39)


given that the fraction of bins that agents observe are full is z, where the function R is defined
in equation (59) in the appendix (see the proof of Proposition 10). An equilibrium is then an
outcome in which markets clear, so that (33) holds, and agents’ posterior beliefs are in line with
their biased observations, p̄ = R(p, Sτ (h+j p̄), m, h, j). For tractability, we focus on the case when
m = 1 (so that agents put comparable weight on prior information and on social observations).
    We show the existence of equilibrium with the following properties:

Proposition 10 Under the above assumptions, the equilibrium probability estimate, overcon-
sumption, and the interest rate are all increasing in visibility bias, τ .


5    Concluding Remarks

We examine how bias in social learning endogenously shapes how people trade off current versus
future consumption. In our model, people observe the consumption activities of others and use this
to update beliefs about whether there is a high or low need to save for the future. Consumption
is more salient than non-consumption, resulting in greater observation and cognitive encoding of
others’ consumption activities. This visibility bias makes episodes of high consumption by others

                                                     39
more salient and easier to retrieve from memory than episodes of low consumption. So owing to
neglect of selection bias (or a well-known manifestation of it, the availability heuristic), people
infer that low saving is warranted. This effect is self-reinforcing at the social level, resulting
in overconsumption and high interest rates. With many opportunities to observe others, this
feedback effect can be intense. In a social network setting, this effect is further amplified to the
extent that in-degree (how heavily an agent is influenced by others) is positively associated with
out-degree (how heavily an agent is observed by others) across agents.
   The effects in the model can also bring about biased assessments of the savings rates of others,
wherein people think that others are consuming even more heavily than they really are. In
consequence, a distinctive implication of our approach is that accurate disclosure of the beliefs or
average consumption of others can, in some cases, help remedy overconsumption. This implication
of our model has been tested in the field experiment of D’Acunto, Rossi, and Weber (2020), who
find that, disclosure of average spending causes a greater reduction in the spending of high-
spending individuals than the increase in spending by low-spending individuals. The model also
implies that not all types of disclosure are always effective in encouraging saving. So to be effective,
disclosure policy must be attuned to the geometry of the social network and the demographic
structure of the population. The model further predicts that accurate disclosures that increase
the salience of saving behavior can also reduce overconsumption.
   The visibility bias approach offers a simple explanation for a central puzzle in household
finance: the dramatic drop in personal saving rates in the U.S. and many other OECD countries
over the last 30 years. In the model, greater observability of the consumption of others intensifies
the effects of visibility bias, and therefore increases overconsumption. We argue that over the last
thirty years the decline in costs of long-distance telephony, the rise of cell phones, cable television
and urbanization, and subsequently the rise of the internet, dramatically increased the extent to
which people observe possible personal consumption activities of others by television enactment,
phone, email, blogging, and social networking. Specifically, this communication is biased toward
making the decision to engage rather than not engage in such activities more salient to others,
because travel, dining out, or buying a car tend to be relatively noteworthy to report upon.
   The visibility bias approach builds upon different elements than other theories of over- or
underconsumption. It is inherently social, which distinguishes it from the present bias (hyper-
bolic discounting) and speculative disagreement theories. Empirically this suggests testing using
proxies for sociability, individual network position, and network connectedness, and by population-
level characteristics such as wealth variance and age distribution. Some of its predictions are in


                                                  40
the opposite direction from other social approaches, such as the wealth signaling (Veblen) and
utility interaction (keeping-up-with-the-Joneses) approaches. It also differs from the signaling,
preference-based, and speculative disagreement approaches in implying that relatively simple dis-
closure policy interventions can potentially increase saving. Indeed, there is evidence discussed
earlier supporting this implication in specialized settings, such as the decisions of college students
of how much to drink.
   The model in this paper is static. An interesting extension would be to consider a dynamic
setting in which agents consume over time and update in response to common shocks. The
feedback/multiplier effect from social learning may then potentially lead to cyclical shifts in
overconsumption. Such fluctuations may help explain consumption booms and business cycles.
This might potentially provide an interesting contrast to Keynesian ideas about business cycles
deriving from resource underutilitization and underconsumption.




                                                 41
                                         Appendices
A     Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1: We first describe the model in detail, since some of these were omitted in
the main paper.
    There are N = Θ×T agents in the economy, where Θ >> 0, T >> 0, divided into G ≥ 1 types
(types). We will subsequently study a sequence of economies, letting Θ and T tend to infinity at
the same rate.
    The number of agents of type g = 1, . . . , G is Ng >> 0, and thus
                                                   G
                                                   X
                                             N=          Ng .
                                                   g=1

The fraction of agents of type g is ug = Ng /N . Time is discrete, t = 1, 2, . . . , T . Here, a period
represents a short time-frame, such as a day or shorter. The T dates together correspond to
period 0 as studied in the main paper.
    The total potential consumption of an agent is divided into K different activities which we
call “bins” (K is large), where each bin represents potential consumption of W/(2K). There are
thus in total N K agent-consumption bins. We refer to a bin as full if it contains consumption
and empty otherwise.
    In each period, t, Θ of the N agents are selected, and each observes L private unbiased, i.i.d.
signals about the level of p. Here, for notational simplicity, we focus on the case when Lg = L
for all g. The derivation for the case with heterogeneous L’s is identical. Specifically, agent n
observes the L Bernoulli distributed signals x̃n,t
                                               k ∼ Ber(p), k = 1, . . . , L. The agents are chosen

in proportion to their type, so the number of selected agents of type g is ug Θ (which we assume
is an integer for each g) in each period. This is the only information the agents chosen at time
1 receive, whereas agents in later periods also receive signals about the consumptions of other
agents in the previous period. We sometimes use the notation x̃n,t,Θ
                                                               k     for the signal x̃n,t
                                                                                      k , i.e., with

an extra superscripted index that shows the size of the economy, Θ. This notation, which we use
in general for the variables we introduce, will be helpful when taking the limit as the size of the
economy grows.
    Agents are Bayesians, with prior Beta(0, 0) distributions about p. After observing the L sig-
nals, an agent selected at time 1 therefore updates to the posterior distribution p ∼ Beta(Ln,1 , L−
                             n,t
Ln,1 ), where Ln,t = L
                     P
                       k=1 x̃k . The agent’s posterior estimate of the probability of a high outcome

is then x̄n,1 =   Ln,1
                   L .   Since E[x̃n,1
                                   k ] = p, an agent’s expected estimate is unbiased, E[x̄
                                                                                           n,1 ] = p,

and since the number of agents is large, the average estimate across agents selected at t = 1 will



                                                  42
be very close to p. Moreover, since an agent’s consumption is a linear function of p, aggregate
consumption will be very close to what is optimal for time 1 agents.
   In period 2 and forward, the Θ selected agents observe a sample of consumption bins from the
consumption of time t − 1 agents, in addition to the L unbiased signals. Specifically, each selected
agent of type g observes Mg such consumption bins. Here, Mg could for example represent how
connected an agent is in a social network (corresponding to the agent’s in-degree in the network),
a higher connectedness allowing more observations of bins from other agents.
    The fraction of the Mg bins an agent of type g observes, that is selected from type g 0 agents is
ug0 > 0, where G                                                             0
               P
                  g 0 =1 ug 0 = 1. Here, it may be that ug 0 = fg 0 for all g , in which case observations

are selected in proportion to the number agents of each type. However, we also allow ug0 to be
distinct from fg0 in general, so that some agent types being more influential (corresponding to
them having a higher out-degree in a social network) than the prevalence of their type suggests.
                            ug0
So, for example, when       fg 0   = 2, a bin from an agent of type g 0 is twice as likely to be chosen as
would be suggested by the number of agents of that type.
   Agents treat these Mg observations in the same way as the L unbiased observations, as being
Ber(p) distributed. Indeed, as we shall see, this behavior is rational when full bins are selected
with the same probability as their fraction of all bins.
   The posterior belief of an agent n of type g at time t ≥ 2 then is p ∼ Beta(Ln,t + M n,t , L +
Mg − Ln,t − M n,t ), where M n,t is the agent’s number of observed full bins, and their probability
estimate is
                                                    Ln,t        Mg    M n,t
                        n,t     Ln,t + Ln,t          L      +    L × Mg           x̄n,t + mg ȳ n,t
                       p̂     =             =                                 =                     ,              (40)
                                 L + Mg                     1   + MLg                 1 + mg
              Mg                     M n,t
where mg =    L ,   and ȳ n,t =     Mg      is the fraction of observed bins containing consumption. Note
that time 1 agents’ estimates are consistent with (40) for the special case when Mg = 0 (and
mg = 0), representing the fact that time 1 agents make no bin observations.
   Suppose the fraction p̄tg of the bins of agents of type g selected at time t are full. Equivalently,
p̄tg is the average probability estimate of agents of type g selected at time t. Given that bins from
highly connected agents are overrepresented, the fraction of full bins among those considered for
selected t + 1 agents to observe is then
                                                            X
                                                    r̄t =         ug p̄tg ,
                                                            g

                                                                                  BFt
i.e., if BFt of these bins are full and BE
                                         t are empty, then r̄ t =
                                                                                  Bt    , where B t = BFt + BE
                                                                                                             t .

   In line with our discussion in the main paper, agents are more likely to observe full bins than



                                                            43
empty. Specifically, the chance that an observed bin is full is
                                                      t
                                                    BE
                        k F BFt                                                r̄t     def
                                  t =
                                                    Bt              =                = Sτ (r̄t ),   (41)
                   k F BFt + k E BE     BFt
                                              +   kE
                                                        1−     BFt           t
                                                                           r̄ + τ1−r̄t
                                        Bt        kF           Bt


where k F is the probability that a bin is observed conditional upon it being full, k E is the
probability that a bin is observed conditional upon it being empty, and τ = k F /k E ≥ 1. The
parameter τ measures the overrepresentation of full bins in an observer’s sample, i.e., it provides
a formal definition visibility bias. In the benchmark case of τ = 1, the random observations match
the actual distribution of consumption bins, and there is no visibility bias. When τ > 1, there is
overrepresentation of draws of consumption bins over non-consumption bins.
   The average probability estimate of all agents in period t is
                                                    Θ                G
                                              1 X n,t X
                                    p̄t,Θ =      p̂ =   fg p̄tg ,                                     (42)
                                              Θ
                                                   n=1               g=1


and the average consumption is C̄ t,Θ = p̄t,Θ W
                                              2 . For the growing sequence of economies, we define


                                              p̄t = lim p̄t,Θ ,                                       (43)
                                                       Θ→∞

which represents the average probability estimate at time t in the large economy. Whereas p̄t,Θ
is random for any finite Θ, we we will show that p̄t is almost surely a well-defined deterministic
number, so aggregate consumption is deterministic in the large economy at all times. We are
especially interested in steady-state consumption, after the initial effects of time 1 agents not
observing a previous cohort has vanished. We therefore define the average probability estimate
among agents in the long-term,
                                                  p̄ = lim p̄t .                                      (44)
                                                        t→∞

   We are now in a position to prove the proposition,. We first study aggregate probability
estimates when random realizations are equal to their expected values and show that the result
holds in this case. It is then quite straightforward to show that the result holds almost surely for
general random realizations of random variables.
   Thus, we study p̄ when x̄n,t = E[x̄n,t ], and ȳ n,t = E[ȳ n,t ] for all n and t, a case we denote by
the expected realization.
   Under the expected realization, it follows immediately that p̄1,g = p for all g and therefore




                                                          44
that r̄1 = p, regardless of size, Θ. An iterative application of (40) leads to the relations

                                                        p + mg Sτ (r̄t )
                                            p̄t+1
                                              g   =                      ,                            (45)
                                                           1 + mg
                                                        X
                                            r̄t+1     =    ug p̄t+1
                                                                g ,                                   (46)
                                                             g

for all t and g.
    We focus on the case τ > 1. From (45,46), it follows that

                                                                                        def
                                       X
                             r̄t+1 =       ug p̄t+1
                                                g   = αp + (1 − α)Sτ (r̄t ) = F (r̄t ),
                                       g

regardless of size, Θ, where α is defined in the theorem.
    It is easy to verify that Sτ (r̄) is a strictly increasing and concave function in the unit interval,
and that Sτ (0) = 0, Sτ (1) = 1. It follows that the function F is also strictly increasing and
concave on the unit interval, and that F (0) > 0, F (1) < 1. This properties of F imply that (16)
has a unique root, r̄, in the unit interval. A standard fixed point argument implies that all rt
lie within the unit interval and that the sequence r̄1 , r̄2 , . . . converges to r̄ regardless of starting
point, r̄1 ∈ (0, 1), i.e.,
                                                       lim r̄t = r̄.
                                                      t→∞

    From (45), it follows that

                                                 p + mg Sτ (r̄)
                                 lim p̄tg =                     ,         g = 1, . . . , G,
                                 t→∞                1 + mg

which leads to
                                                             G
                                                             X                  G
                                                                                X
                                  p̄ = lim p̄t = lim                fg p̄tg =         fg p̄g .
                                           t→∞         t→∞
                                                             g=1                g=1

It follows immediately that c̄0 =      p̄ W
                                          2 .

    For the special case τ = 1, Sτ (r̄t ) = r̄t . Now, r̄1 = p, so an iterative application of (45,46)
implies that p̄tg = p and r̄t = p for all t. This is in line with r̄ = p, which is indeed the solution to
(16) when τ = 1.
    We now extend the proof to allow for random realizations of observed consumption bins. The
result follows quite easily from an iterative application of the following standard lemma:

Lemma A.1 Assume zis ∼ Ber(ps ), i = 1, 2, . . . , s, are independent random variables, where
ps ∈ [0, 1] is a sequence of numbers that converges to p ∈ [0, 1], s = 1, 2, . . .. Then, almost surely,
                                                             s
                                                        1X s
                                                    lim   zi = p.
                                                   s→∞ s
                                                           i=1



                                                            45
Proof : The result follows immediately from the strong law of large numbers for triangular arrays,
since such a set of Bernoulli variables immediately satisfies the fourth moment requirement that
sups E|z1s − ps |4 ≤ 1.

   For the economy of size Θ, consider the agents of type g selected at time t ≤ Θ, who update
according to the rule (40):
                                                         x̄n,t,Θ   mg ȳ n,t,Θ
                                            p̂n,t,Θ =            +             .                                  (47)
                                                        1 + mg     1 + mg
Here, and subsequently, we have added the Θ superscript to the notation to keep track of the
                                   n,t,Θ                                             PMg n,t,Θ
economy’s size, x̄n,t,Θ = Θ1 Θ           , where x̃n,t,Θ ∼ Ber(p), and ȳ n,t,Θ = M1g k=1
                            P
                             k=1 x̃k               k                                      ỹk , where
ỹkn,t,Θ ∼ Ber(Sτ (r̄t−1,Θ )). The average probability estimate of type g agents at time t is then

                                                   Θ
                                                             x̄n,t,Θ   mg ȳ n,t,Θ
                                                                                    
                                              1 X
                                    p̄t,Θ
                                      g     =                        +                   .
                                              Θ             1 + mg     1 + mg
                                                  n=1

Now, assume that r̄t−1,Θ almost surely converges to the number r̄t−1 , as Θ → ∞. It then follows
from Lemma A.1 that p̄t,Θ
                      g   converges almost surely to

                                                        p + mg Sτ (r̄t−1 )
                                               p̄tg =                      ,
                                                            1 + mg

and thus that r̄t,Θ converges almost surely to
                                                             G
                                                             X
                                                    r̄t =          fg p̄tg .
                                                             g=1

   This previous argument also applies to the initial time period, t = 1, but with m1 = m2 =
· · · = mg = 0, immediately implying that p̄1g = p, g = 1, . . . , G, a.s., so r̄1 = p, almost surely.
An iterative application of this argument therefore implies that for each t, r̄t,Θ converges almost
surely to the number r̄t as defined under the expected realization, when Θ tends to infinity, and
thus that p̄tg converges almost surely to its value defined by (45,46) for each t. Finally, as a
consequence, p̄, as defined by (42-44), converges almost surely to its value defined by (14-16). We
are done.



   Proof of Proposition 2: The result follows directly from (15), the fact that Sτ (r̄) > p, and that
mg is increasing in g.


   Proof of Proposition 3: Part 1 follows from noting that (19) implies that p̄ = p if and only if
                                                                                             ∂ p̄
−4(1 − p)p(τ − 1)2 m(1 + m) = 0, which holds if and only if τ = 1. Now that                  ∂τ     > 0 can be seen by
                     1
substituting x =   τ −1 ,   noting that x is decreasing in τ , and taking the derivative w.r.t. x, leading to

                                                              46
                                                   
∂ p̄
                          p
∂x     = x + p − m + 2pm − (p − x + m)2 + 4px(1 + m) ψ(x), where ψ(x) > 0. It then follows
from the fact that (x + p − m + 2pm)2 − ((p − x + m)2 + 4px(1 + m)) = −4(1 − p)pξ(1 + m) < 0,
        ∂ p̄                   ∂ p̄
that    ∂x     < 0, and thus   ∂τ     > 0. Part 2 and the claim in 3 that p̄ approaches 1 as m becomes
large follow immediately by taking the limit of (19) as τ and m become large. To prove the other
claims in Part 3, note that p̄ can be written as
                                        p
                                     γ + γ 2 + 4(k + γ)p def
                                p̄ =                     = V (γ),
                                           2(k + γ)
                                                                                           ∂γ
where γ = (p + m)(τ − 1) − 1 > −1, and k = (1 − p)(τ − 1) + 1 > 1. Since                   ∂m   > 0, it
is therefore sufficient to show that V 0 (γ) > 0 when γ > −1. By calculating V 0 (γ), it follows
that −2γp + k(γ − 2p + γ 2 + 4p(k + γ)) > 0 is necessary and sufficient for V 0 (γ) > 0 to hold.
                           p
                                                           √
For γ = 0, the expression evaluates to V 0 (0) = k(−2p + 2 kp) > 0. Moreover, the solution
                                 p
to V 0 (γ) = −2γp + k(γ − 2p + γ 2 + 4kp + 4γp) = 0 is γ+/− = −k < −1. Thus, since V 0 is a
continuous function of γ, V 0 (γ) > 0 for all γ ≥ −1. We also verify that the equilibrium probability
estimate and aggregate consumption are increasing in the true probability of the high state, p,
                                                               
               ∂ p̄      1
by calculating ∂p   = 2(1+m) + 2√1V 2 + 1+m
                                         1
                                            ((τ − 1)(p + m) − 1) , which is obviously positive for
                       1                              1                        τm
p ∈ [0, 1], since 2 + 1+m ((τ − 1)(p + m) − 1) ≥ 2 + 1+m ((τ − 1)m − 1) = 2 + 1+m − 1 > 0 for such
p.


Proof of Proposition 4: Part 1: The result for p̄g follows immediately from (15), by noting that
the expression represents a weighted average of p and Sτ (r̄) with weight mg on the second term,
and that Sτ (r̄) > p, so when mg increases, p̄g indeed increases. The second result then follows
                                   P
immediately from the fact that p̄ = g fg p̄g is increasing in each p̄g .
   Part 2: The definition of first order stochastic dominance, the fact that p̄g is increasing in g,
             P
and that p̄ = g fg p̄g together imply the result.
                         fgi     i =  uig                                           i =
                                                                                        PG     uig
   Part 3: Note that 1+m     g
                               ωg    1+m  g
                                            , i ∈ {A, B}, and thus from (16) that α       g=1 1+m  g
                                                                                                     ,
correspond to the α-coefficient defined in (16). It is straightforward to show that r̄ as defined in
(16) is decreasing in the α-coefficient defined in (16), and therefore that r̄A > r̄B when αA < αB .
Consequently, p̄A     B                                         A    B
                g > p̄g for all g (as follows from (15)), and p̄ > p̄ (as follows from (14)).         .




                                                        47
References
 Abel, A. B. (1990). Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses.
   American Economic Review 80, 38–42.
 Akerlof, G. A. and R. J. Shiller (2009). Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the
    Economy and Why it Matters for Global Capitalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
    Press.
 Allen, T. W. and C. D. Carroll (2001, April). Individual learning about consumption. Macroe-
    conomic Dynamics 5 (2), 255–271.
 Bagwell, L. S. and B. D. Bernheim (1996, June). Veblen effects in a theory of conspicuous
    consumption. American Economic Review 86 (3), 349–373.
 Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2018, December). The economic effects of
    social networks: Evidence from the housing market. Journal of Political Economy 126 (6),
    2224–2276.
 Bailey, M., E. Dávila, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2019, November). House price beliefs and
    mortgage leverage choice. Review of Economic Studies 86 (6), 2403–2452.
 Benhassine, N., F. Devoto, E. Duflo, P. Dupas, and V. Pouliquen (2015, August). Turning a
    shove into a nudge? A “labeled cash transfer” for education. American Economic Journal:
    Economic Policy 7 (3), 86–125.
 Berger, J. and K. L. Milkman (2012, April). What makes online content viral? Journal of
    Marketing Research 49 (2), 192–205.
 Bertrand, M. and A. Morse (2016, December). Trickle-down consumption. Review of Economics
    and Statistics 98 (5), 863–879.
 Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2018). Behavioral household finance. In
    B. D. Bernheim, S. DellaVigna, and D. Laibson (Eds.), Handbook of Behavioral Economics:
    Foundations and Applications 1, Chapter 3, pp. 177–276. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Else-
    vier.
 Beshears, J. L., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2008). The importance of default
    options for retirement saving outcomes: Evidence from the USA. In S. J. Kay and T. Sinha
    (Eds.), Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas, Chapter 3, pp. 59–87. Oxford: Ox-
    ford University Press.
 Beshears, J. L., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and K. L. Milkman (2015, June). The ef-
    fect of providing peer information on retirement savings decisions. Journal of Finance 70 (3),
    1161–1201.
 Borgatti, S. P., A. Mehra, D. J. Brass, and G. Labianca (2009, February). Network analysis in
    the social sciences. Science 323 (5916), 892–895.
 Borgida, E. and R. E. Nisbett (1977, September). The differential impact of abstract vs. concrete
    information on decisions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 7 (3), 258–271.
 Bosworth, B. P. (1993, March). Saving and Investment in a Global Economy. Washington, D.C.:
    Brookings Institution Press.
 Brenner, L. A., D. J. Koehler, and A. Tversky (1996, March). On the evaluation of one-sided
    evidence. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 9 (1), 59–70.
 Brown, J. R., Z. Ivković, P. A. Smith, and S. Weisbenner (2008, June). Neighbors matter:
    Causal community effects and stock market participation. Journal of Finance 63 (3), 1509–
    1531.

                                               48
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. T. Rebelo (2016, August). Understanding booms and
   busts in housing markets. Journal of Political Economy 124 (4), 1088–1147.
Bursztyn, L., A. L. González, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2020, October). Misperceived so-
   cial norms: Female labor force participation in Saudi Arabia. American Economic Re-
   view 110 (10), 2997–3029.
Cai, H., Y. Chen, and H. Fang (2009, June). Observational learning: Evidence from a random-
   ized natural field experiment. American Economic Review 99 (3), 864–882.
Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999, April). By force of habit: A consumption-based
  explanation of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107 (2), 205–
  251.
Card, D. and J. E. DiNardo (2002, October). Skill-biased technological change and rising wage
   inequality: Some problems and puzzles. Journal of Labor Economics 20 (4), 733–783.
Carroll, C. D., B.-K. Rhee, and C. Rhee (1994, August). Are there cultural effects on saving?
   Some cross-sectional evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (3), 685–699.
Carroll, C. D., B.-K. Rhee, and C. Rhee (1999, October). Does cultural origin affect saving
   behavior? Evidence from immigrants. Economic Development and Cultural Change 48 (1),
   33–50.
Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and N. Roussanov (2009, May). Conspicuous consumption and race.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2), 425–467.
Chen, H., M. Michaux, and N. Roussanov (2019, October). Houses as ATMs? Mortgage refi-
  nancing and macroeconomic uncertainty. Journal of Finance 75 (1), 323–375.
Chen, Y., F. M. Harper, J. Konstan, and S. X. Li (2010, September). Social comparisons and
  contributions to online communities: A field experiment on movielens. American Economic
  Review 100 (4), 1358–1398.
Cialdini, R., L. Demaine, B. Sagarin, D. Barrett, K. Rhoads, and P. Winter (2006, February).
   Managing social norms for persuasive impact. Social Influence 1 (1), 3–15.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, M. Kudlyak, and J. Mondragon (2014, January). Does greater
   inequality lead to more household borrowing? New evidence from household data. Working
   paper, University of Texas Austin.
Cole, H. L., G. J. Mailath, and A. Postlewaite (1995, Summer). Incorporating concern for
   relative wealth into economic models. Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Min-
   neapolis 19 (3), 12–21.
Corneo, G. and O. Jeanne (1997, October). Conspicuous consumption, snobbism and con-
   formism. Journal of Public Economics 66 (1), 55–71.
D’Acunto, F., A. Rossi, and M. Weber (2020, June). Crowdsourcing peer information to change
   spending behavior. Working paper, Boston College.
de Zúñiga, H. G. and S. Valenzuela (2011, December). The mediating path to a stronger
   citizenship: Online and offline networks, weak ties, and civic engagement. Communication
   Research 38 (3), 397–421.
DeGroot, M. H. and M. J. Schervish (2012). Probability and Statistics. Boston, MA: Pearson.
Donath, J. and D. Boyd (2004, October). Public displays of connection. BT Technology Jour-
  nal 22 (4), 71–82.
Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2002, July). Participation and investment decisions in a retirement plan:
   The influence of colleagues’ choices. Journal of Public Economics 85 (1), 121–148.

                                             49
Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2003, August). The role of information and social interactions in re-
   tirement plan decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment. Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 118 (3), 815–842.
Dupor, B. and W.-F. Liu (1993, March). Jealousy and equilibrium overconsumption. American
  Economic Review 93 (1), 423–428.
Enke, B. (2020, August). What you see is all there is. Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (3),
   1363–1398.
Federal Reserve Board (2018, May). Report on the economic well-being of U.S. households in
   2017.
Fiedler, K. (2008, January). The ultimate sampling dilemma in experience-based decision mak-
   ing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 34 (1), 186–203.
Frederick, S. (2005, Autumn). Cognitive reflection and decision making. Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 19 (4), 25–42.
Frederick, S. (2012, June). Overestimating others’ willingness to pay. Journal of Consumer
   Research 39 (1), 1–21.
Frey, B. and S. Meier (2004, December). Social comparisons and pro-social behavior: Testing
   “conditional cooperation” in a field experiment. American Economic Review 94 (5), 1717–
   1722.
Galı́, J. (1994, February). Keeping up with the Joneses: Consumption externalities, portfolio
   choice, and asset prices. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 26 (1), 1–8.
Georgarakos, D., M. Haliassos, and G. Pasini (2014, May). Household debt and social interac-
   tions. Review of Financial Studies 27 (5), 1404–1433.
Georgarakos, D. and G. Pasini (2011, October). Trust, sociability, and stock market participa-
   tion. Review of Finance 15 (4), 693–725.
Gerber, A. S. and T. Rogers (2009, January). Descriptive social norms and motivation to vote:
   Everybody’s voting and so should you. The Journal of Politics 71 (1), 178–191.
Giorgi, G. D., A. Frederiksen, and L. Pistaferri (2016, June). Consumption network effects.
   NBER Working Paper No. 22357.
Goldstein, N. J., R. B. Cialdini, and V. Griskevicius (2008, October). A room with a viewpoint:
   Using social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
   Research 35 (3), 472–482.
Golub, B. and E. Sadler (2016). Learning in social networks. In Y. Bramoullé, A. Galeotti, and
   B. W. Rogers (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Networks, Chapter 19, pp.
   504–542. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Gomes, F., K. Hoyem, W.-Y. Hu, and E. Ravina (2020, February). Retirement savings adequacy
  in U.S. defined contribution plans. Working paper, London Business School.
Grinblatt, M., M. Keloharju, and S. Ikäheimo (2008, November). Social influence and con-
   sumption: Evidence from the automobile purchases of neighbors. Review of Economics and
   Statistics 90 (4), 735–753.
Gross, D. B. and N. S. Souleles (2002, February). Do liquidity constraints and interest rates
   matter for consumer behavior? Evidence from credit card data. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics 117 (1), 149–185.




                                             50
Guidolin, M. and E. A. L. Jeunesse (2007, November/December). The decline in the U.S.
   personal saving rate: Is it real and is it a puzzle? Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
   Review 89 (6), 491–514.
Guin, B. (2017, November). Culture and household saving. Working paper, Bank of England.
Han, B., D. Hirshleifer, and J. Walden (2020, June). Social Transmission Bias and Investor
  Behavior. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. Forthcoming.
Harbaugh, R. (1996, December). Falling behind the Joneses: relative consumption and the
   growth-savings paradox. Economics Letters 53 (3), 297–304.
Healy, A. F. (1981, September). The effects of visual similarity on proofreading for misspellings.
   Memory and Cognition 9 (5), 453–460.
Hearst, E. (1991). Psychology and nothing. American Scientist 79 (5), 432–443.
Heimer, R. (2016, November). Peer pressure: Social interaction and the disposition effect.
   Review of Financial Studies 29 (11), 3177–3209.
Heyerdahl-Larsen, C. and J. Walden (2017, April). Welfare in economies with production and
   heterogeneous beliefs. Working paper, London Business School.
Hirshleifer, D. and S. H. Teoh (2009). Thought and Behavior Contagion in Capital Markets. In
   T. Hens and K. Schenk-Hoppe (Eds.), Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics and Evo-
   lution, Handbooks in Finance, Chapter 1, pp. 1–46. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-
   Holland.
Hong, H. G., J. D. Kubik, and J. C. Stein (2004, February). Social interaction and stock market
  participation. Journal of Finance 59 (1), 137–163.
Jackson, M. O. (2019, April). The friendship paradox and systematic biases in perceptions and
   social norms. Journal of Political Economy 127 (2), 777–818.
Jin, Y., H. Li, and B. Wu (2011, June). Income inequality, consumption, and social-status
    seeking. Journal of Comparative Economics 39 (2), 191–204.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1972, July). Subjective probability: A judgment of represen-
  tativeness. Cognitive Psychology 3 (3), 430–454.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1973, July). On the psychology of prediction. Psychological
  Review 80 (4), 237–25l.
Kaustia, M. and S. Knüpfer (2012, May). Peer performance and stock market entry. Journal
  of Financial Economics 104 (2), 321–338.
Koehler, J. J. and M. Mercer (2009, July). Selection neglect in mutual fund advertisements.
  Management Science 55 (7), 1107–1121.
Krapivsky, P. L., G. J. Rodgers, and S. Redner (2001, June). Degree distributions of growing
   networks. Physical Review Letters 86 (23), 5401.
Laibson, D. (1997, May). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics 112 (2), 443–477.
Laibson, D. I., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman (1998). Self-control and saving for retirement.
   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998 (1), 91–196.
Lambert, T. A., A. S. Kahn, and K. J. Apple (2003, May). Pluralistic ignorance and hooking
  up. Journal of Sex Research 40 (2), 129–133.


                                              51
Lemieux, T. (2006, May). Postsecondary education and increasing wage inequality. American
   Economic Review 96 (2), 195–199.
Lieber, E. M. and W. Skimmyhorn (2018, July). Peer effects in financial decision-making.
   Journal of Public Economics 163, 37–59.
Ljungqvist, L. and H. Uhlig (2000, June). Tax policy and aggregate demand management under
   catching up with the Joneses. American Economic Review 90 (3), 356–366.
Loayza, N., K. Schmidt-Hebbel, and L. Serven (2000, September). Saving in developing coun-
   tries: An overview. World Bank Economic Review 14 (3), 393–414.
Lusardi, A., O. S. Mitchell, and N. Oggero (2018, May). The changing face of debt and financial
   fragility at older ages. AEA Papers and Proceedings 108, 407–411.
Madrian, B. and D. Shea (2001, November). The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) partic-
  ipation and savings behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4), 1149–1187.
Malmendier, U. and L. S. Shen (2018, June). Scarred consumption. Working paper, NBER
  Working Paper No. 24696.
McShane, B. B., E. T. Bradlow, and J. Berger (2012, December). Visual influence and social
  groups. Journal of Marketing Research 49 (6), 854–871.
Mok, D., B. Wellman, and J. Carrasco (2010, November). Does distance matter in the age of
  the Internet? Urban Studies 47 (13), 2747–2783.
Moretti, E. (2011, January). Social learning and peer effects in consumption: Evidence from
  movie sales. Review of Economic Studies 78 (1), 356–393.
Neisser, U. (1963, September). Decision-time without reaction-time: Experiments in visual
   scanning. American Journal of Psychology 76 (3), 376–385.
Nisbett, R. and L. Ross (1980). Human Inference: Strategies and Shortcomings of Social Judg-
   ment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
OECD (2014, August). OECD factbook 2014: Economic, environmental and social statistics.
  OECD Publishing 89 (6).
Parker, J. A. (1999, January). Spendthrift in America? On two decades of decline in the U.S.
   saving rate. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 14, 317–370.
Parlour, C. A., V. Prasnikar, and U. Rajan (2007, August). Compensating for the winner’s
   curse: Experimental evidence. Games and Economic Behavior 60 (2), 339–356.
Perkins, H. W., M. P. Haines, and R. Rice (2005). Misperceiving the college drinking norm
   and related problems: A nationwide study of exposure to prevention information, perceived
   norms and student alcohol misuse. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 66 (4), 470–478.
Perkins, H. W., P. W. Meilman, J. S. Leichliter, J. R. Cashin, and C. A. Presley (1999).
   Misperceptions of the norms for the frequency of alcohol and other drug use on college
   campuses. Journal of American College Health 47 (6), 253–258.
Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003, February). Income inequality in the United States, 1913-1998.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1), 1–39.
Poterba, J. M. (2014, May). Retirement security in an aging population. American Economic
   Review 104 (5), 1–30.
Poterba, J. M., S. F. Venti, and D. A. Wise (2012, May). Were they prepared for retirement?
   Financial status at advanced ages in the HRS and AHEAD cohorts. In D. A. Wise (Ed.),
   Investigations in the Economics of Aging, pp. 21–69. University of Chicago Press.


                                             52
Prentice, D. A. and D. T. Miller (1993, February). Pluralistic ignorance and alcohol use on
   campus: Some consequences of misperceiving the social norm. Journal of Personality and
   Social Psychology 64 (2), 243–256.
Salganik, M. J., P. S. Dodds, and D. J. Watts (2006, February). Experimental study of inequality
   and unpredictability in an artificial cultural market. Science 311 (5762), 854–856.
Samuelson, W. and R. Zeckhauser (1988, March). Status-quo bias in decision making. Journal
   of Risk and Uncertainty 1 (1), 7–59.
Scellato, S., C. Mascolo, M. Musolesi, and V. Latora (2010, June). Distance matters: Geo-social
   metrics for online social networks. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Online Social
   Networks, WOSN’10, pp. 8–8.
Scholz, J. K., A. Seshadri, and S. Khitatrakun (2006, August). Are Americans saving “opti-
   mally” for retirement? Journal of Political Economy 114 (4), 607–643.
Schroeder, C. M. and D. A. Prentice (1998, December). Exposing pluralistic ignorance to reduce
   alcohol use among college students. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 28 (23), 2150–2180.
Shefrin, H. M. and R. H. Thaler (1988, October). The behavioral life-cycle hypothesis. Economic
   Inquiry 26 (4), 609–643.
Shemesh, J. and F. Zapatero (2016, September). The intensity of keeping up with the Jone-
   ses behavior: Evidence from neighbor effects in car purchases. Working paper, Monash
   University.
Stanford Center on Longevity (2016, February). Seeing our way to living long, living well in
   21st century America. The Sightlines Project.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015, May). Most households approaching retirement
   have low savings.
White, K. J. C. and A. M. Guest (2003, September). Community lost or transformed? Urban-
  ization and social ties. City & Community 2 (3), 239–259.




                                             53
Internet Appendix

Proof of Proposition 5: The proof is identical to that of Proposition 1, but with included disclosure
signals.

Proof of Proposition 6: From (22) it follows that
                                         
                               Q                  Q
                     1 + m1 +    (1 − v1 ) p̄1 −     (1 − v1 )p̄2 = p + m1 S,
                              L1                  L1
                                               
                                           Q            Q
                                1 + m2 +      v1 p̄2 −     v1 p̄1 = p + m2 S,
                                           L2           L2


where we write S = Sτ (r̄) for notational convenience. We rewrite this system on matrix form as

                                                        Ap = p1 + Sm,

where
                                                                                                                
                                                         Q
              p̄1                          1 + m1 +      L1 (1   − v1 )    − LQ1 (1   − v1 )                    m1
        p=         ,          A=                                                              ,   m=            .
              p̄2                          − LQ2 v1                        1 + m2 +      Q
                                                                                         L2 v1                  m2

Solving for p, we arrive at
                                           p = A−1 (p1 + Sm),                      where                                  (48)
                                                                                                
                                                        Q        Q
                                    1  1 + m2 +        L2 v1    L1 (1    − v1 )
                     A−1 =                                                                       ,   and
                                    R   Q                                      Q
                                                                                       − v1 )
                                        L2 v1                    1 + m1 +      L1 (1

R = (1 + m1 )(1 + m2 ) + (1 + m2 )(1 − v1 ) LQ1 + (1 + m1 )v1 LQ2 .
   We also have p̄ = (f1 , f2 ) · p (representing (22) on matrix form), which via (48) leads to
                                     1
                         p̄   =         f1 (1 + m2 )(p + m1 S) + f2 (1 + m1 )(p + m2 S) +                                 (49)
                                     R
                                       v
                                          1              1 − v1           
                              +      Q      (p + m1 S) +        (p + m2 S)
                                        L2                 L1
                              def    b + Qa
                              =              ,    where
                                     d + Qc

                                   v1               1 − v1
                              a =     (p + m1 S) +         (p + m2 S),
                                  L2                  L1
                              b = f1 (1 + m2 )(p + m1 S) + f2 (1 + m1 )(p + m2 S),
                                   v1             1 − v1
                              c =     (1 + m1 ) +        (1 + m2 )
                                  L2                L1
                              d = (1 + m1 )(1 + m2 ).

   We write (49) as p̄ = p̄(S, Q), and the chain rule then implies that

                                                      dp̄   ∂ p̄   ∂ p̄ dS
                                                          =      +         .                                              (50)
                                                      dQ    ∂Q ∂S dQ


                                                                  54
                                                     ∂ p̄
A necessary and sufficient condition for             ∂Q       > 0 is that ad − bc > 0, which one can verify is
equivalent to
                                                                  1
                                            v1 >                              .
                                                   L1 (1+m1 )        1
                                                   L2 (1+m2 )        f1   −1 +1
             ∂ p̄
Similarly,   ∂Q     < 0 is equivalent to

                                                                  1
                                            v1 <                              .
                                                   L1 (1+m1 )        1
                                                   L2 (1+m2 )        f1   −1 +1

                                    ∂ p̄                                                                     dS       ∂S dβ
   By inspection, one verifies that ∂S   > 0 (note that R does not depend on S). Also,                       dQ   =   ∂β dQ ,
                                 ∂S
where from (23) it follows that ∂β < 0. From (24), moreover, it follows that

                      L1 L2 (1 + m1 u2 + m2 u1 ) + Q(L2 (1 − v1 ) + L1 v1 )             0    0
                                                                                   def b + Qa
      β=                                                                           = 0         .                        (51)
             L1 L2 (1 + m1 )(1 + m2 ) + Q(v1 L1 (1 + m1 ) + (1 − v1 )L2 (1 + m2 ))     d + Qc0
                                                   dβ
A necessary and sufficient condition for           dQ    < 0 (so that        dS
                                                                             dQ   > 0) is that a0 d0 − b0 c0 < 0, which in
turn is equivalent to
                                                                     1
                                            v1 >                              .
                                                   L1 (1+m1 )        1
                                                   L2 (1+m2 )        u1   −1 +1
             dβ                    dS
Similarly,   dQ     > 0 (so that   dQ   < 0) is equivalent to

                                                                     1
                                            v1 <                              .
                                                   L1 (1+m1 )        1
                                                   L2 (1+m2 )        u1   −1 +1

Altogether, these conditions when plugged into (50) imply parts 1 and 2 of the proposition.
   To show part 3, rewrite (49) as

                                                            b2 + v1 a2
                                         p̄(S, v1 ) =                  ,          where
                                                            d2 + v1 c2

                                                              
                                  1               1
                    a2 = Q           (p + m1 S) −    (p + m2 S) ,
                                  L2              L1
                                                                           Q
                    b2 = f1 (1 + m2 )(p + m1 S) + f2 (1 + m1 )(p + m2 S) +    (p + m2 S),
                                                                           L1
                                                        
                               1             1
                    c2 = Q       (1 + m1 ) −    (1 + m2 )
                              L2             L1
                                               Q
                    d2 = (1 + m1 )(1 + m2 ) +     (1 + m2 ),
                                              L1
and
                                                        def   b3 + v1 a3
                                                   β =                   .
                                                              d3 + v1 c3
The chain rule gives us
                                              dp̄   ∂ p̄   ∂ p̄ ∂S dβ
                                                  =      +            .                                                 (52)
                                              dv1   ∂v1 ∂S ∂β dv1




                                                               55
                                 ∂ p̄               ∂S
where, as noted earlier,         ∂S     > 0, and    ∂β   < 0. A similar comparison as before shows that

                  a3 d3 − b3 c3 = L1 L2 (m2 − m1 )Q(Q + L1 (1 + m1 )u2 + L2 (1 + m2 )u1 ) > 0,
               dβ
and thus       dv1   > 0, in following the earlier argument. Moreover, when L1 = L2 = L, we get

                         a2 d2 − b2 c2 = −L2 (m2 − m1 )Q(Q + L(1 + m1 u2 + m2 u1 ) < 0,
     ∂ p̄                                                                  dp̄
so   ∂v1    < 0. Altogether, using (52), this then implies                 dv1   < 0. We are done.

Proof of Corollary 1: 1. and 2. follow immediately from the fact that 0 < v < v̄ < 1.
   3(a): When ω1 = ω2 , u1 = f1 , and moreover per assumption v1 = f1 , so u1 = f1 = v1 .
Moreover, L1 = L2 , so it is sufficient to show that
                                                                      1
                                               f1 < v =                       ,
                                                          1+m1       1
                                                          1+m2       f1   −1 −1

which follows immediately since m1 < m2 .
   3(b): Since v1 = f1 , it is enough to show that f1 > v̄, which is equivalent to the stated
condition.

Proof of Proposition 7: We study a stationary equilibrium, in which p̄ is constant over time.
Denote by p̄ the equilibrium probability estimate in (25) and by p̄’ the equilibrium in (15). It
follows from these equations that
                                         m                           q
                         p̄0 − p̄ =         (Sτ (p̄0 ) − Sτ (p̄)) +     (1 − p̄0 − Sτ (1 − p̄0 )).        (53)
                                        1+m                         1+m
Define the function
                                                                                              
                                               m                        q
                     R(x) = x − p̄ −              (Sτ (x) − Sτ (p̄)) +     (1 − x − Sτ (1 − x)) ,         (54)
                                              1+m                      1+m

and note that R(p̄0 ) = 0, and that R is a continuous function of x ∈ [0, 1]. From (17), it follows
           m
that p̄ > 1+m Sτ (p̄), and therefore, since Sτ (0) = 0, Sτ (1) = 1, that R(0) < 0. Moreover, since
                                                       q
Sτ (y) > y, for y ∈ (0, 1), it follows that R(p̄) = 1+m  (Sτ (1 − p̄) − (1 − p̄)) > 0. Thus, by the
intermediate value theorem, it follows that the point, p̄0 where R(p̄0 ) = 0, satisfies 0 < p̄0 < p̄.

Proof of Proposition 8: It is easy to verify that the solution to the equilibrium condition (26) is
                                  −1            
                p̄ =                              1 − 3p + 4λp + m − 2pm + 2λpm + 3pτ −                   (55)
                        2(2λ − 1)(1 + m)(τ − 1)
                                                        √ 
                      − 4λpτ + mτ + 2pmτ − 2λpmτ − V ,

where
                                                                                   
              V      = −4(2λ − 1)p(1 + m)(τ − 1) − 1 + 2(λ − 1)p(τ − 1) + 2(λ − 1)mτ +
                                                                         2
                     +  1 − p(−3 − 2m + 2λ(2 + m)(τ − 1) + m(1 + τ − 2λτ ) .

It is also easy to verify that the solution reduces to (27,28) when λ = 0, and to (19) when λ = 1.
Moreover, it is easy to verify that p̄λ=0 > p, and that for any λ ∈ [0, 1], p̄λ = p ⇒ p ∈ {0, 1}. It

                                                                 56
also follows immediately that p̄ is a continuous function of λ, except possibly at λ = 1/2.
    We next define x = 2λ − 1 ∈ [−1, 1], and rewrite (55) as
                                           √
                                         b( 1 − cx + dx2 − 1)
                           p̄ = a +                             ,     where
                                               2x(τ − 1)
                                   p(2 + m)(τ − 1) + mτ
                           a =                              ,
                                        2(1 + m)(τ − 1)
                           b = 1 + p(τ − 1)
                                   2m(−p(τ − 1)2 + p2 (τ − 1)2 + τ )
                           c =                                          ,
                                          (1 + m)(1 + p(τ − 1))2
                                       m2 (p(1 − τ ) + τ )2
                           d =                                .
                                   (1 + m)2 (1 + p(τ − 1))2
                        √                                                        √
A Taylor expansion of 1 + cx + dx2 − 1 around x = 0 i.e., λ = 1/2, yields 1 + cx + dx2 − 1 =
1           2                                                                             λ=1 > p, p̄λ
2 cx + O(x ), and thus p̄ is a continuous function of λ at λ = 1/2 too. Thus, since p̄
                                     λ                                      λ
depends continuously on λ, and p̄ 6= p for λ ∈ [0, 1], it follows that p̄ > p for all λ ∈ [0, 1]. We
have shown p̄ > p, i.e., (1), and (3).
    To show (2), we note that
                                               √
                           dp̄        b          1 − cx + dx2 + 2c x − 1
                               =            ×       √                     ,
                           dx     4(τ − 1)            1 − cx + dx2
    √                                                             dp̄
so 1 − cx + dx2 > 1 − 2c x is necessary and sufficient for dx         > 0. This implies the following
sufficient condition:                              c 2               c2
                             1 − cx + dx2 > 1 − x = 1 − cx + x2 ,
                                                    2                  4
or equivalently,
                                              4d2 − c2 > 0.
It is easy to verify that
                                           16(1 − p)pm2 (τ − 1)2 τ
                             4d2 − c2 =                            > 0,
                                          (1 + m)2 (1 + p(τ − 1))2
so the condition is indeed satisfied.

Proof of Proposition 9:
   We study a stationary equilibrium, in which p̄ is constant over time. We first state and prove
the following lemma, which characterizes the equilibrium probability estimate:

Lemma A.2 The equilibrium probability estimate is the solution to the equation

                            p̄ = λR(p, Sτ (f p̄(1 − ∆)), m, f (1 + ∆))
                                + (1 − 2λ)R(p, Sτ (f p̄), m, f (1 + ∆))
                                + λR(p, Sτ (f p̄(1 + ∆)), m, f (1 + ∆)),                         (56)

where the function R is defined by
                      1                          p                                          
R(p, z, m, f ) =              1 + f p + f m + zm − (1 + f p + f m + zm)2 − 4f (1 + m)(p + zm) .
                 2f (1 + m)
   The lemma states that an agent who observes higher-than-expected consumption updates

                                                 57
beliefs as if the agent were observing only wealthy agents (who consume the fraction p̄f (1 + ∆)
of bins rather than the average, p̄f ). The reason why the agent so strongly concludes that the
wealthy were observed is that the number of observations Q and M are large. The observer finds
the strength of the evidence of high consumption very surprising; the likelihood is low under
the hypothesis that observations are of either high or low wealth agents. But the likelihood is
especially low when the observation targets have low wealth, so the posterior belief puts all the
weight on observing wealthy agents.
    Proof of Lemma A.2: For α, β, f1 , f2 ∈ (0, 1], m > 0, define

                                                       J(α, β, m, f1 , Q, 0)
                          L(α, β, m, f1 , f2 ) =   lim                       ,
                                                   Q→∞ J(α, β, m, f2 , Q, 0)

where J was previously defined. It follows from standard properties of Beta distributions, that
                                           
                                           
                                           
                                            ∞,       f1 − αβ < f2 − αβ ,
                                           
                    L(α, β, m, f1 , f2 ) =                                                   (57)
                                           
                                           
                                                      f1 − αβ > f2 − αβ .
                                           
                                            0,

An agent with prior p, who observes a fraction β of bins with consumption, believing that the
observations provide an unbiased estimate of the consumption of others, and who believes that
the distribution of wealth groups (poor, medium, rich) among the population is (λ, 1 − 2λ, λ) who
consume the fraction (f (1 − ∆), f, f (1 + ∆)) of the bins, respectively, will update—using Bayes
rule—to the posterior:

          λJ(α, β, m, (1 − ∆)f, Q, 1) + (1 − 2λ)J(α, β, m, f, Q, 1) + λJ(α, β, m, (1 − ∆)f, Q, 1)
  p̂ =
          λJ(α, β, m, (1 + ∆)f, Q, 0) + (1 − 2λ)J(α, β, m, f, Q, 0) + λJ(α, β, m, (1 + ∆)f, Q, 0)
          J(α, β, m, (1 − ∆)f, Q, 1)      J(α, β, m, f, Q, 1)      J(α, β, m, (1 + ∆)f, Q, 1)
     =                               g1 +                     g2 +                            g3 ,
          J(α, β, m, (1 − ∆)f, Q, 0)      J(α, β, m, f, Q, 0)      J(α, β, m, (1 + ∆)f, Q, 0)

where
                                       λJ(α, β, m, (1 − ∆)f, Q, 0)
 g1 =                                                                                             ,
          λJ(α, β, m, (1 − ∆)f, Q, 0) + (1 − 2λ)J(α, β, m, f, Q, 0) + λJ(α, β, m, (1 + ∆)f, Q, 0)
                                        (1 − 2λ)J(α, β, m, f, Q, 0)
 g2 =                                                                                             ,
          λJ(α, β, m, (1 − ∆)f, Q, 0) + (1 − 2λ)J(α, β, m, f, Q, 0) + λJ(α, β, m, (1 + ∆)f, Q, 0)
                                        λJ(α, β, m, (1 + ∆)f, Q, 0)
 g3 =
          λJ(α, β, m, (1 − ∆)f, Q, 0) + (1 − 2λ)J(α, β, m, f, Q, 0) + λJ(α, β, m, (1 + ∆)f, Q, 0).

It follows from (57) and assumption (29), that as Q → ∞, g1 , g2 → 0 and g3 → 1. In words, the
observing agent puts all the weight on having observed a wealthy agent’s consumption, regardless
of whom the observing agent actually observes. Moreover, from (65) and it follows that an agent
observing poor, average, and wealthy agents consuming based on posterior beliefs p̄ will have
posterior belief
                                    p̂ = R(α, β, m, (1 + ∆)f ),
where β equals Sτ ((1 − ∆)f p̄), Sτ (f p̄), and Sτ ((1 + ∆)f p̄) with probabilities λ, 1 − 2λ, and
λ, respectively. The fixed point problem that matches aggregate posterior beliefs with agents’
updating is therefore (56).
    Existence of a solution to (56) follows from the easily verifiable fact that R(p, Sτ (g×0), m, f ) >
0 and R(p, Sτ (g × 1), m, f ) < 1, regardless of g, p, f ∈ (0, 1), and m > 0. Therefore, the r.h.s of


                                                   58
(56), which is a continuous function, is strictly greater than p̄ when p̄ close to zero, and strictly less
than p̄ when p̄ is close to one. Existence therefore follows from the intermediate value theorem.
This completes the proof of Lemma A.2.
                                                                       ∂R
   It is straightforward to verify that the function R satisfies       ∂z   > 0, since

                                           ∂R    m(1 + c)
                                              =            ,
                                           ∂z   2f (1 + m)

where
                                      (−1 − zm + f (2 − p + m))2
         c2 =                                                                     < 1,
                (f 2 (p + m)2 + (1 + βm)2 + 2f (m − βm(2 + m) + α(−1 + (β − 2)m))
                                                                                              2
                                                                2                  2(1−f )(1−p)m
implying positivity of the derivative. It also follows that ∂∂zR2 = − ((1+f p+f m+zm)  2 −4f (1+m)(p+zm))3/2 <

0, so R is concave in z.
                                                                                                 κ1
    Moreover, one can show that ∂R                                                        ∂R
                                       ∂f < 0. Specifically, it is easy to verify that ∂f = κ2 f 2 , where
the function κ2 > 0, and κ1 = 0 ⇔ f = 0 on f ∈ [0, 1], for the smooth function κ1 . Thus,R is a
monotone function for positive 0 ≤ f ≤ 1. A Taylor expansion of κ1 in f around f = 0 implies
that κ1 is of the form R0 (f ) = −c1 f 2 + O(f 3 ), where the constant c1 > 0, altogether implying
that ∂R∂f < 0 for small positive f , and thereby for all 0 ≤ f ≤ 1 (since R is monotone).
    Now, we use these properties of R to show that the total derivative of the r.h.s. of (56) w.r.t.
∆ is negative. Specifically, using the notation Ri for the partial derivative of the function R w.r.t.
its ith argument, from the calculus of total derivatives it follows that this r.h.s. derivative is of
the form

      q p̄f −Sτ0 (f p̄(1 − ∆))R2 (·) + Sτ0 (f p̄(1 + ∆))R2 (·) + f (qR4 (·) + (1 − 2q)R4 (·) + qR4 (·)).
                                                              


Since R4 (·) < 0, the second part of this expression is negative. Moreover, Sτ is concave and R
is concave in its second argument, so the first part of the expression is also negative. Thus, the
r.h.s. of (56) is decreasing in ∆.
    Because R is increasing and concave in its second argument, it follows that the r.h.s. of (56)
is concave and increasing in p̄, and since R(p, 0, m, f ) > 0, it follows that at the equilibrium point
                                                                                  ∂ p̄
0 < ∂R∂ p̄ < 1. Altogether, the inverse function theorem then implies that ∂∆ < 0 for the fixed
point p̄ defined by (56).

Proof of Proposition 10: We study a stationary equilibrium, in which p̄ is constant over time. The
proof of the Bayesian updating follows similar lines as in Proposition A.2. Define
                             Z 1
    J(α, β, m, f, g, Q, x) =     tαQ−1+x (1 − t)(1−α)Q−1 (g + f t)βmQ (1 − g − f t)(1−β)mQ dt. (58)
                               0

Standard properties of Beta distributions, implies that an agent’s posterior estimate is

                                                def       J(α, β, m, f, g, Q, 1)
                          p̂ = R(α, β, m, f, g) = lim                            ,                    (59)
                                                      Q→∞ J(α, β, m, f, g, Q, 0)

Moreover, taking the derivative of the term inside the integral of (58) with respect to t, and using
the factor that for large Q, J converges to a scaled Dirac distribution, it follows that p̂ satisfies:
                                                                
                          α 1−α              βm      (1 − β)m
                             −        +f           −               = 0.                           (60)
                          p̂   1 − p̂      g + f p̂ 1 − g − f p̂


                                                      59
for large Q. Substituting in the equilibrium condition p̂ = p̄, p̄ as a function of r defined in (37),
setting α = p, β = Sτ (g + f p̄), m = 1, f and g as defined in (32), and solving for τ in (60) leads
to the functional relation:

                                    
                      τ (p, r) =        2p + 2p2 − 32r + 20pr + 4p2 r + 36r2 + 3pr2 +                          (61)
                                                                                                     
                                + 5p2 r2 − 50r3 − 5pr3 + 3p2 r3 + 25r4 − 10pr4 + p2 r4
                                  
                                /   − 2p + 2p2 + 20pr + 4p2 r + 48r2 + 7pr2 +
                                                                                    
                                + 5p2 r2 − 54r3 − pr3 + 3p2 r3 + 15r4 − 8pr4 + p2 r4 .

This relation thus represents the level of visibility bias that is consistent with equilibrium, given
p and r.
    It is easy to verify that τ (p, 0) = 1, and thus that the unbiased equilibrium with r = 0 is
obtained in this case. Moreover, one verifies that τ is strictly increasing in r in a neighborhood of
0, regardless of p, and that τ approaches infinity for some r < 1/2, so equilibrium is defined for
all parameter values p and τ , and r increases in τ , as does then p̄. Finally, since c̄I0 is decreasing
in r, see (34), and c̄0 = c̄e − c̄I0 , it follows that c̄0 is increasing in r, and then also in τ , since r is
increasing in τ .



Further extensions
We first examine alternative utility functions. we then consider the model with arbitrary size of
consumption bins.

The base model with other utility functions
The combination in the base model of the utility specification in (1), which leads to a linear
consumption function in wealth, c̄0 = p̄ W                                   W
                                          2 , and the assumption that when 2 is consumed at time
0 all bins contain consumption, makes the relationship between p̄ and the expected number of
consumption bin observations especially tractable, which allows for a strong characterization of
equilibrium.
    We now verify that qualitatively similar results as in Proposition 3 also hold under more
common utility specifications. For example, consider the case in which agents have power utility,
       1−γ     1−γ
U = c1−γ
       0
           + c1−γ
               1
                   , with risk aversion coefficient γ ≥ 1 (where in the case γ = 1, log-utility is
used). The consumption shock,  is assumed to take on value W     2 with probability 1 − p (to avoid
negatively infinite utility), and 0 with probability p. As before, the agent’s estimated probability
for a high outcome is p̂
    The agent’s first order condition is in this case is
                                                                   −γ
                              −γ              −γ            W
                             c0 = p̂(W − c0 ) + (1 − p̂)       − c0      ,
                                                             2

leading to the mapping c0 = G(p̂) W  2 . In the base model case with quadratic utility, G(p̂) = p̂.
In the case of power utility, G is a nonlinear function for which a closed form solution is not
available, bare a few special values of γ.38 However, the following behavior of G is easy to show:
                                                                                          p              
  38                                                                          5
       For the special case when γ = 1, the closed form solution is G(p̄) =   4
                                                                                   5 − p̄ − 9 − 10p̄ + p̄2 .


                                                           60
Lemma A.3 The function G satisfies G(0) = 21 , G(1) = 1, and is strictly increasing and convex.
Its inverse is                         γ c −γ c γ            γ 
                      −1        1 − 2c    2       2  − 21 − 2c
                    G (c) =                    γ         γ          .
                                         1 − 2c − 21 − 2c

    Proof : The form of G−1 follows immediately from the f.o.c. Differentiation of G−1 implies that
G−1   is strictly increasing and concave on c ∈ (1/2, 1). Moreover, G−1 (1/2) = 0, and G−1 (1) = 1.
It follows that G(0) = 1/2, G(1) = 1, and from the inverse function theorem that G is invertible
on p ∈ (0, 1), being increasing and convex.

       If an agent observes a fraction x of consumption bins, the agent’s posterior expected value of
p is
                                               p + mG−1 (x)
                                                   p̂ =      .
                                                   1+m
Owing to visibility bias, if other agents’ consumptions are based on the posterior expected prob-
ability p̄, then x = Sτ (G(p̄)). Finally, in equilibrium, p̂ = p̄, leading to the following fixed point
equilibrium condition:
                                           p + mG−1 (Sτ (G(p̄)))
                                     p̄ =                         .                                (62)
                                                   1+m
    The following proposition shows the existence of an equilibrium with over consumption in this
setting:

Proposition A.1 For τ > 1, there exists an equilibrium probability estimate, p̄ > p, with associ-
ated consumption G(p̄) W       W
                       2 > G(p) 2 .

                                        1
                                               
       Proof : Note that y = G(p̄) ∈    2, 1       satisfies

                                                          p + mG−1 (Sτ (y)))
                                       G−1 (y) =                             .                    (63)
                                                               1+m
To show the existence of a y ∈ (G(p), 1) solving (63), we note that

                                          p + mG−1 (G(p))   p + mG−1 (Sτ (G(p)))
                     p = G−1 (G(p)) <                     <                      ,
                                               1+m                1+m
and that
                                                      p + mG−1 (Sτ (G(1)))   p+m
                           1 = G−1 (G(1)) >                                =     .
                                                            1+m              1+m
By the intermediate value theorem, there is therefore a y ∈ (G(p), 1) that solves (63), with
associated equilibrium probability estimate p̄ = G−1 (y) > G−1 (G(p)) = p.


The base model with arbitrary size of consumption bins
The assumption that an agent consumes in all bins when c0 = W/2 makes the analysis tractable,
since the calculus of Bayesian updates with Beta distributed priors and observations is straight-
forward. A generalization is to assume that when c0 = W/2, a fraction 0 < f ≤ 1 of the bins are
full. This allows us to analyze situations where there is heterogeneity in consumption behavior,
for example, because of wealth uncertainty. Specifically, if a rich agent with probability estimate
p̂ = 1 consumes in 100% of the consumption bins, then a poor agent with the same probability


                                                             61
estimate will consume strictly less. The base model assumes f = 1, leading to the posterior
estimate (6).
    The following proposition covers the case when f < 1:

Proposition A.2 The posterior expected probability of high consumption of an agent with prior
p, who observes fraction z of bins being full, where each bin is full with probability pf , is

                      p̂ = R(p, z, m, f )                                                            (64)
                                1      
                         =               1 + f p + f m + zm
                           2f (1 + m)
                           p                                           
                         −   (1 + f p + f m + zm)2 − 4f (1 + m)(p + zm) .

Proof : Define
                                 Z       1
         J(α, β, m, f, Q, x) =               tαQ−1+x (1 − t)(1−α)Q−1 (f t)βmQ (1 − f t)(1−β)mQ dt.
                                     0

Using standard properties of Beta distributions, it follows that

                                                             J(α, β, m, f, Q, 1)
                             R(α, β, m, f ) = lim                                ,                   (65)
                                                         Q→∞ J(α, β, m, f, Q, 0)

and that an agent who updates according to Bayes rule will arrive at the posterior estimate
p̂ = R(p, z, m, f ) when Q is very large.


    It is easy to verify that when f = 1, (64) reduces to the base model formula, p̂ = p+mz
                                                                                          1+m . Also,
when z = f p, the formula reduces to p̂ = p, since the fraction of full bin observations is consistent
with the prior in this case. Moreover, R is increasing in p and z, and is decreasing in f , since the
lower f is, the lower the expected value of z is for a given prior p, which makes any given number
z of observed full bins a more favorable indication about p.
    Using similar arguments as before, an equilibrium probability estimate when visibility bias is
present is then defined as a solution to the fixed point equation:

                                                p̄ = R(p, Sτ (p̄f ), m, f ).                         (66)

We now have

Proposition A.3 There exists a unique equilibrium. In equilibrium there is overconsumption,
and the equilibrium probability estimate is

                                             p̄ = B(1 + f (τ − 1), p, m),                            (67)

where the function B is defined in (19).

Proof : Substituting in the definition of R into the fixed point problem (66) yields a cubic equation
in p̄, two roots of which are outside of the unit interval (0, 1). The remaining root has the
prescribed form.

   The comparative statics from the base model therefore also hold in this variation. More-
over, increasing f has the same effect as increasing τ . Both lead to more overconsumption in
equilibrium.


                                                            62
Corollary A.1 The equilibrium probability estimate, p̄ is increasing in the consumption fraction,
∂ p̄/∂f > 0.




                                               63
