NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODEL FOR TAX COMPLIANCE AND AUDITING

Kurt Beron
Helen V. Tauchen
Ann Dryden Witte

Working Paper No. 2556

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1988

The work reported in this paper was made possible by a grant from the National
Science Foundation and the financial support of the University of North Carolinas
Research Council. Their support of our work in no way indicated support for our
approach or conclusions. We thank Dennis Cox and Bill Lefbom of the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service for helping us obtain the data. The research reported here is
part of the NBERs research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Support
from The Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.

NBER Working Paper #2556
April 1988

A Structural Equation Model

for Tax Compliance

and Auditing

ABSTRACT

In this paper, we estieate a three equation sodel for taxpayers'
reported incoce and tax liability and for the probability of an audit. Our
work differs froe previous studies in that our dependent variables in the
coepliance equations are taxpayer reports rather than a variable related to
auditor estisates of noncoepliance and in that we esticate a structural
equation for audits.
We find that audits stimulate coepliance although the effect Is not
large and is not statistically significant for all groups.
Audits are sore
effective at inducing accurate reporting of subtractions fro. incose than of
incose. Reduced—fore results suggest that IRS activities other than audits
have significant cospliance effects.
Results for the sociodecographic variables are Interesting and help to
explain sose seesingly incongruous findings in the literature.
We find
cospliance to be higher, if anything, in areas with less educated and older
taxpayers, a large proportion of households headed by fesales. and a costly
native born population.

Kurt Heron
University of Texas
Dallas, TX
Helen V. Tauchen
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC
Ann Dryden Witte
Wellesley College and the NBER
Wellesley, MA

1.

Introduction

The study of tax compliance promises important scientific and policy
insights.

Form a scientific point of view, the reporting of tax

liabilities

provides an arena in which we can observe the compliance behavior of most of
the adult population..Thls contrasts markedly with economists' study of most
criminal behavior (e.g.. murder, property offenses) where a small, and possible
aberrant, portion of the population is at risk.
deficits, understanding

At this time of large

budget

compliance behavior also offers the possibility of

'painlessly reducing the deficit.
The potential richness of the tax arena has not escaped the research
community and studies of tax compliance behavior have burgeoned during the
1980s.

However, progress to date has been somewhat disappointing.

Researchers

report seemingly contradictory results and research on tax compliance has not

advanced beyond research on the deterrence of general criminal offenses.

We

believe that it is time to step back, assess current research findings, and try
other approaches.

A critical approach to tax compliance research seems

particularly valuable at this time because of the extensive research that is
underway on this topic.
in this paper, we provide an analysis of a 1969 data set that combines
Information from the IRS's Statistics of Income (SOl) program, the Census.
internal IRS documents and a special data set compiled by the IRS In the mid
1970s.

This last data set has been used by a number of researchers in recent

empirical

studies of tax compliance.

in carrying out the analysis, it Is important to take into account a
number of Issues that are central to compliance research.
dependent

First, consider the

variable used in previous empirical studies, namely an estimate of

2

compliance based

Given

on Internal Revenue Service (IRS) euditors' findings.

the use of
the difficulty of rRs auditors in detecting unreported in income,

to
such a dependent variable provides results that are very difficult
interpret.

Instead we analyze the actual reporting decisions of taxpayers.

As

of dependent
is described in detail in Section 4, the use of these types
variables offers a number of advantages.
compliance models less complex and
straightforward.

Send,

Primarily,

interpretation

it makes

estimation of

of results more

we specify a structural model that allows us to infer

the factors affecting taxpayers income reports and reports of subtractions
e.g., deductions and exemptions) on the tax return.
considers only

a

Other compliance

research

We know, however, that the

single compliance decision.1

than income reports
probability of detection is much higher for subtractions

and we suspect that taxpayer behavior differs for these two quite different
types of compliance activities.

Noncompliance

often an act of omission while noncompliance

requires actual misstatements.

from underreports of income is

from overstatement of subtractions

Third, the work reported here represents

the

research has specified and
first time, as far as we are aware, that empirical

estimated a structural equation for audits.

Yet, theory suggests that the

careful consideration of
proper specification of compliance equations requires
the audit process.

Tosummarize our results briefly, we find that taxpayers significantly
and that increasing the probability of
underreport adjusted gross income (AGI)
that audits
audit increases repo,,ted income and tax liability. We also find
from income
are more effective in inducing accurate reporting of subtractions
than of income.

In addition, there is evidence that detectability of

of taxpayers' reporting behavior.
noncompliance through audits is a determinant

3

The results that audits affect compliance are rather comforting and
support other findings.

However, both our results and the results of previous

studies vary considerably across taxpayer groups and are not always
significant.

Previous studies using different models all report that, in

general, audits deter tax noncompliance

but rind significant deterrent

effects

of audits for different taxpayer groups. To us this is disturbing and suggests
that economists understanding

very firm.

of the effects of audits on compliance is not

In the conclusions we suggest reasons why this might be the case.

Comparison of our structural and reduced form results suggests that IRS
enforcement actions other than audits have significant effects on compliance.

To date research, including our own, has focused on the effect of audits and
largely ignored other IRS actions.

It appears that enhancing our understanding

of the effect of tax administration on compliance will require economists to
broaden their perspectives.
The results for sociodemographic variables are also of interest in that
they help to explain seemingly incongruous results in the literature and to
provide important guidance for future research.

We find in general that

compliance is higher in areas with less educated and older populations and in
which a large percent of the population is native born or in female—headed
households.

The estimated coefficients on these variables in ours and others'

work depend critically though on the dependent variable used and the vector of
explanatory variables included in the model.

Consistent implications emerge.

however, when the coefficients on these variables are interpreted carefully on
the basis of the model specified.

The paper is organized as follows.
conceptual

framework.

In the next section. we present our

The two sections that follow describe the data and our

4
empirical

model.

Section 5 and 6 contain a discussion of the eapirical

for our structural and the reduced fore equations respectively.

results

The final

section contains our conclusIons.

2.

Conceptual

Framework

Our model of tax compliance and enforcement is a simultaneous equation
model with equations for taxpayers'
audit.

Specifically,

equations

reports and for the probability of an

to reflect the reporting behavior of taxpayers we include

total tax
for reported adjusted gross income (AGI) and the reported

We use separate equations for reported AGI and tax liability rather

liability.

than a single reporting equation because of the differences in the magnitude
and possible causes of income underreporting and the overstatement of
subtractions

(i.e. ,adjustments, exemptions, deductions and credits).

The

factors
results for the reported AGI equation allow us to determine the
for the reported AIM
affecting income reporting while comparison of the results

and tax liability equations allows us to infer the factors associated with the
overstatement

of subtractions.2

To specify the equations for reported AGI and total tax liability, we
surveyed the theoretical literature on tax compliance.3

This literature

on the
suggests that taxpayer's reports of income and tax liability depend
and tastes and
enforcement policies of the tax authorities, income, tax rates,
preferences.

the
Although not explicitly mentioned in the literature,

theoretical models of tax compliance also imply that taxpayers'

reports of

income
Income and tax liability depend on provisions of the tax code regarding
exclusions

and subtractions.

5

We chose audits as the measure of enforcement policy since this is the
enforcement action that has been of most interest in the literature on tax
compliance and since the IRS believes that audits are its most effective
Instrument for stimulating accurate taxpayer reports (Controller General of the

United States. 1976, p.1).

To specify the audit equation, we read the

available documents regarding the way in which the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) selects returns for audit4 and discussed

the selection process with IRS

personnel at the national and district level.

The IRS selects the

largest proportion of returns for audit using carefully developed computerized
formulas, known as 'èhe DIP formulas.

The parameters of the DIP formulas are

estimated using data from the IRS's Tax Compliance Measurement Program (TCMP).
Under this program, the IRS every three or four years selects
approximately

50.000 returns to be examined by its best auditors.

Taxpayers are asked to

substantiate every line item on their return, and auditors record both what the
taxpayer filed and what they believe to be the correct report.

These data are

used to estimate equations that relate the extent of underpayment to the
characteristics

of the filed return.

parameters estimates

In subsequent years, the IRS uses the

from these equations to score each return filed In regard

to its audit potential. The returns with the highest scores are targeted for
audit.

The actual number of returns audited through the DIP program depends on

the reporting behavior of taxpayers, the type and number of audit personnel
available, and the amount of audit resources

Involved In special audit

programs.5 To reflect this audit selection process, we model the probability
of an audit as determined by taxpayers
model, by taxpayer oöaracteristlcs

reports which are endogenous to the

that the IRS both observes and may legally

use for audit selection, and by the level of IRS resources.

3.

The Data
We obtain our data on reported AG! and total tax liability and on the

number of returns filed from the Statistics of Income (SO!) files and our
Our measures of

information on audits from the IRS's ProJect 778 data base.

and
income and tastes and preferences come from the 1970 Census of Population
Housing,6

Information on IRS audit resources was obtained from an IRS internal

document (IRS, l969'
All data except that on IRS work load (returns per full—time-equivalent

since data on audits

code level
employee) are aggregated to the three digit zip
are not available at the individual level.
aggregated

Information on IRS work load is

to the IRS District Office level since this is the administrative

unit responsible for conductingaudits.

IRS Districts are coterminous with

where
state boundariesexcept in the most populous states (e.g.. California)

multiple Districts are established.

Tax

return

data are for 1969 returns filed

in 1970, and audit data relate to audits performed in 1969.
on
Information on audits is available for seven distinct groups defined
is
the basis of AOl and income source (I.e., whether or not some Income

received from a business or farm.)7

The IRS separates the returns into these

audit classes because the it believes that compliance
groups and developa4eeparate

behavior varies across

audit selection tormulas for each group.

Both the IRS and academic researchers (Witte and Woodbury. 1985. and
Dubin and Wilde, 1988) have tested for the homogeneity of taxpayer behavior
across the audit classes and concluded that aggregation is not appropriate.
therefore estimate separate models for the different audit classes.

We

Since we

are able to obtain income estimates for only the five low (incomes below
for
$10,000 in 1969 dollars) and middle (incomes between $10,000 and $30,000

7
proprietors and between $10,000 and $50,000 for wage and salary workers in 1969
dollars) income audit classes, we present results for only these audit classes.
The definitions

of the audit classes are given in Table 1.

There are no good

estimates of income for the two high income groups from the Census or other
sources.8

These high income returns account for less than one percent of the

returns filed in 1969.

Results for

a

specification

that omits the income

variable for these two audit classes are available on request.

4.

The Empirical Model
Our model Is a three equation model for reported AGI (AGI"), reported

total tax liability
specification

(7").

and the log odds of an audit

(A).

We discuss our

for the two reporting equations first and then turn our attention

to the specification

of the audit equation.

We see reported AGI and report total tax liability as determined by the
log odds of an audit (our measure of enforcement actions which is
endogenous),9

the degree to which noncompliance can be detected (D) in an audit

(our measure of the penalties), the level of income (I), a vector of variables

that reflect important aspects of the tax code regarding filing requirements.
income exclusions and subtractions from income (TC), and a vector of

sociodemographicvariables that control for differences in tastes and
preferences

(Sr).

Formally, our two equations for taxpayer reports are

AGI"=a0+a1 A+a2Di-a3 I

+a4TC+a5S"+eg

8
TZ'

b0

÷b1A+b2D+b3

I

4.b4TCb5Sr'

4-es

where the e's are random error terms and the a's and b's are the paraeters to

be estimated.
Our measure of the log odds of an audit is based on the audit coverage
in the geographical

area.

We do not measure penalties directly but rather seek
The vast

to measure them indirectly through our measures of detectability.

majority of audits result in some change, generally an increase, in tax
liability.1°

However, the taxpayer generally receives no formal penalty

but

rather is assessed the taxes due plus interest for the period of nonpayment.1
Thus, for 'ost taxpayers it is what the auditor uncovers that is the important

factor in determining the costs of noncompliance.12
We seek to control for the degree of detectability in two ways.
we estimate separate equations for reported AGI and tax liability.

First.

As the IRS

readily acknowledges (e.g., US Department of the Treasury, 1983), it is far
more able to unoover overstatements of subtractions from income than
understatements

of income.

Thus, we would expect audits to have a stronger

effect on reported tax liability where overstatements of subtractions as well
as underreportingof income are reflected than on reported ACt.

Second, we

include two variables related to information reporting to the IRS and other
types of record keeping.

the W—2 forms.13

In 1969, the major paper trails used by the IRS were

To reflect the relative availability W—2s we include the

percent of employment in manufacturing and in the service industries,

Income

from manufacturing firms is generally covered by W—2 reporting and any
underreportingof income is likely to be detected by an audit.

In contrast,

income earned in the service industries is more likely to be in a form (e.g.,

9
cash, comsissions) less subject to detection.
classes in areas where such employment

Even the proprietor audit

is in manufacturingwill be likely to

have "paper trails" for receipts because of the extensive record keeping
activities of large manufacturing enterprises and because a significant portion

of the income for individuals In the proprietor audit classes is from wages and
salary.

Our measure of income is obtained from the Census and varies according
to the income category included in the audit class.

We chose Census Income as

our measure of "true' income rather than an estimate of income from TGMP audit
results because TCMP auditors fail to uncover a substantial fraction of

unreported income.14
marginal

We have not explicitly introduced a measure of the

tax rate as an explanatory variable because for our data set the tax

rate has no variation that is independent of income.15

The coefficient on our

Income variable should therefore be interpreted as measuring the effect of
changes in income on compliance when the tax rates change with income in
accordance with the tax code.

To reflect relevant features of the tax code, we include variables for
the percent of the populationover 65. average family size, the percent of the
population owning their own home, and the percent unemployed.

These variables

control for legitimate nonfilings by very low income Individuals (i.e.. in
1969, generally those with incomes below $600), the special allowances for

senior citizens, the exemptions for dependents, the tax deductability of
mortgage interest and property taxes, and the exclusion of unemployment

benefits from income.

Some of these variables may also be related to tastes

and preference regarding tax compliance.
speculation

For instance, there has been some

that in areas with high unemployment there might be more resentment

of the government and less willingness to pay the eandated taxes.
variables measuring employment

The two

structure (the percent of the population

employed in manufacturingand in services) may serve to control for the most
important adjustment to income, the adjustment for employee business expenses,

as well as detectability.
The theoretical work on tax compliance provides relatively little
direction

in selecting the variables that should be included to reflect tastes
The limited empirical work on tax compliance and the survey

and preferences.
research do

however, provide some valuable guidance.

(1983b), Kinsey (l984a). and Jackson and Hilliron

See Witte and Woodbury

(1986) for surveys.

variables that are consistently related to tax compliance
age, and place of birth.

race, education,

The

behavior Include sex,

We include measures of each in our

model.
Our specification
the literature

of the taxpayer compliance equations differs from

in that our dependent variables are reported AGI and tax

liability rather than measures derived from tax auditor estimates of

We believe that using variables related to the taxpayers'

noncompliance.

reports offer several important advantages for estimating the compliance model

and interpreting the results.
liability as the equations
the theoretical

In addition, the use of reported AGI and tax

for the taxpayers' behavior is implied by much of

literature on tax compliance and recommended by the National

Academy of Sciences' Panel on Research on Taxpayer Compliance (Scholz, Roth
and Witte, 1988).

With reported AOl and total tax liability as the dependent variables in
the equations

for taxpayers' behavior it is reasonable to assume a normal

distribution for the error terms in the equations and to use standard

11
techniques for estimating the equations.

Further, the error term can be

interpreted as arisingjrom true stochasticness
omitted variables

in taxpayers

behavior or from

related to that behavior (e.g.. knowledge of the tax

code).

When the dependent variable is affected by tax auditors' estimate of unreported
income, these assumptions and interpretations are not valid,

in this case, the

error term reflects any elements of the auditors' and taxpayers' behaviors that
are not captured by the model.

Further, the error term has some unusual

features that make it difficult to handle statistically, particularly in a
simultaneous equation setting.

First, the error term is not continuously

distributedts..tncetaxpayers' reports and auditors' findings often coincide.
For example, with unreported

atom at zero.

income as the dependent variable there may be an

Second, the density of the error term may be distributed

asymmetricallyabout the atom since underreports of taxable income are far more
common than over reports.

While there has recently been some very good

progress on methods to handle these difficulties (Schmidt. 1986). the issue is
not resolved.
The advantages_of using reported income as a dependent variable.
rather than a variable such as unreported

income which is determined in part by

tax auditors' findings, are, perhaps, even more important for the
interpretation

of the estimated coefficients.

dependent variable,

With reported Income as the

the effects of explanatory variables can arise either from

taxpayers' reporting behavior or from specific provisions of the tax code.

With a dependent variable that is Influenced by tax auditors' findings, the
effects of explanatory variables might also reflect the auditors' behavior.
Sorting out,even the separate effects of the tax code and compliance behavior

may not be easy, but at least the tax code is known and thus one should be able

12
to make some reasonable interpretation

c-f

the coefficients for the reported

By way of contrast, very little is known about tax auditors'

income equations.

behavior other than that they miss a substantial amount of underreporting and
that they are far better at catching overstatements
exemptions
Treasury.

of deductions and

than at uncovering underreports of income (U.S, Department of the
1983).

This lack of information compounds considerably the task of

he coefficients

interpreting

percentage of noncompliance>

in an equation for unreported income (or for
and is one of the primary reasons that we use

taxpayer reports as the dependent variables in the compliance equations.
The third equation in our mode? is the equation for the log odds of an
audit,

We see the log odds of an audit as determined by reported ACt and

of
reported total tax liability which are endogenous to the model, by a vector
variables that are observed by the IRS and that may be legally used to select
returns for audit (sa) end by the level of IRS resources
a

r

(R).

Formally,

a

AC0'-c1AGI +c2Tr+c35 +c4R÷e
where ea is the random error and the c's are the parameters to be estimated.

We choose the log odds of an audit as the dependent variable for the audit
equation for two reasons.

First, this functional

form ensures that the

probability of an audit is between zero and one for all values of the
explanatory variables,
strategy,

Second, the specification

nests the random audit

assumed in much theoretical work, as a special case.16

A random

audit stratei would be implied if only measures of IRS resources were
significantly related to the log odds of an audit.
The variables that are available from the filed tax return and that the
IRS may potentially
structure,

use for audit selection are the measures of employment

the unemp1onnt rate, the percent of the population over 65,

13

average family size and the percent of the population who own their own homes.
Our Measure of IRS resources is the number of returns per full-time-equivalent
district employees
Although all federal tax returns in any audit class are scored by the
same DIP formula for audit potential, the chances of a tax return being
audited, ceteris paribus, differ considerably across IRS districts.
for the differences In rules across districts
availability.

Based

q the DIP scores,

The reason

Is related to resource

the IRS develops a master plan annually

for the number of return examinations to be conducted by audit class in each
district.

However, the IRS has not been able to locate its staff in a fashion

to carry out its plan.
substantially

In some regions it has been able to examine

fewer returns than indicated by the optimal base plan whereas In

other regions more audits were conducted.
differences

Since much of the reason for the

in the probability that tax returns are selected for audit,

ceteris paribus, is related to resource constraints, we use a measure of IRS
audit resources to control for differences in the audit rules across taxpayers.

Note that It is the variation In the completion of the optimal plan
across districts that is the important In this respect rather than just the
difference in

resources across regions.

A difference in resources relative to

the number of returns is not by itself necessarily evidence that the audit
selection rule varies across taxpayers.

it the IRS targets its resources

towards areas that are believed to be particularly noncompllant,

then higher

than average resources might just reflect higher concentration of noncompliant
taxpayers.

There is considerable evidence in government reports (GAO, 1976 and

WIlt, 1986) that the IRS has not been able to distribute
districts

Its resources among

in away to achieve best its revenue and compliance goals given its

14
In addition.

budget.

Long (1985) concludes that the "introduction of TCMP

compliance data did not bring about any dramatic restructuring in audit
coverage——evenwhen It disclosed regions or return classes with much lower
compliance levels which were receiving less audit attention than more compliant
groups (p. 29),"
We achieve identification of our model by use of exclusion restrictions
which are justified on the basis of institutional, legal and informational
constraints.

Specifically, we identify the two reporting equations by

excluding our measure of IRS resources from these equations.
resources

The level of IRS

affects reporting behavior only indirectly through its effect on the

likelihood that a taxpayer is audited.

Identification of the audit equation is

obtained by the exclusion of economic and socio—demographic variables that are
not available to the IRS on the tax

return

or information documents (e.g.,

whether or not an individual was foreign born) or, if available, cannot legally

be used to select returns for audit (e.g. sex).
We estimate the model by two stage least squares.

We use a single

equation method rather than a systems method of estimation (e.g., three

stage

least squares) because we believe that some of our equations (e.g., the
the
equation for reported AG!) are more completely specified than others (e.g.

audit equation) and we are concerned about spreading any omitted variable bias
across equations.

5.

(See Intriligator (1978) for a discussion.)

EmpIrical Results for the Structural Model
Tables 2 thru 4 contain the results of the two—stage least squares

estimation for the reported AG! and tax liability and for the log odds of an
audit equations respectively.

Note first that the model explains a significant

15

proportion of the variation in reported AGI and tax liability and in the log
odds of an audit for each of the five audit classes.

As we had anticipated, we

Model reporting behavior sore successfully than auditing behavior.

For

reported AOl, the R2s range froa .14 for low incoce wage and salary workers
with iteMized deductions to .79 for low incoae proprietors while for tax
liability tha range of the R2s is froM .13 for Middle incoie wage and salary
workers to .79 for low Incoce proprietors.

Our Model explains between 6 (for

low incoee wage and salary workers with iteelzed deductions) and 31 percent
(for low incoMe proprietors) of the variation in the log odds of an audit.
As Might be expected, the coefficients on income are by far the most
significant of the estimated coefficients in both the reported AOl and tax
liability equations.

The coefficients on income in the reported AGI equations

range from .27 for low Income taxpayers taking standard deductions to .97 for
middle income wage and salary workers.

Taxpayers in all audit classes reported

significantly less than an additional dollar of AOl for each extra dollar of
income.

There are legal exclusions of certain types of income from taxation and
legal adjustments to income that account for some differences between income

and reported AGI.

Further, in 1969, some individuals

(i.e. ,those with total

income below $600 unless they had net earnings from self employment above $400)
In the low income groups (I.e., AGis below $10,000) were not required to file.
However,

recall that we include variables to control for the major income

exclusions (the percent over 65 to control for the exclusion of Social Security
benefits and the unemployment rate to control for the exclusion of unemployment
compensation),

adjustments (the two employment structure variables to control

for employee business expenses, the largest adjustment to Income In 1969). and

16
some of the major causes of extremely low income (the unemployment rate and the
percent of the population over 65).

We do not control for some exclusions

(e.g., income on municipal bonds), adjustments
retirement plans by the self employed),
level (e.g., dependent

teenagers).

(e.g., contributions

to

and causes of incomes below the filing

However, it seems unlikely that such

exclusions, adjustments (total adjustments were less than .1 percent of AGI in
1969) and legitimate nonfilings could explain the low rate at which income
shows up in reported AG!.

The coefficients on income in the tax liability equations provide an
estimate of the marginal tax rate on total income (income before exclusions and
adjustments

by the tax code).

The marginal tax rates implied by these

coefficients do not seem unreasonable.

For the low income groups the estimated

marginal rate is between 7 and 10 percent.

As expected, middle income groups

had higher marginal rates (22 percent for middle income proprietors and 27
percent for middle income wage and salary workers).

For all audit classes,

we find that increasing the odds of an audit

increases reported AG! and tax liability.

However, for reported AG! the effect

is significant for only two groups and for reported tax liability it is
significant

for three groups.

The magnitudes of the effects of audits on tax

compliance are modest with the elasticities for reported tax liability with
respect to the audit variable being between .19 and

.31

when significant.

These elasticities imply that a one percent increase in audit coverage would
lead to approximately

a $1.4 billion increase in tax revenue in current dollars

for the five audit classes considered.
from these groups of approximately

This is an increase in 1969 tax revenue

.69 percent.

17
High audit rates appear to be more effective in eliciting accurate
reporting of subtractions from income than accurate reporting of Income.

The

elasticity of reported AOl with respect to the audit variable is smaller than
the elasticity for reported tax liability for all five audit classes and the

dIfference inelasticities is more pronounced for the middle than the low income
audit classes.

These findings support IRS's belief that its auditors are

better able to find overreported subtractions than underreported income.

The

findings are also consistent with survey findings (Westat. 1980) that
relatively more of the noncompliance for blue—collar communities is from
underreported income whereas for white-collar communities relativelymore of
the noncompliance

is from overstated subtractions

from income.

Recall that we have no direct measure of penalties, but rather estimate
separate equations for reported ACt and tax liability and include two

measures

of detectability (the percent of employment

in manufacturing and in services)

as admittedlycrude proxies for penalties.

Our results provide some limited

support for greater detectability
Specifically,

being associated with compliance.

the finding that reported tax liability is more responsive to

audit rates than is reported AOl supports the hypothesis that the effectiveness

of high audit rates in eliciting honest reporting on the tax return is related
to the detectability of noncompliance. It appears that much of the effect of
audits operates through subtractions from Income which must be substantiated by
the taxpayer rather than through Income reporting.
Also, we find higher level of employment

in manufacturing

(where most

Income may be reported to the IRS by the employer) to be associated with higher
levels of reported tax liabilities for all audit classes and higher levels of
employment in services18 (where a substantial portion of all income may not be

18
covered by W—2 or other reports) generally
of reported tax liability.

to be associated with lower levels

The results are significant, however, for only two

of the low income groups.
Results for sociodemographic variables are interesting and help to
explain some seemingly incongruous findings that appear in the literature.

As

in other studies that include measures of both income and education, we find
that, if anything, taxpayers in areas with a more educated population report
lower AGI and pay less in taxes.
tax compliance, Jackson and

In their summary of the factors related to

Ki1lton

(1986) suggest that the more educated may

be less compliant because they better understand the opportunities for evasion
and are more willing to play the audit lottery than are the less educated.
Studies that omit income from the specification

(e.g., Dubin and

Wilde, 1988) find that the educated are, if anything, more compliant with the
tax laws.

Indeed, if we omit income from our specification, the coefficients

on the education variable becomes positive.
however, highly correlated.

Income and education are,

With income omitted from the specification, the

educationvariable serves partially as an income proxy and the estimated
coefficient on education must be interpreted accordingly.
The percent of the population that Is nonwhite is not significantly

related to income reporting behavior for any of the groups we consider although
reported tax liability is signiticantly lower for nonwhites than for whites in
two of the low income audit classes.

are mixed.

The results obtained depend to some extent on the dependent

variable used and on whether or
variable.

The findings for race in other studies

n

income is included as an explanatory

When income is excluded from the specification and an estimate of

the compliance rate that is indirectly related to auditors' findings is used as

19
the dependent variable (Witte and Woodbury,

1985, Dubin and Wilde. 1988), the

coefficient on the variable for the percent of the population

that is nonwhite

is significant for most audit classes and when significant generally, but not
always, indicates
contrast,

that whites are more compliant than other racial groups.

In

our results which control for income and use measures of taxpayers'

reports as dependent variables

shi

no evidence that whites are slgniicantly

more accurate in their income reports and only weak evidence that whites are
significantlymore accurate in their reports of subtractions from income.
Clearly,

economists' understanding of the relationship

compliance is not very strong.
the general crime literature.

between race and

This mirrors the results for this variable in
See Schmidt and Witte

(1984).

Wilson and

Herrnstein (1985) or Blumstein. et al. (1986) for a discussion.
The results for the percent foreign born and the percent of households

female headed generally support previous work.

Except for low—income wage and

salary workers, we find, as do previous studies, that areas with a relatively
large percent of families headed by females and a relativelysmall percent of
the population foreign born tend to report higher AGI and tax liability.

The

better compliance for areas with a larger percentage of families headed by
women appears to result predominantly

from higher income reports.

The variables related to the taxpayers' ages are the percentage of the
population older than 65 and the ,verage age of the population between 18 and
65.

The coefficients

related to compliance.

on these variables may reflect any age or cohort effects
In addition, the variable for the percentage of the

population over 65 is used to control for the exclusion of Social Security
benefits from taxable income and the extra exemption allowed Individuals over
65.

The coefficients on this variable will be related to both age and tax code

20
effects and would be negative if being over 65 affected reporting only through
the special provisions of the tax code for older taxpayers.
As in other studies usingjnformatlon related to 1969 returns
(Clotfelter, 1983, Witte and Woodbury, 1985. and Dubin and Wilde, 1988). our
results provide some, but not overwhelming, support for the comion perception
that older taxpayers are more compliant than younger ones (see Jackson and
Milliron,

1986).

For two audit classes (low and Riddle income proprietors) we

find a significant and positive relationship between reported tax liability and
average age.

For middle income proprietors we also find significantly higher

reported income and tax liability in areas with a relatively high percent of
the population over 65.
reversed.

For low income proprietors the relationship is

We believe that the finding for the low income audit class is a

result of the regressive structure of the tax code benefits afforded
individuals over 65.
additional

At low income levels the tax code effects outweigh anr

income
compliance behavior of older individuals whereas at higher

levels the compliance effect is predominant.

The remaining three variables were included to control for exclusions,
adjustment and other subtractions from income allowed by the tax code.

When

size and percent of housing owner
significant the results for average family

occupied are am anticipated:

negative and significant in the tax liability

equation reflectingthe exemptions for children and the deductions for mortgage
interest payments and property taxes.
The findings for the unemployment variable do not seem to reflect the

exclusions of unemployment compensationfrom income reporting.

Indeed, the

coefficients on the unemployment rate are generally positive in the reported
AOl equation and significantlypositive for two of the low income

groups.

It

21
may be that Income reporting increases with the unemployment rate because of
Increased filings associated with attempts to secure tax refunds.

The coefficients on the unemployment rate are consistently negative In
the tax liability equation, but are only significant for low Income
proprietors.

Our results suggest that unemployment has only a very weak

association with compliance and any tendency for areas with high rates of
unemployment

to have lower levels of compliance stems from overstatements of

subtractions not understatements

of income.

Thus. It does not appear that the

effect of unemployment can be explained by operation in the underground
economy.

The effects may be due to antigovernment attitudes or to a simple

attempt to overcome financial stress by obtaining a bigger tax refund.
However,

the effects are not strong.

Studies that use an estimated compliance rate based on auditor findings
as the dependent variable for compliance equations (Witte and Woodbury, 1985
and Dubin and Wilde. 1988) generally find increased unemployment to be
associated with decreased compliance.

We suspect that these results may

reflect In large part the auditors' ability to detect overstated deductions.

As noted earlier, our results for the audit equation although
significant are not very strong.

See Table

4.

We find the probability of an

audit to be significantly associated with information available on taxpayers'
returns for all audit classes.

That Is, we find no support for the IRS

pursuing a random audit strategy.ior any audit class.
audit classes we consider, auditing is significantly

or

four of the five

associated with the

endogenous taxpayers' reports (i.e., by reported AGI and total tax liability).
For the remaining audit class (siddle income wage and salary workers) the
probability of audit is not signicantly affected by the endogenous taxpayer

22
reports but is significantly

affected by variables that are related to

information available on taxpayers' returns.19

Specifically

for middle income

wage and salary workers we find that the probability of audit is higher in
areas where a larger percentage p1 individuals is employed in services and
other nonanufacturing jobs and where there is a higher percentage
population over 65.

of the

We suspect that these variables are proxying specific

aspects of taxpayers' reports that we do not observe although they might be

mirroring IRS targeting of specific professions or income sources.

6. Reduced

Form Results

Economic studies of taxpayer compliance have focused on audits as the
enforcement activity of the IRS.

This is perhaps as natural choice given the

theoretical and empirical models for participation
and the IRS's emphasis on the importance of audits.

in other illegal activities
As reported in the

previous section, however, both our work and the previous literature find
relatively weak deterrent effects from audits.

Admittedly,

this empirical work

is based on aggregate data and given the relatively low audit coverage this is

a potential problem.

In addition, the emphasis on audits may be misplaced.

The IRS undertakes many other enorcement and service activities such as

matching the income claims on the return against 1099 and W-2 documents.
checking math errors, providing information and education programs, pursuing
delinquent accounts, instituting detailed investigations and recommending
civil and criminal cases against tax evaders.

The reduced form estimates for

reported AOl and tax liability reveal that these other activities may also have
significant compliance

effects.

23

While estimates of the sjuctural equations suggest that compliance
behavior varies markedly across taxpayer groups and that audits have limited

deterrence effects, the reduced from equations reveal a consistent pattern of
compliance behavior and show significant effects of IRS activities.

Consider

the reduced form results for reported tax liability reported in Table 5.

These

results Indicate that Increases In IRS work load (returns per full—time
—equivalent employee)

consistently and significantly

decrease reported tax

liability.20 This result when coupled with our much weaker structural
findings regarding the effects of audits suggests that IRS activities other
than audits may have significant impacts on compliance.
The reduced form results for the sociodemographic

and tax code related

variables also are also far more significant and consistent
structural model.21

than in the

This suggests that the variabilityof the structural

results across taxpayer classes may be due at least in part to the fact that
IRS activities other than audits affect compliance and perhaps that academic
researchers

7.

have not been very s!pcessful in modeling the audit process.

Conclusions

At this point it seems worthwhile to step back and consider what we can
conclude regarding compliance behavior not only from the work reported here but
also from other work that has used data related to 1969 tax returns
Clotfelter,

1983. Witte and Woodbury,

two important

of this work.

1985, Oubln and Wilde, 1988).

There are

reasons for giving thought to what has been learned In the course
First, there are now a number of studies that use data related

to 1969 returns and there is some controversy surrounding
Second,

(e.g..

the reported results.

the 1969 data sets contain information that is only available through

24
the IRS and the recent work represents the first time that personnel outside
the IRS have been allowed to analyze such data and publish results.

It is

important that we learn as much as possible from the 1969 results because the
IRS is now making more recent data available and a number of researchers are

developing proposals based on the new data sets.
All authors who consider the issue (Witte and Woodbury,

1985, Dubin and

Wilde, 1988 and the results reported here) conclude that for most audit classes
audits have positive effects on compliance but that the magnitudes
effects are small.
noncompliance

of the

Further, different models suggest that audits deter

for different groups.

Wltte and Woodbury find deterrent effects

(mainly lagged effects) for all audit classes except the low
takes standard deductions.

incoe

class that

Dubin and Wilde find a deterrent effect for four of

the seven audit classes and a significant deterrent effect for low income wage

and salary workers who take standard and who take itemized deductions.

(For

high income wage and salary workers they find that a higher probability of
being audited is associated with less compliance.)

We find a deterrent effect

of audits for the five low and middle income audit classes that we consider and

a significant effect for low income returns with standard deductions and for
low and middle income proprietors.
model specification.

Obviously the results depend critically on

This is quite worrisome and suggests that economists'

understandingof the effects of audits on tai compliance is not very thorough.
For some audit classes, part of the problem may be that there Is very
little noncompliance

to explain.

None of the empirical studies have found a

deterrent effect of audits for middle income wage and salary workers who were

the most compliant audit class in 1969.

Interestingly,

the audit class for

which our model provides the best the description of compliance behavior is

25
also the least compliant audit class, namely low income proprietors.
Given the attention that has been focused on how audit coverage
affects tax compliance, it is rather disappointing

have not made more progress.

that empirical researchers

We believe that the major reasons for the state

of affairs relate to the nature of the data utilized and the secrecy
surrounding the IRS's audit selection formulas.

All studies that have

considered the effect of audits on compliance have used data that Is aggregated
to at least the three digit zip code level.

The use of such data to estimate

the audit selection rule is potentially a severe problem.

With audit coverage

in the range of one to five percent, the audit selection system Is primarily an
"outliers' system.
selecting

To be more specific, the IRS's DIP formulas are primarily

returns for audit that are outliers In terms of reporting behavior.

The averaging implicit in aggregate data washes out most information on
outliers and, hence, may only very poorly reflect the audit selection rule.
In order to maintain the integrity of its audit selection system, the

IRS must release data in a form that precludes academic researchers motivated
by intellectual curiosity or private greed from estimating an audit selection
rule that closely duplicates the IRS's formulas.

This means that researchers

may have great difficultyestimating meaningful structural equations with
audits.

Indeed, one can question the ethics of doing so.

earlier,

different

Yet, as noted

types of audit rules have quite different Implications for

the specification of compliance equations.

This is obviously a major issue

that the IRS and compliance researchers need to consider very carefully.
An additional reason why empirical studies may not have found
consistently significant deterrent effects is that the economic research thus
far has concentrated on the effects of only one IRS enforcement activity,

26
namely audits.

Other enforcement and service activities of the IRS (e.g.,

taxpayer services and document matching for W—2 and 1099 forms) may also have
significant compliance effects.

Part of the reason why the reduced form model

shows a more consistent deterrent effect than do the structural models for

audits may be related to how other IRS activities affect compliance.

Very

little is known about the effects of IRS enforcement efforts other than audits
or about the effects of service activities.

Some work has been done though on

how programs directed at return preparers might affect reporting behavior
(Scholz, Roth, and Witte, 1988).
While results from the 1969 data sets allow no definitive conclusions

valuable and
regarding the effects of audits on compliance, they provide very
quite consistent

guidance regarding the type of sociodemographic variables

to

include to control for"tastes and preferences".

This is quite important since

theory provides little direction in this area.

Specifically, the results from

the study of the 1969 data base indicate that the age, sex, and race of the
taxpayer,

the taxpayer's education, and taxpayer's country of birth affect

compliance.

The results of work with the 1969 data base also suggest that it

is important to consider the specifics of the tax code when constructingand
interpreting the coefficients on sociodemographic variables.

Variables such as

the age of the taxpayer may be related both to attitudes towards compliance and
to the special allowances

in the tax code for older individuals.

Careful comparison of existing work also indicates that when
interpreting

the coefficients of compliance models it is important to consider

the model specification very carefully.
quite sensitive

The results one obtains appear to be

to the dependent variable utilized and the vector of

explanatory variables included.

All previous research that has used 1969 data

27
bases has estimated a single compliance

equation with a dependent variable

which is either directly (Clotfelter. 1983) or indirectly (Witte
1985, and Dubin and Wilde. 1988) linked

to

auditors'

findings.22

and Woodbury,
The results

of this research needs to be interpreted with care because coefficients reflect
auditors' as well as taxpayers' behavior.

For example, our results suggest

that previous findings (Witte and Woodbury, 1985; Dubin and Wilde, 1988) that
increased

unemployment is generally associated with decreased

compliance may

be due to tax auditors' abilities to uncover overstated deductions.
In addition, the seemingly mixed evidence regarding the relationship
between education and compliance results from differences is the explanatory
factors included in the models and is quite understandable when one considers

the specificationsof the models.

If income is included in the model, then we

find that the more educated are less compliant.

If.

however, the specification

of the compliance equation does not include a measure of income, then the
educated may appear to be more compliant

(e.g.. Dubln and Wilde, 1988).

Without an income variable in the model, however, the education variable
reflects the change in compliance associated jointly with an increase in
education
education.

and the average change in income that accompanies the increased

28

Endnotes
1Xlepper and Nagin (1987) use the 1982 TCMP data to examine how factors
related to individual line items on the return affect compliance.
2Adjustments have, of course, been subtracted from income to obtain
Thus, when considering results for our AOL equation some subtractions
will be included. However, adjustments to income in 1969 were very small (less
than $700 thousand or less than .1 percent of reported AOl) and, thus, our
results should not be affected much by adjustments.
Reported AGI reflects
mainly the income reporting decision. Our data contain no measures of income
before adjustments.
AGI.

3See Witte and Woodbury (1983b), Kinsey (1984b), Tauchen and Witte
(1986), and Scholz, Roth and Witte (1988) for surveys.

Weddick

4See, for exampl&, Controller General of the United States (1976),
(1983), or wilt (1986).

5See Tauchen and Witte (1986b) for additional details regarding the
audit selection process.
6We obtained some Census information from the Project 778 files and
other variables directly from the Census tapes.
7See Witte and Woodbury (1983a, 1985) or Dubin and Wilde (1988) for
description of the Project 778 data.

additional

8For example, Census data contains only open—ended
for high income individuals.

income categories

9Note that if the taxpayer report affects the probability of audit that
it is the parameters on these variables not the simple probability of audit
that will affect taxpayer compliance. We consider the approach taken in this
paper a first approximation to properly modeling of compliance behavior when
the taxpayer's reports affect the probability of an audit. See Tauchen and
Witte (1986a and 1986b) for a discussion of a way to model compliance when the
audit rule depends on taxpayer behavior.
101n 1969, seventy percent of all returns audited resulted in auditors'
findings that adjustments were necessary. See Commissioner of Internal Revenue
(1970).

For

example, in 1969 when two and a half million returns were
audited, only 25,110 were received by the appelate division and 2,293 were
received for full—scale criminal investigation.
12
Civil penalties are a set rate on the amount of taxes the auditor
estimates to have been underpaid. Thus, detectability is central to tax
penalties when civil penalties are imposed as well. Only criminal penalties
are not directly related to the auditors' estimates of the amount of
There were only 526 criminal convictions for tax fraud in 1969.
underpayment.

29
Criminal tax cases generally relate to such IRS special programs as the
organized crime and drug enforcement programs or to notorious cases of evasion
such as the recent case against the Reverend Moon.
13There was information reporting on dividend and interest income in
1969, but the IRS had not perfected its matching programs and, hence, did not
make very effective use of this type of paper trail information.

14me IRS estimates that auditors are able to uncover only $1 In every
$3 that Is reported on 1099 documents (US Department of the Treasury, 1983).
Until 1979 the TCMP auditors were not provided with 1099 forms.
15We developed a marginal tax rate variable that reflected differences
in state tax codes and differences in subtractions related to differences in
costs of living and other factors. Perhaps because of the aggregate nature of
our data, the marginal tax variable was essentially an income proxy.
16See Reinganua and Wilde (1985) or Tauchen and Wltte (1986a).
170ur count of the number of IRS full—time—equivalent employees
excludes those at the regional service centers since they do not conduct audits
and the district employees who handle alcohol, tobacco and firearms
enforcement.

18gemember that these employment structure variables are also included
to control for legal subtractions from income. We would expect individuals in
the service industries to have higher levels of employee business expenses and
contributions to self employment pension plans, These adjustments would lead
to negative coefficients on the percent employed in services in the reported
AGI equation.
However, the effect should not be very large since total
adjustments were only .1 percent of AGI in 1969.
19The reduced form results for the reported AGI equation are also
available upon request. As for the structural equations, the reduced form
results show that the IRS activities have a greater effect upon reported
subtractions than on reported income.

20A5 in the structural model, we believe that the significant and
negative coefficients on the variables of the percent of the population over 85
for the low income classes result from the nature of the Income exclusions and
exemptions allowance given to older taxpayers. At low income levels, these tax
code effects swamp the compliance effects associated with age.
21The dependent variable used by Witte and Woodbury (1985a) and Dubin
and Wilde (1988) particularly troublesome. The measure of compliance is
created from the DIF scores. Results using this dependent will reflect the DIF
formulas as well as taxpayer and auditor behavior.

30
References

Beron, K. • H. Tauchen and A. D. Witte, (1987) "A Simultaneous Equations Model
of Tax Reporting and IRS Auditing. Working Paper, Department of Economics,
Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA.
Blumstein, A., 3. Cohen, 3. A. Roth and C. A. Visher, eds. (1988) Criminal
Careers and 'Career Criminals", 2 vols. WashingtonD.C.: National Academy
Press.
Clotfelter, C. T., (1983) "Tax Evasion and Tax Rates; An Analysis of
Individual Returns,' Review of Economics and Statistics, 47, 363—373.
Commissioner of Interai Revenue (1970) 1970 Annual Report, Washington,
D.C.: Department of the Treasury.

Controller General of the United States (1976) How the Internal Revenue
Service Selects Individual Income Tax Returns for Audit, Washington,
D.C.; General Accounting Office.
Controller General of the United States (1979) Whots Not Filing Income Tax
IRS Needs Better Ways to Find Them and Collect Their Taxes,
Returns?:
Washington D.C.: General AccountingOffice.
Dubin, J. A., M. J. Graetz and L. L. Wilde (1987) "Are We a Nation of Tax
Cheaters? New Econometric Evidence on Tax Compliance," American Economic
Review, 77, 240—245.
Dubin, 3, A. and L. L. Wilde (1988) "An Empirical Analysis of Federal
Income Tax Auditing and Compliance," National Tax Journal, forthcoming.
Greenberg, J. (1984) "AvoIding Tax Avoidance: A (Repeated) Game Theoretic
Journal of Economic Theory, 32, 1—13.
Approach,
Internal Revenue Service (1969) IRS Office Location, Washington D.C.:
Internal Revenue Service.
Intriligator, N. 0., (1978) Econometric Models and Applications,
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, Inc.

Englewood

Jackson, B. R. and V. C. Milliron (1986) "Tax Compliance Research, Findings,
Problems and Prospects," Journal of AccountingLIterature, 5, 125-165.

and
Kinsey, K. A. (l984a) "Survey Data on Tax Compliance: A Compendium
Review, Working Paper 84—1, American Bar Foundation, Chicago.
Klnsey, K. A. (1984b) 'Theories and Models of Tax Evasion," Working Paper
84—2, AmerIcan Bar Foundation, Chicago,

31
Kiepper, S. and 0. Nagin (1987). "The Anatomy of Tax Evasion," Working Paper.
Carnegie-Mellon University.
Landsberger, M. and I. Meilijson (1982) "Incentive Generating State Dependent
Penalty System.' Journal of Public Economics, 19, 333—352.
Long, S. (1985) "The Impact of Information on Law Enforcement," Working
Paper, School of Business Administration, Syracuse University.
Poterba. J. A. (1987) "Tax Evasion and Capital Gain Taxation," American
Economic Review, 77, 234-239.
Reinganum, J. F. and L. L. Wilde (1985) "Income Tax Compliance in a
Principal—Agent Framework," Journal of Public Economics, 26. 1—34.
Schmidt. P. (1986) "Statistical Issues in Modelling Taxpayer Compliance,"
paper presented at the National Academy of Sciences' Symposium on
Taxpayer Compliance. San Padre Island, Texas. January 15—17.
Schmidt, P. and A. D. Witte (1984) An Economic Analysis of Crime and Justice,
Orlando, Fla. : Academic Press.
Scholz, J. , J. Roth and A. D. Witte, eds, (1988), Report of the NAS Panel on
Taxpayer Compliance Research, Washington. D.C.: National Academy Press,
forthcoming.
Tauchen. H. V. and A. D. Witte (l986a) "Economic Models of How Audit Policies
Affect Voluntary Tax Compliance" in Proceedings of the Seventy—eighth
Annual Conference of the National Tax Association—Tax Institute of
America. Columbus, OH: National Tax Association, 39-45.
Tauchen, H. V. and A. 0. Witte (1986b) "The Impact of Law and Administrative
Rules and Compliance:
The Case of the Federal Income Tax", proposal to
the National Science Foundation, available from the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

US Department of the Treasury. Internal Revenue Service (1983) Income Tax
Estimates for 1973-1981, WashIngton, D.C.: Office
Compliance Research:
of the Assistant Commissioner for Planning. Finance and Research.
Weddick, J. L.. Jr. (1983> "Looking for a Needle in a Haystack—-How
Selects Returns for Audit,' The Tax Advisor, November.

Westat

Inc.

Research,

the tRS

(1980) Individual Income Tax Compliance Factors Study Qualitative
Prepared for the Internal Revenue Service.

Wilson, J. Q. and R. J. Herrnstein
Simon and Schuster.

(1985) CrIme & Human Nature, New York:

Wilt. D. E. (1986) "Trends in DIF and DIF Related Source Examinations" in
U.S. Department of the Treasury. Trend Analysis and Related Statistics.
Washington. D.C.: Internal Revenue Service.

32
and Tax
Witte, A. 0. and D. F. Woodbury (1983a) The Effect of Tax Laws
Administration on Tax Compliance,' Working Paper 83—1. Department of
Economics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Witte, A. 0. and D. F. Woodbury (1983b) "What We Know About Factors Affecting
Compliance with the Tax Laws" in P. Sawicki, ed. income Tax Compliance
Research: A Report of the ABA Section on Taxation, Washington, D.C.:
American Bar Association.
(1985) "The Effect of Tax Laws and Tax
The Case of the U.S. Individual
Income Tax," National Tax Journal, 38, 1—13.

Witte, A. 0. and 0. F. Woodbury,

Administration Ofl Tax Compliance:

Table 1:

Definitions of the IRS Audit Classes

Acronymn

Definitions of Audit Class

LI-SD

Low—income tax returns taking the standard deduction
(AGI < $10,000 with no Schedule C or F)

LI-ID

Low-income tax returns taking Itemized deductions
(AGI < $10,000 with no Schedule C or F)

LI-C&F

Low—income propreitor tax returns
(AGI below $10,000 with Schedule C or F)

M1—W&S

Midd1e-incoe wage and salary workers
(AGI between $10,000 and $50,000 with no Schedule C or F)

MI—C&F

Middle—income propreitor tax returns
(AGI between $10,000 and $30,000 with Schedule C or F)

Table 2: Empirical Results for Reported Adjusted Gross Income: 2SLS
(t—values in parentheses)
Audit Class

Variable
Log odds of an audit —endogenous
Income

LI-SD

648.13

LI—ID

LI—C&F

MI-W&S

MI-C&F

(2.87)

1693.37
(1.05)

450.75
(3.20)

2491.81
(0.72)

1072.27
(1.07)

.27
(6.47)

.43
(4.96)

.60
(14.46)

.97
(8.72)

(15.78)

8.77
(3.52)

2.67

(—0.10)

15.18
(0.67)

(0.74)

—8,87
(—0,26)

11.42
(0.65)

—15.89

—22,23
(—3.11)

.90

Detectability:

S Employed in
manufacturing
S Employed in Services

6.30
(1.55)

—.34

(2.21)

—20.37

—8.23

(-1.40)

(—2.84)

4.00

Sociodemographics:

S High School
Education
S Nonwhite
S Female—headed
Households

S

3.52
(.90)
.11

2.91
(0.42)

—8.38
(-5.05)

(—2.71)

5.13

.42
(0.49)

(0.45)

1.71
(0.35)

(—1.05)

25.98
(4.76)

60.09
(2.12)

52.45
(2.17)

—.97

(.11)

(—0.40)

—29.52
(—1.90)

—20.83

Foreign Born

11.87
(2.70)

10.52
(0.55)

—7.24
(—2.48)

—52.80
(—1.79)

—49.04
(—2.67)

Average Age

—6.80
(—.50)

—70.51
(—0.88)

—6.68
(—0.78)

23.20
(0.53)

26.12
(0.70)

14.63
(1.24)

65.70
(0.93)

—13.58
(—2.46)

35.69
(1.29)

56.51
(2.51)

39.95
(.44)

278.49
(0.96)

—70.99
(—1.40)

—274.90
(—1.05)

—389.80
(—1.58)

1.55
(.76)

.30
(0.08)

2.44
(1.55)

—3.51
(—0.37)

1.61
(0.23)

Tax Code Variables:
S Over 65
Years

Average Family
Size
S Housing Owner
Occupied
S Unemployed
Constant
R2
F
N

39.04
(3.32)

67.97
(3.10)

13.55
(1.41)

—36.47
(—0.77)

18.00
(0.39)

4442.44
(4.25)

12238.68
(1.59)

3958.82
(3.72)

7785.44
(0.58)

3319.67
(0.72)

.52
66.96
827

.58
83.74
801

.42

47.30

858

.14
10.26
852

.79

248.66

858

Table 3: Empirical Results for Reported Total Tax Liability: 2SLS
(t—values in parentheses)
Audit Class

Variable
Log odds of an audit ——
endogenous

Income

LI-SD

109.60
(2.66)

LI-ID
290.17
(1.04)

LI—C&F
71.50
(3.21)

MI-W&S
2035.37
(0.89)

MI-C&F
648.83
(1.72)

0.07

0.10

0.09

0.27

0.22

(9.17)

(6.38)

(14.42)

(3.68)

(10.01)

12.77
(0.86)

(0.24)

Detectability:
1.42

0.65

0.32

manufacturing

(3.14)

(0.11)

(1.66)

Employed in Services

.46
(0.62)

-2.03
(—4.43)

—16.77

(—1.65)

(—0.76)

-3.90
(—0.59)

0.61
(0.85)

0.23
(0.19)

—1.45
(—5.53)

—7.87
(-2.04)

—10.15
(3.78)

—0.31
(—1.66)

—0.53
(—1.27)

—0.36
(—2.61)

2.43
(0.33)

—1.59
(—0.88)

% Female—headed
Households

—4.81
(-1.69)

—3.66
(-1.06)

(2.89)

16.33
(0.88)

14.22
(1.57)

% Foreign Born

1.75
(2.19)

1.92
(0.58)

—1.48
(—3.20)

—30.73

2.89
(1.16)

—4.79
(—0.35)

3.96
(2.94)

20.96

1.78
(0.82)

10.74
(0.88)

—2.35
(—2.68)

(0.24)

14.21
(1.68)

Average Family
Size

—11.02
(—0.67)

5.07
(0.10)

-35.74
(—4.44)

-256.13
(—1.49)

—280.03
(—3.02)

% Housing Owner
Occupied

-.32
(—0.85)

-1.06
(—1.67)

-.32
(—1.26)

-5.82
(—0.94)

(—0.24)

% Unemployed

—0.12
(—0.05)

—1.78
(—0.47)

—5.38
(—3.54)

—46.40
(—1.49)

-16.92
(—0.99)

381.16
(1.99)

1449.62
(1.09)

257.94
(1.53)

5966.08
(0.68)

1270.73
(0.73)

% Employed in

-4.15

0.49

Soc iodemographics:

% High School
Education

% Nonwhite

Average Age

2.49

(1.59)

(0.73)

-24.65
(—3.58)
24.95
(1.78)

Tax Code Variables:
% Over 65
Years

Constant
R2
F

.56
81.77

N

858

.22
18.50
852

.78
231.84
858

4.26

.13

9.34
827

-.63

.35
33.03
801

Empirical Results for the Log Odds of An Audit (x 1000): 2SLS
(t—values in parentheses)

Table 4:

Audit Class
LI—SD

Variable
——
Reported AGI ($l000s)
endogenous
Reported Tax Liability
($lOOs) —— endogenous

6.16

LI-ID

(7.79)

—0.82
(—2.02)

—23.91
(—8.39)

1.88
(1.25)

32.68
(0.62)

—31.75

LI—C&F
.48
(1.68)
.06

MI—W&S

MI—C&F

—.03

.10
(1.34)

(—0.50)
—0.02

—0.60

—95.62
(—3.12)

—40.35
(—1.49)

—104.16
(—2.90)

—3,44
(—1.57)

(—3.03)

20.79
(5.54)

13.31
(4.47)

23.28

10.74
(1.77)

13.23

(0.02)

81.90
(1.50)

121.76
(2.01)

38.70
(0.79)

100.36

2.31

—1.87
(-1.03)

1.65
(0.97)

IRS Resources:

Returns per FTE

(—1.27)

Detectability:

%

Employed in

—15.35
(—3.51)

manufacturing
Employed

in

Services

—22.72
(—4.60)

—

.03

(-0.02)

3.94
(1.72)

4.17

7.41
(3.81)
(5.67)

Tax Code Variables:

%

Over
65 Years

Average Family
Size
Housing Owner

Occupied

%

Unemployed

Constant

R2
F

N

25.06
(2.80)
—69.83
(—0.70)

—26.29
(—3.43)

.13

—16.95
(—5.46)

(0.84)

—210.55
(—6.43)

(1.51)

30.48
(1.62)

12.49
(0.79)

—14509
(—8.53)

—121
(0.79)

—6998
(—10.50)

—3721
(—10.63)

.16
17.71
858

.07

.31

6.51
852

42.26
858

4.25

(1.63)

(1.47)

4.63
(—2,06)
—26.51

(—1.23)
—4445

(—9.45)

.13
13.65

8.52

.09

827

801

Table 5:

Empirical Results for Reported Total Tax Liability:
(t—values in parentheses>

Reduced Form

Audit Class

Variable
Returns per FTE

(bOOs)
Income

LI-C&F

LI-SD

LI-ID

MI-W&S

MI—C&F

-9.16
(-4.74)

—7.13
(—3.07)

-8.24
(—4.58)

—47.37
(—2.71)

-45.83
(—2.53)

0.08
(26.31)

0.09
(22.37)

0.11
(37.67)

0.21
(19.26)

0.19
(16.64)

Detectability:
% Employed in
manufacturing

0.50
(3.51)

-0.19
(—1.08)

0.27

0.33

2.25

(2.08)

(.28)

(1.78)

-1.14
(—4.65)

—1.70
(—5.60)

—.99
(—4.33)

2.06
(0.90)

5,53
(2.26)

—1.19
(-8.23)

-0.92
(-5.31)

—0.88
(—6.60)

—6.38
(—5.48)

—6.61
(-5.37)

-0.21
(—2.08)

—0.32
(—2.54)

—0.31
(—3.29)

-3.47
(—3.42)

-2.73
(—2.42)

2.43
(4.42)

(-0.89)

4.10
(8.00)

26.35
(5.20)

22.19
(4.04)

(0.45)

—1.40
(—3.50)

—2.07
(—6.68)

-16.25
(—5.18)

7.11
(7.45)

8.70
(7.59)

4.96
(5.58)

30.57
(3.64)

31.02
(3.45)

-2.81
(—4.44)

-1.48
(—1.95)

—2.88
(—488)

12.83
(2.40)

13.55
(2.37)

Average Family
Size

—46.46
(—8.89

—43.22
(—6.87)

—21.96
(—4.51)

-169.48
(—3.59)

—183.14
(—3.62)

% Housthg Owner
Occupied

-.76
(-'4.29)

-.86
(—4.05)

-.53
(—3.21)

-1.86
(—1.18)

-1.93
(—1.16)

—3.04
(-2.90)

—2.64
(-2.09)

—3.53
(-3.61)

—37.28
(-3.93)

-34.08
(—3.45)

—80.23
(2.84)

85.03

—243.22
(9.24)

—1655.81
(—6.10)

—1477.21
(—5.25)

Employed in Services
Sociodemographics:

High School
Education

Nonwhite
% Female-headed
Households

% Foreign Born
Average Age
Tax Code Variables:
Over 65
Years

%

Unemployed

Constant
R2
F
N

0.15

.80
259.74
857

-.60

(2.49)
.71
160.68
851

.88
470.63
857

.57
85.97
826

-16.72
(—5.08)-

.53
71.46
800

