                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            NAÏVE *BUYING* DIVERSIFICATION AND NARROW FRAMING
                         BY INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS

                                       John Gathergood
                                       David Hirshleifer
                                          David Leake
                                       Hiroaki Sakaguchi
                                          Neil Stewart

                                      Working Paper 25567
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25567


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 2019, Revised February 2020




We thank David Laibson, George Loewenstein and Brigitte Madrian for very helpful comments
and suggestions, together with seminar participants at the Network for Integrated Behavioural
Science Annual Workshop 2018, University of Glasgow, University of Bristol, University of
Loughborough and Queen Mary University of London. This work was supported by Economic
and Social Research Council grants ES/K002201/1, ES/N018192/1, ES/P008976/1, and
Leverhulme grant RP2012-V-022. Sakaguchi acknowledges PhD studentship funding from the
Economic and Social Research Council with award reference 1499648. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John Gathergood, David Hirshleifer, David Leake, Hiroaki Sakaguchi, and Neil
Stewart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Naïve *Buying* Diversification and Narrow Framing by Individual Investors
John Gathergood, David Hirshleifer, David Leake, Hiroaki Sakaguchi, and Neil Stewart
NBER Working Paper No. 25567
February 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. D14,D53,D91,G02,G11,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

We provide the first tests to distinguish whether individual investors equally balance their overall
portfolios (naïve portfolio diversification—NPD) or engage in naïve buying diversification
(NBD)—equally balancing values in same-day purchases of multiple assets. We find NBD in
purchases of multiple stocks, and in mixed purchases of individual stocks and funds. In contrast,
there is little evidence of NPD. So investors seem to narrowly frame their buy-day decision.
Simulation analysis suggests that NBD substantially reduces investor welfare. These findings
suggest that behavioral finance theory should incorporate transactional as well as portfolio
framing.

John Gathergood                                  Hiroaki Sakaguchi
School of Economics                              University of Warwick
Sir Clive Granger Building                       Department of Psychology
University Park                                  hiro.sakaguchi@outlook.com
Nottingham
NG8 1AA                                          Neil Stewart
United Kingdom                                   Warwick Business School
john.gathergood@nottingham.ac.uk                 University of Warwick
                                                 England
David Hirshleifer                                neil.stewart@warwick.ac.uk.
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu

David Leake
Lloyds Banking Group
David.E.Leake@lloydsbanking.com
    1. Introduction

    When faced with financial decisions, people often turn to simple rules to guide their
    choices. Examples include setting saving to be a constant fraction of income, or choosing
    a mortgage contract that keeps monthly repayments at a target value. Such heuristics are
    sometimes very imperfect approximations to optimal behavior, or even quasi-rationally
    optimal behavior. So, to develop realistic models of individual behavior, and to inform
    policy design, it is important to understand these heuristics.
            We here investigate how investors approach a very fundamental financial choice: how
    to allocate funds for investment across multiple stocks. Portfolio theory offers standard
    recommendations for how to diversify optimally across stocks (Markowitz 1952), but
    individual investors deviate substantially from what theory recommends (Goetzmann and
    Kumar 2008).1
            One of the major explanations that have been proposed to explain this failure is
    narrow framing, which is the tendency to make choices in isolation rather than making
    an integrated overall decision (Gilovich and Griffin 2010). One proposed consequence
    of narrow framing is the reluctance of investors to incorporate new assets into their
    portfolios, providing an explanation for limited stock market participation and portfolio
    under-diversification (Barberis, Huang, and Thaler 2006; Barberis and Huang 2008).
            Our focus is on an aspect of narrow framing that has received much less attention,
    and on neglect of something even more basic—the benefit of coordinating the amounts
    of new purchases of an asset with current holding of that same asset in the portfolio.
    We first show that when investors buy stocks, they often group several trades together
    on the same day, and split their investments evenly using the 1/N heuristic. This raises
    the question of whether, when making a purchase, investors seek to bring their overall
    portfolios into balance, or whether they apply 1/N only to their new purchases. If they
    frame narrowly upon their new purchases, such a heuristic could potentially push their


1
    Investors typically hold only a few stocks and exhibit biases such as over-trading (Barber and Odean
    2000), sensitivity to gains compared with losses (Odean 1998) and rank effects (Hartzmark 2015). See also
    the reviews of behavioral finance of Hirshleifer (2015) and Barberis (2018), and the review of investor
    behavior of Barber and Odean (2013).


                                                       2
    overall holdings further from a 1/N balance. We find that investors do indeed use 1/N as
    a buying heuristic, not as a portfolio balancing heuristic.
            This evidence indicates that investors act very narrowly, naïvely diversifying among
    what they buy, not what they hold. Investors appear to be considering only the stocks they
    are buying on a given day. This is consistent with narrow framing at the daily purchase
    level independently from their existing portfolio. We call this behavior Naïve Buying
    Diversification (NBD). The main contribution of this paper is to show that investors
    engage in NBD and do not engage in Naive Portfolio Diversification (NPD) defined as
    equal weighting of securities in their portfolios. In other words, many investors split their
    buys according to the 1/N heuristic, but very few investors allocate buy amounts so as to
    achieve 1/N portfolio shares.
            We also explore whether investors’ use of NBD is associated with fundamental
    category errors. Individual stocks and funds are very different categories of investment, so
    that under rational balancing of risk and return, there is no presumption that investments
    across these categories, either in new purchases or in overall portfolios, should be at all
    close to equally weighted. Nevertheless, we find NBD among investors when buying stocks
    and funds on the same day, even when buying index-tracking Exchange Traded Funds
    (ETFs) on the same day as individual stocks. This behavior also results in portfolios that
    are heavily tilted toward a few stocks, which is inconsistent with NPD. Such behavior
    reflects a fundamental investor confusion.2
            These findings mark a departure from the approach of both rational models and
    many existing behavioral finance models. In many psychology-based models of investment
    choices, even though investors do not behave rationally, they engage in portfolio framing—
    they seek to optimize an overall portfolio in order to achieve an attractive probability
    distribution of consumption (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam 2001; Grinblatt and
    Han 2005; Li and Yang 2013; Barberis, Mukherjee, and Wang 2016). Our findings provide
    a new type of empirical support for the hypothesis that investors narrowly frame on


2
    Investors who have private information may have good reasons to choose portfolios heavily tilted toward
    particular stocks. But this does not provide a sensible reason to tilt heavily toward a stock in order to
    equalize the amount invested in a stock and a fund on a given buy-day.


                                                       3
incremental gambles (as in Barberis and Huang 2001). We show that the tracks of such
narrow framing are evident in the incremental purchases of assets already in the portfolio,
and that the resulting 1/N behavior makes it especially clear that investors are engaged
in narrow framing on the incremental purchase.
       Our findings indicate that investors narrowly frame on incremental portfolios of
gambles, not just single ones. In consequence, errors of narrow framing go beyond judging
incorrectly how risky it is to acquire the additional gamble, resulting in mistaken decisions
over whether to make a new investment (as reflected, for example, in application to the
stock market participation puzzle), or how much in total to invest in a new gamble. It
also leads to errors in the relative weights investors allocate to the different securities that
they buy, conditional on making a purchase. Our finding that investors often diversify
with equal weighting within the new portfolio gamble being acquired provides a new kind
of test for and confirmation of narrow framing on new gambles. This new kind of test
focuses on relative weights within the transaction portfolio rather than on the decision of
whether to invest. We refer to the investor’s narrow focus on the transaction portfolio as
transactional framing.
       Our evidence also indicates that investors fall far short of even quasi-rational
portfolio optimization. To an extent that leaves tracks in the data, investors do not even
seem to be trying to assess security or portfolio risk, nor to diversify or bring balance
to their overall portfolios—only to bring value-invested balance to purchase events on
a day-by-day basis. Trading based on equalizing trade values rather than estimating
risks seems even farther from rational than the narrow framing of investors who, in the
above-mentioned models of narrow framing, overestimate the risks of certain potential
portfolio changes.
       We are not the first to study the use by investors of naïve diversification heuristics,
meaning the deliberate use of 1/N value allocations. Our findings differ in two key ways.
First, our study resolves a debate in the literature as to whether individuals actually use
1/N as a heuristic for investing. Previous studies provide evidence that employees make
1/N allocations in establishing their regular contribution rates to retirement savings plans



                                               4
    (Benartzi and Thaler 2001, Huberman and Jiang 2006). The debate centers on whether
    such 1/N allocations result from a 1/N choice heuristic or arise from a framing effect
    associated with the number of options, N , offered in the menu. Our findings provide
    evidence that individuals actually do use 1/N as a heuristic, since we examine a general
    stock investment setting in which there is no plan-ordained number of available assets “N ”
    in the menu of options available to investors.
            The second key way in which our findings differ derives from the fact that we
    examine an empirical setting that permits sharp distinction between NBD and NPD.
    Based on this, we document that NBD is present whereas NPD is not. In the Benartzi and
    Thaler (2001) and Huberman and Jiang (2006) retirement saving plan testing context, it
    is not possible to distinguish between NBD and NPD, because investors choose continuing
    contribution rates rather than one-time transactions, which very strongly links specific
    purchase transactions weights to overall portfolio weights. This is especially the case given
    very strong evidence of inertia in retirement investing (Madrian and Shea 2001). This
    distinction is important, since findings of naïve diversification from past literature are
    often described as a bias toward NPD.3
            In contrast with these studies, our tests focus on a sample of discrete trades by
    individual investors, so that there is a clear distinction between buy-transaction weights
    and portfolio weights, and therefore between NBD and NPD. This is one of the key
    innovations of our study. Our finding that investors use NBD when buying both individual
    stocks and funds (which are comprised of multiple stocks) on the same day provides
    especially clear evidence that investors are not using a heuristic of equalizing the weights
    across stocks in their portfolios.
            This evidence raises the question of whether, and how much, NBD damages portfolio
    performance compared to NPD. There is a normative literature showing that NPD is the
    best diversification rule investors can implement in practice. DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal

3
    For example, in their review paper, Benartzi and Thaler (2007) define the 1/N rule in NPD terms as
    “when faced with “N ”’ options, divide asset shares evenly across the options” (p.86). We do not rule out
    the possibility that the Benartzi and Thaler (2001) results derive from the use of a NPD heuristic in
    addition to (or even instead of) a NBD heuristic—the empirical context they examine does not disentangle
    these possibilities. What we can conclude is that in our setting, in which the two types of heuristics can
    be sharply distinguished, there is evidence of NBD and not NPD.


                                                        5
    (2009) evaluate the out-of-sample performance of a suite of models against NPD, including
    the sample-based mean-variance model, and find that none is consistently better than
    NPD over reasonable time horizons.4 We extend the simulation model used in DeMiguel,
    Garlappi, and Uppal (2009) to analyze the effectiveness of NBD, and find that NPD
    outperforms NBD, with the extent of outperformance increasing as the correlation between
    assets falls and time period increases. In other words, NBD can be costly in practice.
    Taken together our findings of NBD in stock portfolios and stock-and-fund portfolios, plus
    the existing evidence for 1/N behavior over longer time horizons in retirement savings
    schemes (as in Benartzi and Thaler 2001), suggests that the use of NBD is substantially
    detrimental to investor welfare.5
           The data we use are provided by a mainstream brokerage platform and cover a
    large sample of individual investors. We examine the allocation decisions of over 50,000
    investors on 260,000 buy-days on which investors purchase multiple stocks. Multiple-
    stock buy-days are important, with one third of the total amount invested in our sample
    accounted for by multiple-stock buy-day purchases. On approximately one-third of all
    multiple-stock buy-days investors adopt a NBD heuristic for splitting the funds that they
    invest, approximately equalizing the value invested in each stock bought on the buy-day.
           NBD does not vary by age or gender. NBD might be explained by models of
    learning and rational inattention, as in the rational inattention approach of Sims (2003). If
    individual investors face fixed costs of calculating the investment share of each stock in an
    optimal portfolio (such as time or psychic costs of calculations), then use of NBD would
    decrease as economic stakes increase. Alternatively, if investors learn portfolio strategies,
    then use of NBD would decrease with trading experience.


4
  The reason it is hard to beat this simple heuristic is that there is to high estimation error for portfolio
  weights estimated from the relatively short-time-period samples available given the fact that means and
  covariances are not entirely stable over time. Simulations in DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009) show
  that the estimation window needed for the sample-based mean-variance strategy to out-perform NPD is
  approximately 3,000 months for a portfolio with 25 assets and approximately 6,000 months for a portfolio
  of 50 assets.
5
  The inferior portfolio performance of investors in our sample is further exacerbated by the typical portfolio
  holding only a few stocks (median 5). Goetzmann and Kumar (2008) show that US equity investors on
  average also hold underdiversified portfolios. Calvet et al. (2007) use comprehensive data from Sweden
  and show that, while a few households are very poorly diversified, most Swedish households outperform
  the Sharpe ratio of their domestic stock index through some degree of international diversification.


                                                       6
            Our findings provide only a degree of support for an explanation of NBD based upon
    learning and rational inattention. Consistent with learning, NBD declines with investor
    experience (measured by account age and frequency of trading). Consistent with rational
    inattention, NBD declines with financial stakes (measured by investment size and variance
    in returns on individual stocks bought).6 However, NBD is not eliminated even at high
    levels of investor experience or as the financial stakes of the decisions increase: it is used
    by investors on more than 20% of buy-days even at the top of the distributions of the
    variables by which we measure learning and rational inattention.
            Our analysis distinguishes between NBD and NPD. The cleanest context for
    distinguishing between NBD and NPD is when an investor tops up existing positions in N
    stocks. For example, an investor holding positions in stocks A and B who, on a buy-day,
    buys additional units of stock A and stock B. This investor could decide split the new
    invested funds 50:50 across A and B (i.e., NBD), or split the new funds such that at the
    end-of-day the ratio of the total market value in A and B is 50:50 (i.e., NPD), or make
    some other allocation. We find that NBD is overwhelmingly more likely than NPD. Our
    results show that the rarity of NPD is not due to slow rebalancing, with investors choosing
    NBD even when NPD is feasible given the amount invested on the buy-day. Additionally,
    when the analysis is extended to all trades on all buy-days, (and not just top-up days),
    we find that only very few investors engage in NPD. This evidence indicates that 1/N
    splitting is almost exclusively a buy-day effect.
            Our results focus on how investors frame narrowly on their new purchases within
    their stock portfolio. Previous studies suggest investors act narrowly across other aspects
    of their asset allocation, such as retirement saving funds (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian
    2009). Hence the narrow framing we observe is most likely a lower bound on the extent of
    narrow framing in the investor’s overall portfolio of assets.
            We propose that investors prefer NBD because it simplifies the buying decision
    problem. The way in which investors implement NBD suggests a strong preference for


6
    Also, we find no evidence of day-of-the-week or month-of-the-year differences in the use of NBD. This
    indicates that NBD is not made more likely by Friday-induced inattention. (Market reactions to earnings
    announcements are on average more sluggish on Friday afternoons (DellaVigna and Pollet 2009).)


                                                      7
    simplicity. Specifically, many investors choose the denominator and numerator of the 1/N
    calculation to make the division problem simple. When N = 3, the distribution of total
    investment amounts is dominated by round number multiples of 3, with heaping at £3,000,
    £6,000, £9,000, £15,000 and £30,000. When N = 4, the distribution shows heaping
    at £4,000, £8,000, £20,000 and £40,000. This pattern of investors choosing investment
    amounts that are round number multiples of the N stocks purchased on the day suggests
    a strong preference for simplicity in the math of investing.7
            Overall, these results suggest that the behavior of individual investors is far from
    optimal. However, the investors in our sample are purchasing multiple stocks and de facto
    achieving some degree of diversification of their portfolios, albeit in a crude manner. Naïve
    diversification may be an improvement on no diversification at all; many studies find most
    investors hold under-diversified portfolios (Barber and Odean 2013). Nevertheless, our
    results indicate that investors apply the naïve diversification strategy in an extremely
    narrow way.


    2. Data

    2.1. Brokerage Account Data

    We use data from Barclays Wealth, a large mainstream UK based broker. The data consist
    of transaction histories of 182, 569 accounts held with the broker between April 2012 and
    June 2016. The panel data are unbalanced, with accounts opening during the period.
    Dropping accounts with no activity during the data period, we define the baseline sample
    as 118,169 accounts that have at least one buy transaction within the data period. The
    data include stock identification numbers (Stock Exchange Daily Official List (SEDOL)
    numbers, a list of security identifiers used in the United Kingdom and Ireland for clearing
    purposes), transaction dates, transaction types (e.g., buy, sell), transaction quantities, and
    transaction prices. We use SEDOL numbers to match in additional data on individual
    stock product and performance information via Datastream.

7
    Other studies on the role of round numbers in financial markets include Aggarwal and Lucey (2007) and
    Johnson, Johnson, and Shanthikumar (2007).


                                                     8
    2.2. Sample

    Our interest lies in how individuals choose to allocate funds invested on buy-days involving
    purchases of multiple stocks. We define a “multiple-stock buy-day” as a day on which the
    investor makes a purchase of two or more common stocks (denominated in GBP), via
    either opening a position in new stocks or adding additional shares to an existing position.8
              Our analysis focuses on two samples. First is a sample of all accounts in which we
    see at least one multiple-stock buy-day. The sample includes accounts already open at the
    beginning of our data period and also new accounts which open within the data period.
    This sample restriction provides 52,866 accounts and 261,585 multiple-stock buy-days.
    Multiple-stock buy-days account for 30.8% of the total amount invested over the data
    period.
              Second, from the first sample we draw a sub-sample that includes all new accounts
    which open within the data period. For this sub–sample of new accounts we have richer
    data, in that we observe the complete portfolio position of the account from opening date
    onwards, including for accounts that are transferred in from another broker service. This
    sample restriction provides 8,982 accounts (43.1% of new accounts in the baseline sample)
    and 25,507 multiple-stock buy-days (16.3% of buy-days in the baseline sample of new
    accounts).
              Approximately 68% of multiple-stock buy-days involve purchases of two stocks.
    Among the all accounts sample, 70.4% of account holders are male. The average age of
    the account is four years. Account holders make on average 1.8 trades per month, with an
    average investment amount of over £16,500 on a multiple-stock buy-day (median value
    is close to £7,000). Among the sample of new accounts, for which we have additional
    information, investor portfolios are worth on average £61,000, with an average investment
    amount on a multiple-stock buy-day of £11,500. Portfolios contain on average 8 individual
    stocks and on average investors engage in of 1.5 trades per month.9
              The low number of individual stocks we see investors in our sample hold in their

8
  We restrict to buy-events involving the choice of an investment amount on the part of the investor on the
  buy-day. Hence we exclude, for example, automatic dividend reinvestments.
9
  Summary statistics are provided in Table A1 and Table A2 in the Online Appendix.


                                                     9
     portfolios is consistent with existing studies that document a lack of diversification among
     individual investors in the individual stock component of the portfolio (Goetzmann and
     Kumar 2008; Barber and Odean 2013). Purchases of diversified investment products, such
     as mutual funds or ETFs are rare in the sample—fewer than 6% of purchases are of mutual
     funds or ETFs. In addition, while the benefits of diversification increase with the variance
     in market prices, among the sample of all buy-days (including single-stock buy-days), the
     average number of stocks purchased per day does not depend on market volatility and does
     not vary over the sample period. Further details are provided in the Online Appendix.


     3. Naïve Buying Diversification

     3.1. Multiple-Stock Buy-Days

     We first examine whether investors engage in Naïve Buying Diversification (NBD). We
     begin by showing allocations across purchased stocks on multiple-stock buy-days. We
     calculate the percentage of the total buy-day investment (in pounds sterling and net of
     fees) that is allocated to each stock.10 Choosing one of the N stocks at random to be
     “Stock A”, Figure 1 plots the proportion of the buy-day investment allocated to Stock A
     among all N -stock buy-days in the sample, with panels showing different values of N . The
     width of each bin is 0.01. We focus on allocation to one randomly chosen stock to avoid
     the dependence of observations that naturally arises because the sum of weights across
     stocks must be equal to one.
             Strikingly, Figure 1 shows large heaping in the frequencies of portfolio weights
     around 1/N . In Panel A, 29.7% of two-stock buy-days involve allocations of monies invested
     on the day in the 49-51 interval. This suggests that, as seen in Panel A, many trades are
     made with allocations that are close to 50:50 and investors may be using that heuristic
     to guide their allocation choices. In Panels C-D we also see heaping around 1/N . On
     three-stock buy-days, people often spend one third of their money on each stock. On
     four-stock buy-days, people often spend one quarter on their money on each stock. And so

10
     Fees are low as a proportion of the average amount invested. Hence our results are not sensitive to the
     inclusion of fees in the allocation calculations.


                                                       10
     on.11
             When measuring NBD, we should not restrict the definition to a precise 1/N
     allocation of funds across N stocks. This is because the indivisibility of individual stocks
     implies that investors could not in all cases make precise NBD allocations (even if they
     wanted to). Given the total amount invested and the prices of individual stocks, investors
     may only be able to achieve an allocation close to 1/N . As with most investment platforms,
     on the Barclays platform investors can input a money amount they would like to invest
     in a stock and the platform calculates the maximum number of shares (in integers) at
     the time-limited quoted price (in local currency) that can be purchased with that money
     amount at the market price.12
             We therefore present bandwidth measures of NBD. Table 1 reports the proportion
     of multiple-stock buy-days on which a buy-day investment of £P is split such that the
     money value of stock purchases are divided in the intervals £P/N × (1 ± X) where X
     takes values of 0.02, 0.05 and 0.1 in Panels A–C. This range of values of X allow for
     the indivisibility of individual stocks. In the two-stock case, these intervals translate to
     a proportion of the total buy-day investment invested in Stock A of 49-51 (Panel A),
     47.5-52.5 (Panel B) and 45-55 (Panel C). We report 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals
     clustered by accounts.
             The estimates in Table 1 show that, for two-stock buy-days, allocations fall in the
     NBD interval in between one quarter and one half of cases, depending on bandwidth. As
     the number of stocks bought on the multiple stock buy-day increases, the proportion of
     allocations falling within the range decreases. This will be in part due to a mechanical

11
   We also investigated whether investors might naïvely equate the number of shares purchased across
   multiple stocks. Additional analysis presented in the Online Appendix demonstrates that this is not the
   case. Figure A4 Panel A illustrates that allocations in which the number of shares purchased are equalized
   only occurs when the unit price of the shares is very close. When the unit price of the shares is further
   apart, we do not see equal allocation of the number of shares, but we do see equal allocation of the money
   amount (shown in Panel B).
12
   For example, consider the case that an investor intends to invest £1, 000 to buy two stocks, called Stocks
   A and B, and that a price of Stock A is £4.50 per unit and a price of Stock B is £100.50 per unit. Were
   the investor to aim for NBD the precise stock split generating an equal money cost split would be: Stock
   A = £500/£4.50 = 111.11 units, Stock B £500/£100.50 = 4.96 units. Purchases of common stock must
   be made in indivisible single units. Due to this indivisibility, the investor cannot invest £500 for each
   stock and so might instead decide to buy 111 shares of Stock A with a cost of 111 × £4.50 = £499.50 and
   to buy shares of Stock B with a cost of 5 × £100.50 = £502.50. Thus, the allocation of the investment to
   Stock A is £499.50 ÷ (£499.50 + £502.50) = .498 and that to Stock B is .502.


                                                      11
     effect, as the indivisibility of individual stocks resulting in 1/N allocations being less
     likely as the number of stocks bought rises. Across all buy-days involving multiple-stock
     purchases, 49.6% of investors exhibit at least one buy-day on which they make an allocation
     in the interval £P/N × (1 ± X) with X = 0.02.
            Our findings raise the question of whether NBD has a mechanical source. For
     example, if the investment platform uses an interface in which a NBD allocation is
     presented as an on-screen default, this might lead investors to accept a NBD allocation.
     However, the platform used by the brokerage did not automatically default, or suggest,
     equal money investments across multiple stocks. Investors were required to key in their
     investment amount for each stock separately and each transaction required a separate
     multiple-screen journey, with no default allocation or recommended allocation shown on
     screen or in investment guidance.13


     3.2. Stock-and-Fund Buy-Days

     We also explore whether investors’ use of NBD is associated with a fundamental misun-
     derstanding of the difference between two types of asset categories, individual stocks and
     funds. In standard portfolio theory there is no reason for the portfolio weights or new
     purchase weights to be equated between an individual stock and a fund to be anywhere
     close to equally weighted. We focus on buy-days on which the investor purchased at least
     one fund and at least one common stock, either by opening a new position or adding to
     existing position(s). We further restrict our analysis to ETFs, as orders for other types of
     funds (such as Unit Trusts) are commonly executed with delay of a few days.14 Purchases
     of funds (of any type) are relatively uncommon in the Barclays data. as a result, the sample
     for this analysis is much smaller than that for the analysis of multiple-stock buy-days.

13
   A video showing the Barclays Stockbroking user interface and screen display journey involved in making a
   purchase can be viewed at https://youtu.be/M1HGgKp6p6k. The video shows that the buy / sell screen
   display journey shows only information about the stocks to be purchased / sold and does not allow for
   multiple purchase or sale events in a way that would encourage NBD, or show portfolio information (such
   as illustration of portfolio positions before or after a purchase / sale) on the same screen.
14
   Orders of other types of funds are queued and batch-processed by the platform every few trading days in
   order to reduce trading costs. This poses a challenge for our analysis, which focuses on buy-day allocations.
   This is because in the data we observe the executed price and quantity, which will differ from the order
   price and quantity placed by the investor a few days previously. We therefore restrict of analysis to ETFs,
   orders for which are processed in real-time, as is the case for orders of common stocks.


                                                       12
             We adopt the same approach to the calculation of allocations on stock-and-fund
     buy-days as for multiple-stock buy-days (see Online Appendix for details). We calculate
     the percentage of the total buy-day investment (in pounds sterling and net of fees) that is
     allocated to each security. Results reveal that, depending on bandwidth, between one-fifth
     and one-third of trades involving stock-and-fund combinations have allocations within the
     1/N range.
             We also explore whether investors demonstrate this same misunderstanding of
     asset categories when investing in index-ETFs, a category specifically designed to use
     market weights. We therefore further restrict the sample to FTSE100 ETFs (the two
     most popular FTSE100 ETFs in the sample (by total holdings) are the ISHARES Core
     FTSE100 and the Vanguard FTSE100. Results reveal that allocations in the 1/N range
     are only slightly less common in this subsample: in the two-security case the percentage
     of index-ETF-and-stock buy-days in the 1/N range is 21.7% (bandwidth 0.02), 26.8%
     (bandwidth 0.05) and 33.2% (bandwidth 0.10), compared with 23.0%, 29.1% and 36.3% in
     the ETF-and-stock buy-day sample. Hence, even among investors who are partly engaged
     in low-cost index investing, we see similar levels of 1/N allocations compared with those
     in the multiple-stock and ETF-and-stock buy-day samples. The use of the 1/N heuristic
     for allocations on stock-and-fund buy-days is particularly striking as it implies, in the
     two-security example, that the single common stock receives a far higher weighting than
     the individual holdings within the fund.15


     4. Exploring the Sources of NBD

     We now examine whether use of the NBD heuristic varies across investor types. We also
     examine whether use of the NBD heuristic is consistent with models of learning and
     rational inattention.




15
     For example, the highest weight of any individual stock within a FTSE ETF is approximately 7%. This
     implies, in the two-security example, that the individual stock would have a weight more than 14 times
     higher than the largest stockholding within the ETF.


                                                      13
     4.1. Investor Types: Gender and Age

     There is evidence that US males tend to trade more actively and aggressively compared
     with females (Barber and Odean 2001; Choi et al. 2002; Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sundén
     2003; Dorn and Huberman 2005; Mitchell et al. 2006). Consistent with this, we might also
     expect that men tend to be more confident in choosing portfolio weights. But, alternatively,
     they might tend more to heuristic thinking, being more likely to follow a gut instinct of
     choosing 1/N . To test between these possibilities, we examine gender subsamples. Figure 2
     Panel A shows the bootstrapped estimate of the proportion of two-stock buy-days on
     which the investment is split within the 49%–51% interval by gender.16 The plot shows
     that the proportions of 1/N buy-day allocations are very similar across men and women.
            Previous research has also found that age is associated with lower investment
     performance, possibly due to age related declines in cognitive abilities (Korniotis and
     Kumar 2013). Declining cognitive ability might lead older investors to turn to the simple
     NBD heuristic. Figure 2 Panel B shows the proportion of 1/N buy-days by decade of birth.
     Very few investors in the sample were born before the 1930s or after the 1990s. The plot
     illustrates a similar propensity to engage in NBD across investors by age.17


     4.2. Do Investors Learn to Avoid Naïve Buying Diversification?

     Previous research offers mixed evidence as to whether investor behavior improves with
     experience. For example, studies have found that investors learn to avoid the disposition
     effect as they gain more trading experience (Feng and Seasholes 2005 Seru, Shumway, and
     Stoffman 2010; ); while in the case of investing in initial public offerings, investors appear
     to learn to make more mistakes (Kaustia and Knupfer 2008; Chiang et al. 2011). There is
     evidence that individuals learn from previous experience when using financial products
     (Agarwal et al. 2008; Ater and Landsman 2013; Miravete and Palacios-Huerta 2014). While

16
   We use this interval to identify NBD throughout this section of the paper. Results are not sensitive to
   widening this interval. Figure A5 shows the similarity in histogram plots for men and women separately,
   with no notable differences in the distributional characteristics of the buy-day allocation by gender.
   Table A5 shows summary statistics for the proportion of two-stock buy-days on which the investor uses
   NBD by investor characteristics.
17
   Online Appendix Figure A6 shows the investor age distribution. Figure A7 shows the similarity in
   histogram plots for investors by each decade of birth.


                                                    14
     a 1/N buy-day allocation might be a naïve action of a new investor, with experienced
     investors may gain information and feedback that causes them to refine their allocations.
             Figure 3 Panel A shows the proportion of NBD buy-days across quartiles of the
     distribution of account tenure. Measured in months from account opening, the quartile
     threshold values are 25%: 24 months; 50%: 60 months and 75%: 109 months. Figure 3
     shows that the propensity to engage in NBD falls with tenure, though the magnitude of
     the reduction is small. The proportion of buy-days on which the investor uses NBD falls
     from 31% in the bottom quartile to 27% in the top quartile.
             An alternative measure of experience is the frequency with which investors trade,
     which we measure as the number of trades executed per month. This measure includes all
     buy and sell trades, whether involving single stock or multiple stocks. A large number of
     studies have examined the relationship between this measure of trading frequency and
     performance, typically finding that frequent trading tends to result in lower returns (Barber
     and Odean 2001). Figure 3 Panel B shows the proportion of NBD buy-days across quartiles
     of trading frequency. The quartile threshold values of trades per month are 25% : 1.1 trades,
     50% : 3.1 trades; 75% : 10.2 trades. As can be seen from the figure, the most frequent
     traders are much less likely to choose NBD, possibly because some of these individuals
     are day-traders who very regularly adjust their positions and follow more sophisticated
     trading strategies. Among the top quartile sub-sample, 19% of multiple stock buy-days
     are NBD compared with 36% in the bottom quartile.


     4.3. Limited Attention Explanations for Naïve Buying Diversification

     Theoretical models have suggested that limited investor attention affects trading and
     asset prices (Hirshleifer and Teoh 2003; Peng and Xiong 2006; Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh
     2011). A considerable body of empirical research finds evidence consistent with attention
     effects in asset markets.18 Models of rational inattention explain quasi-rational behaviors as
     arising due to opportunity costs in allocating attention, as in Sims (2003). Recent studies
     present mixed evidence as to whether individuals behave in a way that is consistent with

18
     Examples include DellaVigna and Pollet (2009), Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009), Hou, Peng, and Xiong
     (2009), Cohen, Diether, and Malloy (2013) and Huang (2015).


                                                      15
     rational inattention (DellaVigna 2009; Chetty et al. 2014; Taubinsky and Rees-Jones 2018;
     Gathergood et al. 2019).
            In our setting, if investors face fixed costs of calculating the investment share of
     each stock in a optimal portfolio (such as time or psychic costs of portfolio calculations),
     then for investment choices with low economic stakes, investors might optimally choose the
     simple naïve diversification heuristic. In models with fixed optimization costs, it is worth
     paying the optimization cost (e.g. time cost) only when stakes are sufficiently high. Also,
     investors may be inattentive to their investment choices when distractions are present (as
     in Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh 2011). This is a feature that DellaVigna and Pollet (2009)
     refer to as behavioral inattention, who provide evidence of reduced market reaction to
     earnings announcements made on Fridays. We find no evidence of variation in the use of
     NBD by day of the week or month of the year.19


     4.3.1. Scale of Investment

     To test whether use of the NBD heuristic is consistent with limited attention, we first
     examine the relationship between NBD and the financial stakes of the investment decision.
            The financial stakes of the investment allocation choice can be defined in two main
     dimensions—the difference in returns among the stocks bought and the total value of the
     buy-day investment. When returns and risks differ more across stocks, optimal allocations
     tend to differ more from NBD. We explore how NBD buy-days relate to the difference
     in past returns, or the difference in future returns, between the two stocks purchased on
     the two-stock buy-day. We use the simple difference in gross returns over the previous 3
     months, excluding dividend payments, capital gain taxes, or trading fees. We then separate
     the sample into quartiles by the difference in returns.20

19
   See Online Appendix for further details. Figure A10 Panel A shows the fraction of NBD buy-days for
   each day of the week. Figure A11 shows the distribution of trades by day of the week and Figure A13
   shows the distribution of trades by month of the year. Figure A12 confirms that the histogram plots are
   very similar for each day of the week. Figure A10 Panel B shows the fraction of NBD buy-days for each
   month of the year. Figure A14 confirms that the histogram plots are very similar for each month of the
   year. Table A6 Panel A reports supporting summary statistics.
20
   It is possible that investors might be more likely to use NBD when stocks have similar characteristics, such
   as being from firms in the same industry. However, additional analysis in Online Appendix Figure A17
   shows that this is not the case. Panel A shows that investors are as likely to engage in NBD when buying
   two stocks from firms in the same industry as they are when buying two stocks from firms in different


                                                       16
            Figure 3 Panel C shows the proportion of 1/N buy-days for past returns. The
     proportion of buy-days with NBD declines with the difference in past returns and is notably
     lower in the top quartile sub-sample compared with the third quartile. Approximately
     24% of buy-days in the top quartile are NBD, compared with 33% in the bottom quartile.
     A similar pattern in seen in Panel D for future returns, in which approximately 25% of
     buy-days in the top quartile are NBD compared with 32% in the bottom quartile.
            Panels E and F of Figure 3 illustrate the relationship between NBD behavior and
     the total value of the investor’s portfolio with the brokerage (Panel E) and the amount
     invested on the day (Panel F). Panel E illustrates that investors with high value portfolios
     are less likely to adopt a NBD heuristic.21
            The total amount invested on the day is the simple sum of the two-stock purchases.
     Figure 3 Panel F illustrates the proportion of buy-days with NBD across quartile sub-
     samples. Among the sample the median investment amount on the day is £5, 200. Figure 3
     Panel F shows the proportion of buy-days exhibiting NBD falls as the investment amount
     increases. At the top quartile 24% of buy-days involve a 1/N allocation, compared with
     35% in the bottom quartile. However, Panel F also illustrates a non-monotonic relationship,
     with the proportion increasing between the second and third quartiles, before falling at
     the fourth quartile.22
            Later, we show that this pattern arises due to investors making joint decisions over
     their investment amount on the day and the number of stocks bought. This results in high
     value investment amounts (e.g. at higher round number multiples of 2 such as £10, 000
     and £20, 000) being more popular among investors using NBD compared with lower value
     investment amounts.




   industries.
21
   This analysis is only feasible for new accounts, as we can only build complete portfolios from transaction
   data for new accounts, as old accounts have a composition which is not seen by us at the beginning our
   of data period. We replicate our main result among all new accounts in Online Appendix Figure A18,
   which shows that approximately 34% of two-stock buy-days are made in the 49%–51% interval among the
   sample of new accounts.
22
   Additional analysis in the Online Appendix in Figure A20 shows the histogram plots and confirms this
   non-monotonic pattern, which is attributable to less bunching at the centre of the distribution in the
   second quartile.


                                                      17
4.3.2. Trading Activity and Portfolio Size

In a limited attention setting there may be a one-time fixed cost of adopting a decision
making strategy (e.g., learning how to use an online portfolio optimizer). The returns
from adopting a decision making strategy are higher as portfolio size and trading activity
increase. Hence, use of NBD will fall with trading activity and portfolio size.
       Figure 4 Panel A shows the proportion of NBD buy-days by whether the investor
holds existing positions in their portfolio and Panel B by whether the investor also makes
a sale on the buy-day. The panels show the proportion of NBD buy-days is lower with
existing positions held (31% compared with 39%) and with sales on the day (22% compared
with 35%).
       Finally, we explore the relationship between NBD behavior and the number of
stocks in the individual investors’ portfolio. It is well documented that individual investors
tend to hold only a few stocks as direct holdings in their portfolios (Barber and Odean
2013). In our data the cut points for quartiles of the number of stocks held are 25%: 3,
50%: 5 and 75%: 9. Figure 4 Panel C shows the proportion of NBD buy-days by number
of stocks held. There is no decline in the proportion of NBD buy-days with the number of
stocks held.
       Overall, these results suggest that the use of the NBD heuristic decreases both
with investor experience and as the incentives to allocate attention increase. Nevertheless,
among top quartile of buy-days by financial characteristics (including portfolio value,
number of stocks in the portfolio and differences in returns across stocks) the proportion
of investments made with NBD is consistently above 20%. Hence NBD is only modestly
sensitive to the economic stakes of investing.


4.4. Taking Stock of NBD Behavior

To explore the relative importance of the multiple possible sources of NBD behavior,
we estimate cross-section multivariate regression models. Of course, these estimates do
not establish causality. In the probit model the dependent variable is a dummy variable
indicating whether the two-stock buy-day allocation is NBD, again using the £P/N ×


                                             18
(1 ± 0.02) interval to define an approximate NBD. The model is estimated on the sample
of all multiple-stock buy-days from the new accounts sample.
       Results are shown in Table 2. Model 1 includes investor gender dummies, decade of
birth dummies, day of the week dummies and month of the year dummies (coefficients not
shown), plus an intercept term. Consistent with the unconditional relationships shown
above, none of the coefficients returned in the regression are statistically significantly
different from zero. Model 2 adds dummies for account tenure quartiles and a continuous
measure of the average number of trades per month. The coefficient on the average number
of trades per day is negative and statistically significant. Model 3 adds the additional
variables. Results show the likelihood of a NBD declines with the number of stocks bought
on the day, the range in future returns of stocks in the portfolio, whether the investor
holds an existing position in their position and whether a sale is made on the same day.


5. Naïve Buying Diversification or Naïve Portfolio

    Diversification?

A key contribution of our paper is to distinguish whether investors engage in NPD (targeting
equal weights in the portfolio) or NBD (targeting equal weights in a given purchase). This
distinction has important welfare consequences. As a target portfolio-balancing heuristic,
NPD arguably performs well for investors in practice. From a normative perspective,
DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009) compare the performance of NPD against 14
alternative models and find that none is consistently better than NPD in achieving a
Sharpe ratio, certainty-equivalent return or turnover.


5.1. Evidence from Top-Up Buy-Days

The cleanest setting in which to distinguish between NBD and NPD is when investors
top-up multiple stocks already held in their portfolio. We examine whether they split the
top-up investment 1/N across new funds invested (i.e., NBD), or instead top up such that
the portfolio is balanced 1/N as a result of the trades (i.e., NPD).
       First we show results for top-up buy-days involving two stocks. Panel A of Figure 5

                                            19
shows the proportion of the buy-day investment allocated to (randomly chosen) Stock A.
The right-side figure shows the market value of Stock A over the total end-of-day portfolio
value (of holdings of Stocks A and B). There is clear heaping around 1/N in the left-side
figure, which is absent in the right-side figure. Hence in this sample we see NBD, not NPD,
on top-up buy-days.
       Investors may fail to achieve NPD simply because the level of total investment
on the buy-day is not large enough to bring their portfolio into balance. In that case,
an investor could only achieve NPD if they increased the total amount invested on the
buy-day, or reduced their holdings of one position. In Panel B of Figure 5 we restrict
the sample to top-up buy-days on which the investor could achieve NPD, given the total
buy-day investment amount, without requiring any sell activity. Again, there is clear
heaping around 1/N in the left-side figure, which is absent in the right-side figure.
       Next we extend our analysis to all top-up buy-days involve multiple stocks. Results
are shown in Table 3, which presents a breakdown of the starting positions, buying
allocations, and ending positions of all buy-day episodes with at least two existing positions
in the portfolio. In each panel the rows summarize eight mutually exclusive scenarios for
account positions at the start of the day and activity during the day.
       The first four rows in each panel show accounts which begin the buy-day with
NPD (2.2% of observations). Of these, 1.1% engage in NBD and 1.1% engage is non-NBD.
At the day end, in 0.5% of cases the portfolio is balanced by NPD in 1.9% of cases the
portfolio is not balanced by NPD. The bottom four rows in each panel show accounts
which begin the buy-day away from NPD (97.8% of observations). Of these, in 28.5% of
cases investors use NBD and 69.2% of cases they choose some other allocation. In only
0.2% of cases the portfolio shows NPD. Panels B and C show similar results. Table 4
shows the proportion of buy-days resulting in NPD in the restricted sample. Across all
multiple-stock buy-days in the restricted sample, only 2% result in NPD.
       In summary, this evidence indicates that investors are prone to naive buying
diversification. When investors hold multiple-stocks in their portfolio and make top-up
purchases of the same stocks on the buy-day, they are many times more likely to engage



                                             20
in NBD than NPD.


5.2. Evidence from All Buy-Days

To verify whether this finding of naive buying diversification generalizes beyond this
specific sample conditioning, we now extend the analysis to examine purchases without
restricting either the numbers of stocks currently held nor the set of stocks purchased on
the buy-day.
       The panels in Figure 6 describe behavior for different numbers of positions in the
investor’s existing portfolios at the beginning of the buy-day. Within each panel, the
horizontal axis denotes the number of stocks bought on the day. The red bars and whiskers
illustrate 95% confidence intervals for the proportion of buy-days within the cell that show
NBD. The blue bars and whiskers illustrate 95% confidence intervals for the proportion of
buy-days that show NPD.
       Strikingly, NBD is consistently high on buy-days in which, at the beginning of
the day, there are multiple stocks in the portfolio. In contrast, NPD is rare across all
combinations of existing positions and numbers of stocks bought on the day (with the
exception of empty accounts with no existing positions at the beginning of the day for
which, by construction, NBD = NPD). Table 5 and Table 6 report the mean values and
bootstrapped 95% confidence interval bounds within each cell. This analysis makes clear
that NPD is extremely rare, whether investors are topping-up their portfolios or adding
new positions.


6. Naïve Buying Diversification and Portfolio Performance

Our main result, that investors often use NBD, whereas there is no evidence that they use
NPD, raises the question of whether, and how much, NBD damages portfolio performance
compared to NPD. There is evidence that owing to estimation problems for investors,
the NPD rule is the best diversification rule that investors can implement in practice.
As mentioned earlier, DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009) evaluate the out-of-sample
performance of 14 different portfolio estimation and formation models against NPD, and


                                            21
     find that none perform consistently better than NPD over reasonable time horizons. We
     therefore compare the performance of NBD with that of NPD. Our main result is that NPD
     outperforms NBD when the correlation in returns across assets is low (i.e., idiosyncratic
     risk is high). We briefly outline here the simulation model that we use to compare the
     performance of NPD and NBD. Further details are provided in Appendix A.
             Simulated asset returns are generated according to the single-factor model used in
     DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009). We assume that an investor i holds a portfolio
     consisting of Ni risky assets, one of which is the factor. Annualized excess returns of the
     factor, Rb,t , are drawn from the normal distribution Rb,t ∼ N (µb , σb2 ). Annualized excess
     returns of the remaining Ni − 1 risky assets, Ra,t , follow Ra,t = BRb,t + t , where B is the
     factor loading and t is an error term drawn from the normal distribution t ∼ N (0, Σt ). Σt
     is a diagonal variance-covariance matrix where the squared root of the diagonal elements
     represent the idiosyncratic volatility.
             We implement the NBD and NPD rules over a time horizon T (months) with a
     regular contribution into the portfolio at each time step. Under the NPD rule, assets are
     sold and purchased at each time step to rebalance the portfolio to 1/Ni weights. Under
     the NBD rule, the monthly contribution is simply split equally over the Ni assets. We
     evaluate portfolio performance using the Sharpe ratio based on 1,000 simulations.
             We present two calibrations, one with low and one with high idiosyncratic volatility
     (the squared root of the diagonal elements of Σt ). These are calibrated to the inter-quartile
     range (25% - 75%) of estimated annualised idiosyncratic volatilities of stocks in the data
     (other parameter values used in the simulation are the same as those in DeMiguel, Garlappi,
     and Uppal (2009): µb = 0.08 and σb = 0.16, B are evenly spread from 0.5 to 1.5.) In the low
     idiosyncratic risk simulation the idiosyncratic components are drawn from a U [0.10, 0.30],
     which is shifted to U [0.40, 0.60] in the high idiosyncratic risk simulation.23 We conduct

23
     We fitted daily excess returns of ordinary shares listed in the London Stock Exchange to the single-index
     model where the index is FTSE 500 index. (Note that we used 200 stocks which were traded throughout
     the data period and were most frequently traded in the data. Stocks having a zero daily return for more
     than 25% of trading days were excluded. As a risk-free rate, we used the UK government liability 1 year
     spot rate retrieved from https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/yield-curves.) The inter-quartile
     range (25% - 75%) of the estimated annualized idiosyncratic volatilities is approximately 0.20 (the average
     in the low idiosyncratic risk simulation) and 0.50 (the average in the high idiosyncratic risk simulation),
     respectively. Idiosyncratic volatilities of 56% of stocks are within the parameter value range in the low


                                                        22
  simulations for each pairwise combination of Ni ∈ {5, 10, 20} and T ∈ {120, 360}.
          Table 7 summarizes results from the simulation exercise. In the low idiosyncratic
  risk simulations, shown in Panel A, a t-test fails to reject the null hypothesis that the
  average Sharpe ratios of the NBD and NPD strategies are equal. The NPD simulations in
  Panel A are consistent with those in Table 6 of DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009).
          In contrast, the high idiosyncratic risk simulations, shown in Panel B, NBD sub-
  stantially reduces Sharpe ratios relative to NPD, and the t-test rejects the null hypothesis
  of equality in the Sharpe ratios at the 1% level in the majority of cases. The difference in
  Sharpe ratio increases with both Ni and T . The reduction in Sharpe ratio under the NBD
  rule compared with the NPD ranges from 11.0% (with Ni = 5 and T = 120) to 22.7%
 (with Ni = 20 and T = 360).
          Intuitively, NBD tends to induce arbitrary disparities in portfolio weights, so we
  do not expect it to do as good a job as NPD in evenly balancing the portfolio and
  diversifying risk.24 Such imbalance tends to increase portfolio risk more when there is
  greater idiosyncratic risk to be diversified. Furthermore, portfolio weights tend to diverge
  as random return realizations shift relative asset values. T and this random divergence is
  stronger when return correlations are low (i.e., idiosyncratic risk is high). Such divergence
  can create especially large non-diversification for portfolios that are already imbalanced,
  as arises under NBD, because random divergence in the weights in the few stocks that
  are most heavily held has a larger effect on portfolio volatility. In contrast, NPD adjusts
  portfolio weights to offset random divergence. These adverse effects for NBD are increasing
  with both T and Ni , with higher T allowing further random divergence from initial weights
  and higher Ni generating lower correlation in returns.




   idiosyncratic risk simulation (0.10-0.30) and those of 17% of stocks are within the parameter value range
   in the high idiosyncratic risk simulation (0.40-0.60).
24
   For example, in general an asset that happens to be purchased on a day when few other assets are
   purchased or on a day when a greater amount of funds are invested will tend to get higher portfolio weight.
   Also, an asset that happens to be bought on multiple days will tend to get higher portfolio weight.


                                                      23
     7. 1/N Selling

     Investors could employ a Naïve Selling Diversification (NSD) heuristic when selling multiple
     stocks. However, if NBD is due to narrow framing, then NSD might be less likely, as
     when making selling decisions investors are confronted with information on their portfolio.
     Previous research suggests investor selling behavior is related to the framing of the
     portfolio, including the well-known disposition effect (Barber and Odean 2013) and rank
     effects (Hartzmark 2015). By these heuristics, investors tend to pick out stocks from the
     distribution within their portfolio. Indeed, in our data the vast majority of sell-days involve
     single stocks. We observe 1,108,080 sell-days, among which 84% are sell-days involving a
     single-stock sale. The majority of sell trades are liquidating sales (62%) with the remainder
     partial sales. (Another category is short-selling, which is uncommon in our data, affecting
     only 7% of sell-trades.)


     7.1. 1/N Selling on Multiple-Stock Sell Days

     Additional analysis in the Online Appendix illustrates the proportion of selling proceeds
     from a randomly chosen stock, Stock A, on two-stock sell-days. The peak at 1/N accounts
     for approximately 10% of sell-days in the 49% – 51% interval. In total only 6.2% of all
     multiple-stock sell-days involve investors choosing NSD. Overall, NSD accounts for fewer
     than 1.5% of all sell-days in the data.


     7.2. Selling to Achieve 1/N Portfolios

     Alternatively, investors might sell positions such that they achieve NPD. Again, this might
     be more likely than NPD when buying because selling stocks necessarily involves looking
     at the values of existing positions. We calculated the percentage of sell-days that result
     in NPD by combinations of the number of existing positions in the portfolio at the start
     of the day, number of positions sold (either partially or fully liquidated) and number of
     resulting positions. Results show that NSD is a very rare outcome.25

25
     When we restrict the sample to sell-days on which the investor can achieve NSD without requiring
     any purchases of stocks, we find that NSD is achieved on only 7.2% of sell-days (see Online Appendix
     Table A10). When we restrict the sample to days with both buy and sell trades on which the investor


                                                     24
8. Do Investors Jointly Choose Investment Amounts and N ?

A possible motivation for using the NBD heuristic is that it simplifies the decision problem.
If so, we would expect that investors who use the NBD heuristic would implement it in a
simple way. To investigate this, we analyze how investors choose total amount to invest on
the day and the number of stocks bought (N ). We find that they choose these in order
to make the division calculation simpler, say choosing to invest approximately £15,000
in three stocks or £10,000 in two stocks. This is consistent with NBD investors having a
preference for simplicity.
        In Figure 7 we plot the investment amount on multiple-stock buy-days on which
individuals split their purchases 1/N , for different value of N . The striking feature of the
plot is the heaping of investment amounts around simple round-number multiples of N .
Beginning at Panel A with N = 2, one observes heaping at values of £1,000, £2,000,
£4,000, £10,000 and £20,000. By contrast, in Panel B with N = 3 we see investment
amounts dominated by numbers which are simple multiples of 3, £1,500, £3,000, £6,000,
£9.000,£15,000 and £30,000. We further see this patterns when N = 4 and when N = 5.
In Panel C, showing N = 4, we see heaping at £2,000, £4,000, £8,000, £10,000, £12,000,
£20,000, and £40,000. In Panel D, showing N = 5, we see heaping at at £2,500, £5,000,
£10,000, £25,000 and £50,000. It is further striking that the modal investment bin
is £2,000 when N = 2, £3,000 when N = 3, £4,000 when N = 4 and £5,000 when
N = 5. One outcome of this behavior is to give rise to near-identical distributions of
investment amounts per stock across multiple-stock buy-days involving two – five stocks.
The distribution of investment amount per stock across five-stock buy-days appears near-
identical to that across two-stock buy-days. Hence the total amount invested on the buy-day
rises monotonically with the number of stocks bought, while the average amount invested
in each stock remains constant. However, while the average amount invested in each stock
remains constant with the number of stocks in the sample, this is not true at the investor
level. Restricting to the sample of investors who make at least one multiple-stock buy-trade


can achieve NSD by reallocating the total sales and total investment on the day without requiring any
additional purchase or sale, we find that NSD is achieved on only 1.6% of sell-days (see Table A11).


                                                 25
and one single-stock buy-trade within the sample period, only 2.3% of investors spend
approximately the same amount on every trade (allowing a 10% bandwidth). Therefore,
we can rule out the hypothesis that NBD arises due to a coincidence of investors always
investing a constant amount per stock and sometimes buying multiple stocks on the same
day.
       An example of a compelling pattern pointing in this direction is the observation
that investors tend to buy 2 not 3 stocks with a spend of £2,000, 3 not 2 stocks with a
spend of £3,000, but then often 2 not 3 stocks with a spend of £4,000, suggesting that
the total sum of money available for investment may be determining the number of stocks
bought in a very non-monotonic way. An interpretation of these results is that investors
are not only utilizing 1/N as a simple heuristic for allocating across N stocks, but that
they are choosing a total investment amount to be allocated such that 1/N becomes a
simple calculation although we do not have experimental or natural sources of exogenous
variation in either the total investment amount or N within or across investors.


9. Conclusion

We investigate how investors go about approaching a common financial choice: allocating
invested funds across multiple stocks bought on the same day. Previous research on
retirement saving fund allocation has proposed that investors use a 1/N heuristic, but has
not disentangled whether individuals use 1/N as a rule for dividing the amount invested
across funds, or as a target portfolio allocation. We disentangle these, showing that a
common approach among investors is to simplify this problem by applying a 1/N heuristic
to their buy-day purchases, approximately equalizing the money amount invested across
several stocks purchased on the day or across a mixture of stocks and funds, a behavior
which we term Naïve Buying Diversification (NBD). In contrast, investors almost never
achieve approximately equal money amounts invested in each stock, an outcome we term
Naïve Portfolio Diversification (NPD)
       The propensity to use the NBD heuristic decreases with investor experience and
financial stakes, consistent with models of learning and attention allocation. Nevertheless,


                                            26
even when investor experience is high and financial stakes are large, the proportion
of investments made with NBD is above 20%. Hence NBD is only modestly sensitive
to investor experience and economic stakes of investing. Investors may use the NBD
heuristic because of an attraction to simplicity. Consistent with this, investors implement
NBD in a simple way, appearing to choose both margins in order to make the 1/N task
mathematically simple.
       Use of the NBD heuristic has the result of creating portfolio shares for individual
stocks that do not closely approach equalizing weights in the investor’s overall portfolio
(Naïve Portfolio Diversification). This behavior is consistent with narrow framing, whereby
investors appear to approach the buy–day task of allocating funds across stocks in isolation
from their existing portfolio positions. In other words, they engage in transactional framing
instead of portfolio framing.
       Barberis and Huang (2001) argue that when an investor contemplates adding
an incremental gamble the the investor’s portfolio, the investor narrowly frames on the
increment rather than on the overall portfolio; and that this offers an explanation for
otherwise puzzling phenomena, such as the rejection of small independent gambles, and
the stock market participation puzzle. We show that the tracks of such narrow framing
are evident in the incremental purchases of assets already in the portfolio. The resulting
1/N behavior makes it especially clear that investors are engaged in narrow framing
on the incremental purchase. Even conditional on making an asset purchase, narrow
framing on the transaction results in bad choices of the relative weights allocate to the
different securities in the transaction. So we document that narrow framing extends to
incremental portfolios of gambles, not just single ones. This suggests that behavioral
models of investment decisions should incorporate the effects of transactional framing by
investors.
       Our findings also have implications for the design of contribution-based savings
plans, such as pension schemes. Such schemes typically ask investors to select buying
weights across funds for continuing monthly contributions. This can have the adverse side-
effect of encouraging investors to use the NBD heuristic without integrated consideration



                                             27
of the current portfolio allocation. Our findings suggest that a different scheme may help
investors achieve better-diversified overall portfolios. Such a scheme could offer investors
a choice over overall portfolio target. The scheme would then automatically provide the
investor simultaneously with (1) a recommended portfolio reallocation, and (2) monthly
contribution weights consistent with this target. An interesting topic for future research is
whether such a scheme improves investor diversification and portfolio performance.




                                             28
References

Agarwal, S., J. C. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson (2008). Learning in the Credit
 Card Market. NBER Working Paper 13822.

Aggarwal, R. and B. Lucey (2007). Psychological Barriers in Gold Prices? Review of
 Financial Economics 16, 217 – 230.

Agnew, J., P. Balduzzi, and A. Sundén (2003). Portfolio Choice and Trading in a Large
 401(k) Plan. The American Economic Review 93, 193–215.

Ater, I. and V. Landsman (2013). Do Customers Learn from Experience? Evidence from
  Retail Banking. Management Science 59, 2019–2035.

Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2000). Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common
  Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors. Journal of Finance 55, 773–806.

Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2001). Boys will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and
  Common Stock Investment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261–292.

Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2013). The Behavior of Individual Investors. Handbook of
 the Economics of Finance; Volume 2A (1), 1533–1570.

Barberis, N. (2018). Psychology-based models of asset prices and trading volume. In
 Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1, Volume 1, pp.
 79–175. Elsevier.

Barberis, N. and M. Huang (2001). Mental Accounting, Loss Aversion and Individual
  Stock Returns. Journal of Finance 56, 1247–1292.

Barberis, N. and M. Huang (2008). The Loss Aversion / Narrow Framing Approach to
  the Equity Premium Puzzle. In R. Mehra (Ed.), Handbook of the Equity Risk Premium,
  Chapter 6. Elsevier.

Barberis, N., M. Huang, and D. Thaler (2006). Individual Preferences, Monetary Gambles,
  and Stock Market Participation: A Case for Narrow Framing. American Economic
  Review 96, 1069–1090.

Barberis, N., A. Mukherjee, and B. Wang (2016). Prospect Theory and Stock Returns:
 An Empirical Test. Review of Financial Studies 29, 3068–3107.

Benartzi, S. and R. Thaler (2001). Naive Diversification Strategies in Defined Contribution
  Saving Plans. American Economic Review 91, 79–98.

Benartzi, S. and R. Thaler (2007). Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings Behavior.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, 81–104.

                                            29
Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2007). Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare
  Costs of Household Investment Mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115 (5), 707–747.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, S. Leth-Petersen, T. H. Nielsen, and T. Olsen (2014). Active
 vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from
  Denmark. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1141–1219.

Chiang, Y.-M., D. Hirshleifer, Y. Qian, and A. E. Sherman (2011). Do Investors Learn from
  Experience? Evidence from Frequent IPO Investors. Review of Financial Studies 24,
 1560–1589.

Choi, J., D. Laibson, and B. Madrian (2009). Mental Accounting in Portfolio Choice:
 Evidence from a Flypaper Effect. American Economic Review 99, 2085–2095.

Choi, J., D. Laibson, B. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2002). Defined Contribution Pensions:
  Plan Rules, Participant Choices, and the Path of Least Resistance. In R. Moffitt (Ed.),
 Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 16, pp. 67–114.

Cohen, L., K. Diether, and C. Malloy (2013). Misvaluing Innovation. The Review of
 Financial Studies 26, 635–666.

Daniel, K. D., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam (2001). Overconfidence, Arbitrage,
 and Equilibrium Asset Pricing. Journal of Finance 56, 921–965.

DellaVigna, S. (2009). Psychology and Econmics: Evidence From the Field. Journal of
 Economic Literature 47, 315–372.

DellaVigna, S. and J. M. Pollet (2009). Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings An-
 nouncements. Journal of Finance 64, 709–749.

DeMiguel, V., L. Garlappi, and R. Uppal (2009). Optimal Versus Naive Diversification: How
  Inefficient is the 1/ N Portfolio Strategy? Review of Financial Studies 22, 1915–1953.

Dorn, D. and G. Huberman (2005). Talk and Action: What Individual Investors Say and
 What They Do. Review of Finance 9, 437–481.

Feng, L. and M. S. Seasholes (2005). Do Investor Sophistication and Trading Experience
  Eliminate Behavioral Biases in Financial Markets? Review of Finance 9, 305–351.

Gathergood, J., N. Mahoney, N. Stewart, and J. Weber (2019). How Do Individuals Repay
 Their Debt? The Balance-Matching Heuristic. American Economic Review 109, 844–875.

Gilovich, T. and D. Griffin (2010). Judgment and Decision Making. In S. T. Fiske, D. T.
  Gilbert, and G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of Social Psychology Vol. 2, Chapter 15, pp.
  576. John Wiley & Sons.

                                           30
Goetzmann, W. N. and A. Kumar (2008). Equity Portfolio Diversification. Review of
 Finance 12, 433–463.

Grinblatt, M. and B. Han (2005). Prospect Theory, Mental Accounting, and Momentum.
 Journal of Financial Economics 78, 311–339.

Hartzmark, S. M. (2015). The Worst, the Best, Ignoring All the Rest: The Rank Effect
 and Trading Behavior. Review of Financial Studies 28, 1024–1059.

Hirshleifer, D., S. Lim, and S. Teoh (2009). Driven to Distraction: Extraneous Events and
  Underreaction to Earnings News. The Journal of Finance 64, 2289–2325.

Hirshleifer, D., S. S. Lim, and S. H. Teoh (2011). Limited Investor Attention and Stock
  Market Misreactions to Accounting Information. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies 1,
  35–73.

Hirshleifer, D. and S. H. Teoh (2003). Limited Attention, Information Disclosure, and
  Financial Reporting. Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 337–386.

Hirshleifer, D. A. (2015). Behavioral Finance. Annual Review of Financial Economics 7,
  133–159.

Hou, K., L. Peng, and W. Xiong (2009). A Tale of Two Anomalies: The Implications of
 Investor Attention for Price and Earnings Momentum. Working Paper.

Huang, X. (2015). Thinking Outside the Borders: Investors’ Underreaction to Foreign
 Operations Information. The Review of Financial Studies 28, 3109–3152.

Huberman, G. and W. Jiang (2006). Offering versus Choice in 401(k) Plans: Equity
 Exposure and Number of Funds. Journal of Finance 61, 763–801.

Johnson, E., N. B. Johnson, and D. Shanthikumar (2007). Round Numbers and Security
  Returns. Working Paper.

Kaustia, M. and S. Knupfer (2008). Do Investors Overweight Personal Experience?
 Evidence from IPO Subscriptions. Journal of Finance 63, 2679–2702.

Korniotis, G. M. and A. Kumar (2013). Do Portfolio Distortions Reflect Superior Infor-
 mation or Psychological Biases? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48,
 1–45.

Li, Y. and L. Yang (2013). Prospect Theory, The Disposition Effect, And Asset Prices.
  Journal of Financial Economics 107, 715–739.

Madrian, B. and D. Shea (2001). The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation
 and Savings Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 4, 1149–1187.

                                           31
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio Selection. Journal of Finance 7, 77–91.

Miravete, E. J. and I. Palacios-Huerta (2014). Consumer Inertia, Choice Dependence, and
 Learning from Experience in a Repeated Decision Problem. Review of Economics and
 Statistics 96, 524–537.

Mitchell, O. S., G. R. Mottola, S. P. Utkus, and T. Yamaguchi (2006). The Inattentive
 Participant: Portfolio Trading Behavior in 401(K) Plans. SSRN Electronic Journal.

Odean, T. (1998). Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses? Journal of Finance 53,
 1775–1798.

Peng, L. and W. Xiong (2006). Investor Attention, Overconfidence and Category Learning.
  Journal of Financial Economics 80, 563–602.

Seru, A., T. Shumway, and N. Stoffman (2010). Learning by Trading. Review of Financial
  Studies 23, 705–739.

Sims, C. A. (2003). Implications of Rational Inattention. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 50, 665–690.

Taubinsky, D. and A. Rees-Jones (2018). Attention Variation and Welfare: Theory and
  Evidence from a Tax Salience Experiment. The Review of Economic Studies 85, 2462–
  2496.




                                           32
                                   Figure 1: Proportion of Buy-Day Investment Allocated to Each Stock on
                                                               Multiple-Stock Buy-Days

                                                (A) Two Stocks                                                                (B) Three Stocks
                            0.20




                                                                                                               0.25
                                                                                                               0.20
                            0.15
   Proportion of Buy−Days




                                                                                      Proportion of Buy−Days
                                                                                                               0.15
                            0.10




                                                                                                               0.10
                            0.05




                                                                                                               0.05
                            0.00




                                                                                                               0.00
                                    0.0   0.2       0.4     0.6      0.8   1.0                                        0     0.2    0.33       0.6      0.8   1
                                          Proportion Invested in Stock A                                                    Proportion Invested in Stock A


                                                (C) Four Stocks                                                                   (D) Five Stocks
                            0.15




                                                                                                               0.20
                                                                                                               0.15
   Proportion of Buy−Days




                                                                                      Proportion of Buy−Days
                            0.10




                                                                                                               0.10
                            0.05




                                                                                                               0.05
                            0.00




                                                                                                               0.00




                                    0      0.25     0.4     0.6      0.8   1                                          0.0   0.2       0.4     0.6      0.8   1.0
                                          Proportion Invested in Stock A                                                    Proportion Invested in Stock A


Note: Figure shows a histogram of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which is
invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the group of stocks purchased. Bin
width is 0.01. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock buy-days. See Section 2 for details on the sample
construction.




                                                                                 33
                                  Figure 2: Naïve Buying Diversification by Gender and Age
                                                   Two-Stock Buy-Days

                                                                                   (A) Gender
                                                                    0.4
                                         Proportion of 1/N Buying
                                                                    0.3




                                                                                                      ●

                                                                               ●
                                                                    0.2




                                                                           Male                   Female
                                                                                       Gender


                                                                               (B) Decade of Birth
                           0.4
Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                                                                                                 ●
                                  ●
                           0.3




                                                                                            ●                          ●
                                                                           ●                               ●
                                                                    ●
                           0.2




                                 30s                          40s         50s            60s              70s   80s   90s
                                                                                    Decade of Birth


Note: Figure shows proportion of all two-stock buy-days on which the buy-day investments are split
equally (in pounds) across the two stocks. Equal is defined in the range 49% to 51%. Sample is restricted
to two-stock buy-days. See Section 2 for details on the sample construction. 95% confidence intervals
illustrated in error bars.




                                                                                       34
  Figure 3: Naïve Buying Diversification by Portfolio Value and Investment Amount
                                     Two-Stock Buy-Days
                                                   (A) Account Tenure                                                                        (B) Trading Frequency
                              0.4




                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                                                        ●
   Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                                                                                  Proportion of 1/N Buying
                                                                                                                                                         ●




                                                                                                                             0.3
                                         ●                                                                                                                              ●
                              0.3




                                                          ●
                                                                         ●




                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                              0.2




                                                                                                                             0.1
                                    1st Quartile     2nd Quartile   3rd Quartile   4th Quartile                                    1st Quartile     2nd Quartile   3rd Quartile   4th Quartile

                                                           Account Age                                                                                Trading Frequency


                                             (C) Past 3 Month Returns                                                                    (D) Next 3 Month Returns
                              0.4




                                                                                                                             0.4
   Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                                                                                  Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                         ●
                                                          ●                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●
                              0.3




                                                                                                                             0.3




                                                                         ●                                                                                              ●




                                                                                                                                                                                       ●

                                                                                        ●
                              0.2




                                                                                                                             0.2




                                    1st Quartile     2nd Quartile   3rd Quartile   4th Quartile                                    1st Quartile     2nd Quartile   3rd Quartile   4th Quartile

                                                    Difference in Past Returns                                                                    Difference in Future Returns


                                                   (E) Portfolio Value                                                             (F) Investment Amount on the Day
                              0.4




                                                                                                                             0.4
   Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                                                                                  Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                                                                                                                        ●
                                         ●                ●

                                                                                                                                                                        ●

                                                                         ●
                              0.3




                                                                                                                             0.3




                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●



                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                              0.2




                                                                                                                             0.2




                                    1st Quartile     2nd Quartile   3rd Quartile   4th Quartile                                    1st Quartile     2nd Quartile   3rd Quartile   4th Quartile

                                                          Portfolio Value                                                                             Investment Amount


Note: Figure shows proportion of all two-stock buy-days on which the buy-day investments are split
equally (in pounds) across the two stocks. Equal is defined in the range 49% to 51%. Sample is restricted
to two-stock buy-days. For Panel E, sample is further restricted to two-stock buy-days in the new
accounts data. See Section 2 for details on the sample
                                                    35 construction. 95% confidence intervals illustrated
in error bars.
                                    Figure 4: Naïve Buying Diversification by Existing Positions and Sales
                                                                Two-Stock Buy-Days

                                       (A) Existing Position Held                                                                                                     (B) Sale on the Day
                              0.5




                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●
   Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                                                                                                          Proportion of 1/N Buying
                              0.4




                                                                                                ●




                                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                            ●
                              0.3




                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                              0.2




                                           With                                             Without                                                                     With                  Without
                                                  Existing Positions                                                                                                          Sale on the Buy−Day


                                                                                                    (C) Number of Stocks Held
                                                                                      0.4
                                                           Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                ●                                                        ●
                                                                                      0.3
                                                                                      0.2




                                                                                            1st Quartile   2nd Quartile                              3rd Quartile   4th Quartile

                                                                                                           Number of Stocks Held


Note: Figure shows proportion of all two-stock buy-days on which the buy-day investments are split
equally (in pounds) across the two stocks. Equal is defined in the range 49% to 51%. Sample is restricted
to two-stock buy-days in the new accounts data. See Section 2 for details on the sample construction.
95% confidence intervals illustrated in error bars.




                                                                                                                     36
                                 Figure 5: Naïve Buying Diversification vs. Naïve Portfolio Diversification
                                                    Investors Topping-Up Two-Stock Portfolios

                                                                         (A) Whole Sample
                         0.15




                                                                                                                0.15
Proportion of Buy−Days




                                                                                       Proportion of Buy−Days
                         0.10




                                                                                                                0.10
                         0.05




                                                                                                                0.05
                         0.00




                                                                                                                0.00




                                0.0   0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0                                        0.0         0.2      0.4       0.6       0.8         1.0
                                       Proportion Invested in Stock A                                                        Market Value of Stock A over Portfolio Value


                                                                        (B) Restricted Sample
                         0.20




                                                                                                                0.20
                         0.15




                                                                                                                0.15
Proportion of Buy−Days




                                                                                       Proportion of Buy−Days
                         0.10




                                                                                                                0.10
                         0.05




                                                                                                                0.05
                         0.00




                                                                                                                0.00




                                0.0   0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0                                        0.0         0.2      0.4       0.6       0.8         1.0
                                       Proportion Invested in Stock A                                                        Market Value of Stock A over Portfolio Value


Note: Panel A figure shows a histogram of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds)
invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased. Bin
width is 0.01. Panel B shows a histogram of the proportion of the end of day investment in the portfolio
that is allocated to Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample is restricted to two-stock buy-days in the sample of new accounts. See Section 2 for details on
the sample construction. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                                  37
                                Figure 6: Naïve Buying Diversification vs. Naïve Portfolio Diversification
                                                                  All Buy-Days
                          0.6




                                          0 Existing Position                          1 Existing Position                     2 Existing Positions
                          0.4




                                          ●



                                                                                                                               ●
                                  ●                                            ●       ●                               ●
Proportion of Buys Days




                                                  ●
                                                          ●                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                  ●                                            ●
                          0.2




                                                                                                       ●                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●




                                                                                   ●
                                                                                           ●                       ●
                                                                                                   ●       ●
                                                                                                                                   ●                             ●
                                                                                                                           ●                   ●
                          0




                                                                                                                                                         ●
                          0.6




                                          3 Existing Positions                         4 Existing Positions                    5+ Existing Positions
                          0.4




                                                                                                                               ●
                                          ●                                            ●               ●
                          0.2




                                                                  ●
                                                  ●                                                                                        ●         ●
                                                                                               ●
                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●


                                                                                                               ●




                                                      ●
                                      ●       ●               ●                            ●               ●                                                     ●
                          0




                                                                      ●            ●               ●               ●       ●       ●           ●         ●



                                  1       2       3       4       5+           1       2       3       4       5+      1       2           3       4         5+

                                                                          Number of Bought Stocks (N)                                  ●       NBD
                                                                                                                                       ●       NPD
Note: Plots illustrate the proportion of buy-days on which multiple-stock purchases as split across stocks
1/N (in red) and on which the end of day portfolio positions are split 1/N (in blue). Separate panels
for number of existing positions within the portfolio at the start of the day, with number of stocks
purchased on the day shown on the x-axis of each panel. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock buy-days
in the new accounts data. See Section 2 for details on the sample construction.




                                                                                       38
Figure 7: Distribution of Total Buy-Day Investment (in £) by Number of Stocks Bought
                         0.15




                                  (A)                                                    N=2
                         0.10
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                1000           2000                 4000                         10000                20000
                         0.15




                                  (B)                                                    N=3
                         0.10
Proportion of Buy−Days
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                        1500                 3000                 6000         9000           15000               30000
                         0.15




                                  (C)                                                    N=4
                         0.10
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                               2000                 4000                  8000        12000           20000               40000
                         0.15




                                  (D)                                                    N=5
                         0.10
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                                      2500                 5000                  10000                        25000               50000


                                                 Total Amount Invested on the Day (GBP)
Note: Panels illustrate the distribution of monies invested on the buy-day (in pounds) for multiple-stock
buy-days involving 2 – 5 stocks. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock buy-days. See Section 2 for details
on the sample construction.



                                                                              39
                  Table 1: 1/N Allocations on Multiple-Stock Buy-Days

                                  (a) Panel A: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.02))
                           N     1/N Buying (%)        LL    UL      Buy-days
                            2         29.7            29.1   30.3     177193
                            3         20.3            19.4   21.1      48896
                            4         18.6            17.6   19.7      17672
                            5         17.5            16.0   19.0       7925
                           6+         15.2            13.1   17.3      9899
                           All        26.3            25.6   26.9     261585

                                 (b) Panel B: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.05))
                          N      1/N Buying (%)        LL    UL     Buy-days
                           2          36.5            36.0   37.1    177193
                           3          23.3            22.4   24.2     48896
                           4          20.9            19.7   22.1     17672
                           5          20.1            18.6   21.7      7925
                          6+          18.0            15.3   20.6     9899
                          All         31.8            31.1   32.5    261585

                                  (c) Panel C: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.05))
                           N     1/N Buying (%)        LL    UL      Buy-days
                            2         45.6            45.1   46.2     177193
                            3         27.8            26.8   28.7      48896
                            4         23.9            22.6   25.2      17672
                            5         22.4            20.7   24.0       7925
                           6+         20.0            17.2   22.8      9899
                           All        39.1            38.4   39.9     261585

Note: Table shows summary data for multiple-stock buy-days. Each row reports the percentage of
buy-days involving N stocks in which the proportion invested in each stock falls within the 1/N range,
for differing ranges. See Section 3 for details. Lower limit and upper limit values of 95% confidence
intervals from bootstrap mean estimates are reported in LL and UL columns. Sample is restricted to
multiple-stock buy-days. See Section 2 for details on the sample construction.




                                                 40
  Table 2: Probit Regression Marginal Effects: 1/N Buying on Two-Stock Buy-Days

                                           Model 1             Model 2                 Model 3
  (intercept)                               -0.085              -0.076                   0.061
                                        [-0.311,0.119]      [-0.289,0.129]         [-0.159,0.262]
  Decade of Birth 1930s                     -0.071              -0.062                  -0.079
                                        [-0.280,0.168]      [-0.278,0.145]         [-0.291,0.153]
  Decade of Birth 1940s                     -0.120              -0.095                  -0.102
                                        [-0.318,0.112]      [-0.289,0.112]         [-0.305,0.110]
  Decade of Birth 1950s                     -0.088              -0.062                  -0.073
                                        [-0.291,0.140]      [-0.260,0.145]         [-0.273,0.132]
  Decade of Birth 1960s                     -0.088              -0.051                  -0.062
                                        [-0.288,0.140]      [-0.251,0.153]         [-0.251,0.147]
  Decade of Birth 1970s                     -0.086              -0.061                  -0.065
                                        [-0.288,0.139]      [-0.264,0.150]         [-0.255,0.137]
  Decade of Birth 1980s                     -0.092              -0.067                  -0.070
                                        [-0.293,0.133]      [-0.263,0.133]         [-0.265,0.143]
  Decade of Birth 1990s                     -0.077              -0.072                  -0.078
                                        [-0.280,0.151]      [-0.280,0.136]         [-0.276,0.128]
  Decade of Birth 2000s                     -0.128              -0.003                  -0.024
                                        [-0.349,0.148]      [-0.263,0.231]         [-0.257,0.206]
  Male                                      -0.009               0.004                   0.005
                                        [-0.040,0.026]      [-0.029,0.035]         [-0.027,0.038]
  Account Tenure 2nd Quartile                                    0.000                   0.010
                                                            [-0.029,0.031]         [-0.026,0.042]
  Account Tenure 3rd Quartile                                   -0.022                  -0.010
                                                            [-0.052,0.009]         [-0.041,0.025]
  Account Tenure 4th Quartile                                   -0.031                  -0.017
                                                            [-0.064,0.004]         [-0.052,0.020]
  Ave Num of Trades Per Month                                   -0.006       **         -0.004      **
                                                           [-0.009,-0.004]        [-0.008,-0.003]
  Portfolio Value (x 10000)                                                             -0.001
                                                                                   [-0.003,0.000]
  Num of Stocks in the Portfolio                                                         0.004       *
                                                                                    [0.000,0.006]
  Inv Amount on the Day (x 10000)                                                        0.002
                                                                                   [-0.003,0.008]
  N (Num of Bought Stocks)                                                              -0.034      ***
                                                                                  [-0.047,-0.023]
  Range in Past 60-Days Returns                                                         -0.005
                                                                                   [-0.024,0.001]
  Range in Next 60-Days Returns                                                         -0.083      **
                                                                                  [-0.138,-0.035]
  Existing Position Dummy                                                               -0.054      ***
                                                                                  [-0.084,-0.024]
  Same-Day Sale Dummy                                                                   -0.084      ***
                                                                                  [-0.116,-0.053]
  Log-Likelihood                          -14439.59          -13838.38                -13560.05
Note: Table reports marginal effects from probit regression model estimates. Dependent variable is
a 1/0 dummy indicating whether the buy-day investment falls within the 1/N range, defined as
£P/N × (1 ± 0.02). Covariates are account characteristics. Day-of-week and Month-of-year dummies
included in the model but not shown. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock buy-days in the new accounts
data. See Section 2 for details on the sample construction. * denotes statistical significance at the 5%
level, ** at the 1% level and *** at the 0.1% level. The standard errors were corrected for clustering by
accounts and buy-days.



                                                   41
            Table 3: Starting and Ending Portfolio Positions on Multiple-Stock Buy-Days

   Panel (A) (£P/N × (1 ± 0.02))
       1/N Existing Positions        1/N Buying    1/N Resulting Positions    Proportion of Buy-Days      LL    UL
                Yes                     Yes                 Yes                         0.5               0.4    0.7
                Yes                     Yes                 No                          0.6               0.4    0.7
                Yes                      No                 Yes                         0.0               0.0    0.0
                Yes                      No                 No                          1.1               0.9    1.3
                No                      Yes                 Yes                         0.1              0.0    0.1
                No                      Yes                 No                         28.5              27.3   29.8
                No                       No                 Yes                         0.1              0.0    0.1
                No                       No                 No                         69.2              67.8   70.4


   Panel (B) (£P/N × (1 ± 0.05))
       1/N Existing Positions        1/N Buying    1/N Resulting Positions    Proportion of Buy-Days      LL    UL
                Yes                     Yes                 Yes                         1.5               1.3    1.7
                Yes                     Yes                 No                          1.3               1.1    1.5
                Yes                      No                 Yes                         0.1               0.0    0.1
                Yes                      No                 No                          1.9               1.6    2.1
                No                      Yes                 Yes                         0.1              0.1    0.2
                No                      Yes                 No                         32.7              31.5   34.0
                No                       No                 Yes                         0.2              0.1    0.3
                No                       No                 No                         62.2              60.9   63.5


   Panel (C) (£P/N × (1 ± 0.1))
       1/N Existing Positions        1/N Buying    1/N Resulting Positions    Proportion of Buy-Days      LL    UL
                Yes                     Yes                 Yes                         2.7               2.4    3.1
                Yes                     Yes                 No                          2.2               2.0    2.5
                Yes                      No                 Yes                         0.2               0.1    0.2
                Yes                      No                 No                          2.7               2.4    3.0
                No                      Yes                 Yes                         0.2              0.2    0.3
                No                      Yes                 No                         37.2              36.0   38.3
                No                       No                 Yes                         0.3              0.2    0.4
                No                       No                 No                         54.5              53.3   55.8
Note: Table shows summary data for multiple-stock buy days. Each row reports the percentage of buy-days by combi-
nations of existing positions at the beginning of the day, buying split, and resulting positions in the 1/N range, for
differing ranges. Lower limit and upper limit values of 95% confidence intervals from bootstrap mean estimate reported
in LL and UL columns. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock buy-days in the new accounts data. See Section 2 for
details on the sample construction.




                                                        42
Table 4: Naïve Portfolio Diversification, Re-
         stricted Sample Buy-Days


 N     1/N Portfolios (%)   LL    UL    Buy-days
 2           3.5            2.9   4.3     2622
 3           1.4            1.0   1.9     2549
 4           0.8            0.3   1.3     1052
 5           1.1            0.2   2.3      467
 6+          0.0            0.0   0.0      482
 All         2.0            1.6   2.3     7172
Note: Table shows summary data for multiple-
stock buy days. Each row reports the percentage of
buy-days resulting positions in the 1/N range, for
different number of stocks in the portfolio. Lower
limit and upper limit values of 95% confidence
intervals from bootstrap mean estimate reported
in LL and UL columns. Sample is restricted to
multiple-stock buy-days in the new accounts data.
See Section 2 for details on the sample construc-
tion.




                       43
                                Table 5: Naïve Portfolio Diversification By N Stocks Purchased and N Positions
                                                                  All Buy-Days
                              Single Stock Purchase    2 Stock Purchase     3 Stock Purchase    4 Stock Purchase    5 Sstock Purchase     6+ Sstock Purchase
     0 Existing Position               NA                     36.5                 24.9                22.4                 25.0                  14.1
                                                          [34.8,38.3]          [22.0,27.5]         [19.0,25.8]          [19.5,30.6]           [10.6,17.8]
     1 Existing Position                8.6                    7.3                  4.7                 4.8                 10.0                   4.5
                                    [ 8.1, 9.2]            [ 6.0, 8.5]          [ 2.6, 7.1]         [ 1.6, 8.7]         [ 2.3,18.9]           [ 0.0,10.5]
     2 Existing Positions               2.3                    3.9                  2.9                 0.0                  2.8                   4.8
                                    [ 2.0, 2.5]            [ 3.0, 5.0]          [ 1.2, 4.5]         [ 0.0, 0.0]          [ 0.0, 9.7]          [ 0.0,11.9]
     3 Existing Positions               0.6                    0.9                  2.2                 1.2                  0.0                   0.0
44




                                    [ 0.5, 0.7]            [ 0.5, 1.4]          [ 0.8, 4.0]         [ 0.0, 3.8]          [ 0.0, 0.0]           [ 0.0, 0.0]
     4 Existing Positions               0.3                    0.5                  0.3                 1.1                  0.0                   0.0
                                    [ 0.2, 0.4]            [ 0.2, 0.9]          [ 0.0, 0.9]         [ 0.0, 3.6]          [ 0.0, 0.0]           [ 0.0, 0.0]
     5 Existing Positions               0.1                    0.2                  0.0                 0.0                  8.1                   0.0
                                    [ 0.0, 0.1]            [ 0.0, 0.4]          [ 0.0, 0.0]         [ 0.0, 0.0]         [ 0.0,18.8]            [ 0.0, 0.0]
     6+ Existing Positions              0.0                    0.0                  0.0                 0.0                  0.0                   0.3
                                    [ 0.0, 0.0]            [ 0.0, 0.0]          [ 0.0, 0.0]         [ 0.0, 0.0]          [ 0.0, 0.0]           [ 0.0, 0.8]
     Note: Table shows data for all buy-days. Each cell reports the percentage of buy-days which end in 1/N allocations by number of existing positions at the
     start of the buy-day and number stocks purchased on the day. Cell [0,1] empty as it takes a value of 100% by construction. Values in square brackets
     report lower limit and upper limit values of 95% confidence intervals from bootstrap mean estimate. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock buy-days in the
     new accounts data. See Section 2 for details on the sample construction. The numbers in the first row slightly differ from those in Table 6 due to intraday
     price movement.
                    Table 6: Naïve Buying Diversification By N Stocks Purchased and N Positions
                                                    All Buy-Days
                              2 Stock Purchase    3 Stock Purchase     4 Stock Purchase    5 Sstock Purchase     6+ Sstock Purchase
     0 Existing Position            39.5                28.4                  26.4                29.9                  19.4
                                 [37.7,41.4]         [25.7,31.3]          [22.8,30.5]          [24.3,35.5]           [15.5,23.6]
     1 Existing Position            31.5                27.0                  19.0                30.0                  19.7
                                 [29.4,33.7]         [22.6,31.7]          [12.5,26.6]          [17.5,42.2]           [10.3,29.4]
     2 Existing Positions           32.9                19.8                  25.6                19.4                  14.3
                                 [30.6,35.0]         [15.9,24.1]          [16.5,34.9]          [ 7.1,34.1]           [ 4.8,25.6]
     3 Existing Positions           29.2                19.4                  16.7                20.6                  21.1
45




                                 [26.9,31.6]         [15.4,23.5]           [ 9.0,24.4]         [ 8.3,35.0]           [ 8.3,34.1]
     4 Existing Positions           29.5                17.5                  29.3                12.2                   7.9
                                 [26.7,32.4]         [13.6,21.8]          [20.8,38.9]          [ 4.2,23.4]           [ 0.0,17.6]
     5 Existing Positions           30.6                17.8                  20.9                35.1                  17.2
                                 [27.6,33.8]         [13.4,22.5]          [13.3,29.5]          [16.7,53.1]           [ 5.3,33.3]
     6+ Existing Positions          30.4                18.9                  18.0                15.2                  13.9
                                 [28.2,32.6]         [16.1,21.6]          [14.4,21.7]          [11.4,19.4]           [ 9.2,19.1]
     Note: Table shows data for all buy-days. Each cell reports the percentage of buy-days on which the investor splits the buy-day
     investment 1/N , by number of existing positions at the start of the buy-day and number stocks purchased on the day. Values in
     square brackets report lower limit and upper limit values of 95% confidence intervals from bootstrap mean estimate.Sample is
     restricted to multiple-stock buy-days in the new accounts data. The numbers in the first row slightly differ from those in Table 5
     due to intraday price movement.
           Table 7: Sharpe Ratio Simulations for NPD vs. NBD

Panel A: Low Idiosyncratic Risk
Strategy          Ni = 5                     Ni = 10                  Ni = 20
            T = 120   T = 360           T = 120 T = 360          T = 120 T = 360
  NPD         0.127       0.128          0.136       0.139         0.134      0.140
  NBD         0.125       0.124          0.135       0.135         0.133      0.136
             (0.661)     (0.111)        (0.736)     (0.161)       (0.791)    (0.151)




Panel B: High Idiosyncratic Risk
Strategy          Ni = 5                     Ni = 10                   Ni = 20
            T = 120   T = 360           T = 120 T = 360           T = 120 T = 360
  NPD         0.091       0.091           0.109      0.107         0.126       0.119
  NBD         0.081       0.079           0.097      0.084         0.116       0.092
             (0.015)     (0.000)         (0.004)    (0.000)       (0.014)     (0.000)

Note: Table shows Sharpe ratios from simulations based upon a one-factor model.
The values in parentheses is the p-value for the difference in the Sharpe ratios between
NPD and NBD strategies, from a t-test.




                                         46
                                        ONLINE APPENDIX


     Appendix

     A. Simulation Model

     In this appendix we describe the simulation model presented in Section 6.
            Our interest is in estimating the portfolio performance (here measured by the Sharpe
     ratio) of NBD vs. NPD. We simulate T -month long monthly portfolio values according to
     the single-factor model used in DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009). A portfolio held by
     an investor i consists of Ni risk assets including a single factor. Annualized excess returns
     of the factor, Rb,t , are drawn from the normal distribution Rb,t ∼ N (µb , σb2 ). Annualized
     excess returns of the remaining Ni − 1 risk assets, Ra,t , follow Ra,t = BRb,t + t , where B is
     the factor loadings and t is a noise drawn from the normal distribution t ∼ N (0, Σt ). Σt
     is assumed to be a diagonal matrix where an average of the squared root of the diagonal
     elements represents the average idiosyncratic risk across Ni − 1 assets. Annualized risk
     free returns are drawn from N (µf , σf2 ), where µf = 0.02 and σf = 0.02.
            In the simulation, an investor rebalances the portfolio and invests additional money
     at monthly frequency. We assume that the investment amount is held constant across
     months. At each time step (i.e., each month), NPD investors sell and buy risk assets to
     equalize their market values while NBD investors allocate the new money equally to Ni
     assets without selling any. For simplicity, we assume that a unit of assets is completely
     divisible and assume zero trading fees.26
            From the T -month long price paths for Ni risk assets, we calculate T − 1 monthly
     portfolio returns and a Sharpe ratio for both on NPD and NBD strategies. A simulation
     is repeated by 1,000 times, resulting in 1,000 Sharpe ratios for each of NPD and NBD
     strategies.27 We then conduct a t-test to examine the statistical significance of differences
26
   The number of trades per month tends to be larger for NPD investors than for NBD investors. Given this,
   commissions might tend to be larger for NPD investors.
27
   In DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009), a portfolio return at t is calculated, using investment weights
   for Ni assets which are estimated using asset returns in previous M months. (I.e., investors rebalance a
   portfolio each month using weights estimated in previous M -month window.) They repeat the calculation
   of a portfolio return from t = M + 1 to t = T , resulting in T − M monthly portfolio returns (rolling-sample


                                                       47
in Sharpe ratios between the two strategies.
       In order to examine the sensitivity of simulation results to the correlation in returns
across assets, we conduct simulations in two settings–low and high idiosyncratic risk
simulations. The parameter values used in the low idiosyncratic risk simulation are the
same as those in DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009): µb = 0.08 and σb = 0.16, B are
evenly spread from 0.5 to 1.5, and the squared root of the diagonal elements of Σt (i.e.,
idiosyncratic volatilities) are drawn from the uniform distribution ranging between 0.10 and
0.30. In the high idiosyncratic risk simulation, the support of the uniform distribution for
Σt are shifted to the range between 0.40 and 0.60 while other parameter values unchanged
from the low idiosyncratic risk simulation. We conduct simulations for each combination
of Ni = {5, 10, 20} and T = {120, 360}.




method). A Sharpe ratio is calculated based on those T − M portfolio returns (T = 24, 000). In our
simulation, we do not use the rolling-sample method because we focus on how investors allocate new
money over time in addition to an initial investment.


                                               48
                           Figure A1: Number of Stocks Bought on Multiple-Stock Buy-Days


                         300000
                         250000
                         200000
    Number of Buy−Days
                         150000
                         100000
                         50000
                         0




                                  All (2+)       2       3        4      5        6+

                                             Number of Stocks Bought on the Day

Note: Sample comprises all multiple-stock buy-days. Right-most column includes all multiple-stock
buy-days on which 6 or more stocks were purchased.




                                                             49
                    Figure A2: Number of Stocks Bought and Market Volatility
                                                                 (A) Market Volatility and Mean Stocks Purchased




                                                        1.6
                                                                                                                                                                      ●
               Average Number of Buy Trades Per Day

                                                                                                                                                      ●




                                                                                                                                                                                      ●



                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                            ●       ●                        ●●
                                                        1.4




                                                                                            ●                                                                                          ●                 ●
                                                                                                    ●     ●            ●
                                                                                           ●                                                                    ●
                                                                   ●                       ●                                    ●●
                                                                                                              ●                                                ●                   ●                     ●
                                                                                      ● ●          ●                     ●●                                                   ●            ●
                                                                                            ●                                    ●      ●                                             ●
                                                                       ●                      ●                                       ●      ●            ●                                      ●   ●
                                                                       ● ●                          ●●
                                                                                                                 ●                       ● ●                 ●●●                 ●
                                                                                   ●●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                      ●●●   ●●
                                                                                              ●●● ●          ●●           ●     ● ●●●
                                                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                         ● ●  ●● ● ●● ●                  ● ●                                                   ●
                                                                              ●●●●        ●●●● ●   ● ●●●     ●                   ●●        ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                          ●●●                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                         ●                 ●   ●●● ●●●●● ●●
                                                                                                         ●●  ●●  ●              ●                               ●         ●
                                                                                  ● ● ●●● ●●●    ●●   ●   ●●●●
                                                                                                             ●●       ●● ●● ● ●     ●   ●  ●●●
                                                                                                                                           ●            ●      ●●            ●● ●        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                        ●              ●●    ●●●●●  ●   ●      ● ●
                                                                                                                 ● ● ●                ● ●          ●                ●                                         ●
                                                                                ● ● ● ● ●●● ●● ●       ●●
                                                                                                        ● ●   ●●●●●       ● ●●        ●       ● ● ●●     ●                                                   ● ●
                                                                              ●● ● ● ●●●●●
                                                                              ●                ●● ●        ●●●●●
                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                 ●●● ●
                                                                                                                 ●●       ●●
                                                                                                                               ●      ● ● ● ●●   ●●     ●●      ●       ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                   ● ●       ●                  ●●
                                                                        ●     ●        ●● ● ●●      ●● ●●●       ●●                   ●● ●                ●           ●
                                                                     ● ●                ● ●●●●●   ●●    ●●● ● ●   ●●●● ●      ● ●●  ●●    ● ●●●● ●● ● ● ● ● ●●              ●●
                                                                            ●● ● ● ●   ●
                                                                                       ●      ●●●●●● ●  ●
                                                                                                         ●●●●● ●●●●●
                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●                ●●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ● ●                      ●   ● ●             ● ●
                                                                      ●          ●
                                                                                 ● ●   ●●●●
                                                                                          ●●●●●          ●           ●● ●● ●
                                                                                                                      ●        ●
                                                                                                                               ● ●● ●
                                                                                                                                ●●    ●●●        ●        ●●
                                                                                                                                                           ●                      ●            ●
                                                                     ●●●  ●       ●●
                                                                                 ●●●
                                                                                 ●  ● ●●
                                                                                    ●     ●
                                                                                          ●●  ●
                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                  ●●●●●● ●●●
                                                                                                         ● ●●    ●●
                                                                                                                 ● ●●●●    ●●● ●     ●● ● ●● ●●●● ●
                                                                                                                                                          ●● ● ● ●        ● ●● ●●                             ● ●
                                                                     ● ● ●● ● ●●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●● ●
                                                                                    ●   ●●●
                                                                                         ●●●●
                                                                                            ●● ●●  ●
                                                                                                   ●●●  ●●   ● ●●●
                                                                                                                 ●●●●●●●●
                                                                                                                    ●   ●●●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                           ●● ●●    ●  ●   ● ●●   ●●    ●              ●●     ●●● ● ●                           ●
                                                                     ● ●●   ● ● ●●●● ● ●   ●         ●      ●
                                                                                                            ●●●●
                                                                                                               ●●●●●  ● ●
                                                                     ● ●●         ●
                                                                                  ● ●●  ●●
                                                                                            ● ●
                                                                                          ● ●●●
                                                                                         ●●     ●●●●●●● ●●●
                                                                                                          ●●●
                                                                                                            ●●  ●
                                                                                                                ●  ●
                                                                                                                    ●●●●● ●●●      ●●
                                                                                                                                    ● ●
                                                                                                                                       ● ●      ●        ●●         ●     ●●            ●
                                                                          ●   ●  ●             ●  ●●●
                                                                                                    ● ●      ●      ●  ●
                                                                                                                       ●         ●●    ●       ●  ● ●                                    ●
                                                                    ● ●
                                                                    ●●●
                                                                      ●
                                                                        ● ●● ●● ●●●●
                                                                                    ●     ●
                                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                              ● ●●●
                                                                                                  ●●● ●●
                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                        ● ●
                                                                                                          ●●●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                            ●●●●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                                                                                    ●● ●● ●●  ●●    ●
                                                                                                                                      ●●●●        ●●● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●    ●
                                                                                    ● ●  ●●   ● ●
                                                                                                ●    ●   ●  ●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ● ● ●●●  ● ●                       ●● ●      ● ●  ●
                                                                   ● ● ●     ●● ●  ●
                                                                                   ●●    ●●●●●● ●     ●●● ●  ●            ●
                                                                                                                    ● ●●● ● ●  ● ● ●●● ● ●●          ●●                          ●
                                                                      ● ●         ● ● ●●●  ●●●●
                                                                                             ● ●● ● ●
                                                                                                     ● ●●●●●● ●●● ●
                                                                                                                ● ●●●● ●     ● ●● ●                 ●     ●
                                                                                                                                                        ●● ● ●              ●      ●
                                                                      ● ● ● ●●●    ●●● ●●
                                                                                     ●               ● ● ●  ●●
                                                                                                             ●● ●  ●●●● ●               ●      ● ●●                       ●
                                                                   ● ●●
                                                                     ●       ●       ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●        ●● ●    ●● ● ●●● ● ●●        ● ●●       ●● ●            ●
                                                                     ●●     ●● ●                ● ●●  ●
                                                                                                     ●●●● ●●       ● ●●      ●
                                                                   ●● ● ●                       ●        ● ●●
                                                                                                            ● ● ● ●     ● ●
                                                                                                                       ●●         ● ●  ●
                                                                                                                                              ● ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                        1.2




                                                                                  ●             ● ●        ● ● ●●●                                          ●
                                                                    ● ●       ●●                ●  ●       ●      ●●●
                                                                                                                    ●● ●     ●    ●  ●
                                                                          ●                                                                  ●● ● ●
                                                                                          ●              ●     ●●          ●●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                      ● ●●● ●    ●            ●
                                                                                                                                  ● ●                ● ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●   ●
                                                                                                        ● ● ●           ●          ●●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                              ●             ●
                                                                                                                                ●


                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                        1




                                                                   5                    10                        15                       20                       25                        30                     35
                                                              FTSE 100 Volatility (20−days Rolling; Annualized (%))

                                                                  (B) Mean Stocks Purchased by Calendar Days
                                                      1.6
               Average/Median Number of Trades
                                                      1.4
                                                      1.2
                                                      1.0




                                                                       Average
                                                      0.8




                                                                       Median
                                                                             2013                                   2014                                     2015                                        2016
                                                                                                                                     Date


Note: Panel A shows the correlation between the average number of buy trades per day (among accounts
making at least one buy trade on the day) and the volatility of the FTSE 100. The dashed red line is a
fitted smoothing spline. Panel B shows the average and median number of buy trades per day (among
accounts making at least one buy trade on the day) by calendar date of the sample period. The blue
lines represents the median value and the red line represents the average value. Sample comprises all
buy-days (including both single-stock and multiple-stock buy-days).


                                                                                                                                50
Figure A3: Proportion of Buy-Days with 1/N Buying by Number of Stocks Purchased
                                                0.30
    Proprotion of Buy−days with 1/N Investing
                                                0.25
                                                0.20
                                                0.15
                                                0.10
                                                0.05
                                                0.00




                                                       2     3             4             5      6+
                                                           N (The Number of Purchased Stocks)

Note: Bar heights illustrate the proportion of all N -stock buy-days on which buy-day investments are
split equally (in pound values) across the N stocks purchased. Equal is defined in the range 49% to 51%.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy two or more stocks. 95% confidence intervals
illustrated in error bars.




                                                                         51
Figure A4: 1/N Allocation of Money Amount vs. 1/N Allocation of Number of Shares
                                                                                   (A) Allocation of Number of Shares

                                     0.3
                                     0.2
                                     0.1
                                     0           D1 Price Ratio                                       D2 Price Ratio                                 D3 Price Ratio




                                           0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6       0.8     1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                     0.3




                                                 D4 Price Ratio                                       D5 Price Ratio                                 D6 Price Ratio
                                     0.2
            Proportion of Buy−Days
                                     0.1
                                     0




                                           0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6       0.8     1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                     0.3




                                                 D7 Price Ratio                                       D8 Price Ratio                                 D9 Price Ratio
                                     0.2
                                     0.1
                                     0




                                           0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6       0.8     1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                     0.3




                                                 D10 Price Ratio
                                     0.2
                                     0.1
                                     0




                                           0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6       0.8     1.0

                                                                              Proportion of Shares Invested in Stock with the Higher Unit Price


                                                                                        (B) Allocation of Money Amount
                                     0.3




                                                 D1 Price Ratio                                       D2 Price Ratio                                 D3 Price Ratio
                                     0.2
                                     0.1
                                     0




                                           0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6       0.8     1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                     0.3




                                                 D4 Price Ratio                                       D5 Price Ratio                                 D6 Price Ratio
                                     0.2
            Proportion of Buy−Days
                                     0.1
                                     0




                                           0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6       0.8     1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                     0.3




                                                 D7 Price Ratio                                       D8 Price Ratio                                 D9 Price Ratio
                                     0.2
                                     0.1
                                     0




                                           0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6       0.8     1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                     0.3




                                                 D10 Price Ratio
                                     0.2
                                     0.1
                                     0




                                           0.0        0.2         0.4   0.6       0.8     1.0

                                                                               Proportion of GBP Invested in Stock with the Higher Unit Price


Note: Figure shows allocations of investments on two-stock buy days. Samples for sub-plots are divided
into deciles of the ratio of the unit price of shares, where Decile 1 is the lowest ratio (unit price of shares
are closest together) and Decile 10 is the highest ratio (unit price of shares are farthest apart). Panel A
shows a histogram of the proportion of the total number of shares purchased which is allocated to the
higher unit price stock. Panel B shows a histogram of the proportion of the total buy-day investment
(in pounds) which is allocated to the higher unit price stock.

                                                                                                                       52
     Figure A5: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Investment in Stock A by Gender

                                                Male                                    Female
                           0.2
                           0.15
  Proportion of Buy−Days
                           0.1
                           0.05
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0   0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0

                                                       Proportion Invested in Stock A

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                  53
                                 Figure A6: Distribution of Investor Decade of Birth


                         14000
                         10000
    Number of Accounts
                         6000
                         2000
                         0




                                 1920s 1930s 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s

                                                   Decade of Birth

Note: Figure shows a histogram (frequency) of two-stock buy-days by decade of birth of the investor.




                                                         54
Figure A7: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Investment in Stock A by Age of Investor
                                            Born in 1940's                           Born in 1950's                           Born in 1960's
                          0.2
                          0.1
 Proportion of Buy−Days
                          0




                                0.0   0.2     0.4   0.6      0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2     0.4   0.6      0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2     0.4   0.6      0.8   1.0


                                            Born in 1970's                           Born in 1980's                           Born in 1990's
                          0.2
                          0.1
                          0




                                0.0   0.2     0.4   0.6      0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2     0.4   0.6      0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2     0.4   0.6      0.8   1.0

                                                                     Proportion Invested in Stock A

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                                       55
Figure A8: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Investment in Stock A by Account Tenure

                                               1st Quartile                           2nd Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
  Proportion of Buy−Days
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0


                                               3rd Quartile                            4th Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0

                                              Proportion Invested in the Stock with a Higher Return

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                     56
Figure A9: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Investment in Stock A by Trading Fre-
           quency

                                              1st Quartile                               2nd Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
  Proportion of Buy−Days
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8   1.0   0.0    0.2       0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0


                                              3rd Quartile                               4th Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8   1.0   0.0    0.2       0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0

                                                            Proportion Invested in Stock A

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                       57
                                       Figure A10: Naïve Buying Diversification by Day and Month
                                                               Two-Stock Buy-Days

                                                                                           (A) Day of the Week
                                                                  0.4
                                       Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                                                               ●
                                                                  0.3




                                                                                           ●             ●                       ●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                  0.2




                                                                              Mon         Tue           Wed          Thu         Fri
                                                                                                Day of the Week


                                                                                           (B) Month of the Year
                           0.4
Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                  ●                                                                ●
                           0.3




                                                                                                              ●       ●     ●           ●           ●
                                                                  ●                                                                           ●
                                                                         ●                 ●
                                                                                     ●
                           0.2




                                 Jan                        Feb         Mar         Apr   May     Jun         Jul    Aug   Sep         Oct   Nov   Dec
                                                                                                 Month of the Year


Note: Figure shows proportion of all two-stock buy-days on which the buy-day investments are split
equally (in pounds) across the two stocks. Sample is restricted to two-stock buy-days. See Section 2 for
details on the sample construction. Equal is defined in the range 49% to 51%. 95% confidence intervals
illustrated in error bars.




                                                                                                       58
                                                               Figure A11: Distribution of Investment Day of Week


                         10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
    Number of Buy Days
                         0




                                                                Mon         Tue        Wed         Thu         Fri
                                                                                   Day of Week

Note: Figure shows a histogram (frequency) of two-stock buy-days by day of the week.




                                                                                      59
  Figure A12: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Monies Invested in Stock A by Day
                                            Monday                              Tuesday                             Wednesday
                         0.2
                         0.15
                         0.1
                         0.05
Proportion of Buy−Days
                         0




                                0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0


                                            Thursday                             Friday
                         0.2
                         0.15
                         0.1
                         0.05
                         0




                                0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0

                                                                Proportion Invested in Stock A

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                                60
                                      Figure A13: Distribution of Investment Month of Year


                         30000
                         20000
    Number of Buy Days
                         5000 10000
                         0




                                      Jan   Feb Mar   Apr May Jun   Jul   Aug Sep   Oct   Nov Dec

                                                           Month of Year

Note: Figure shows a histogram (frequency) of two-stock buy-days by month of the year.




                                                               61
Figure A14: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Monies Invested in Stock A by Month
                                           January                             February                             March
                         0.2
                         0.1
                         0




                               0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0


                                             April                               May                                 June
                         0.2
                         0.1
Proportion of Buy−Days
                         0




                               0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0


                                             July                               August                             September
                         0.2
                         0.1
                         0




                               0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0


                                           October                             November                            December
                         0.2
                         0.1
                         0




                               0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0

                                                               Proportion Invested in Stock A

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                               62
Figure A15: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Monies Invested in Stock A by Difference
            in Past 3 Month Stock Returns

                                               1st Quartile                           2nd Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
  Proportion of Buy−Days
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0


                                               3rd Quartile                            4th Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0

                                              Proportion Invested in the Stock with a Higher Return

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which is
invested in Stock A, where Stock A is the stock from the pair of stocks purchased which has the higher
gross returns over the previous 3 month period. Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy
exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                     63
Figure A16: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Monies Invested in Stock A by Difference
            in Next 3 Month Stock Returns

                                               1st Quartile                           2nd Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
  Proportion of Buy−Days
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0


                                               3rd Quartile                            4th Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0   0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0

                                              Proportion Invested in the Stock with a Higher Return

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is the stock from the pair of stocks purchased which has the
higher gross returns over the next 3 month period. Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors
buy exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                     64
Figure A17: Naïve Buying Diversification by Two-Stock Buy-Days With Same Industry
            Stock Purchases and Different Industry Stock Purchases
                                                                                                 (A) Proportion NBD


                                                                   0.4
               Proportion of 1/N Buying




                                                                                             ●
                                                                   0.3




                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                   0.2




                                                                                         Same                             Different
                                                                                             Industry of Bought Stocks

                                                                    (B) Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Investment in Stock A

                                                                                        Same                                  Different
                                                                    0.2
                                                                    0.15
                                          Proportion of Buy−Days
                                                                    0.1
                                                                    0.05
                                                                    0




                                                                           0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8    1.0   0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0

                                                                                                 Proportion Invested in Stock A


Note: Panel a shows proportion of all two-stock buy-days on which the buy-day investments are split
equally (in pounds) across the two stocks by whether the two stocks are in the same, or different,
industries. Panel B shows histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds)
which is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks bought
on the day. Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.


                                                                                                           65
Figure A18: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Investment in Stock A Among New
            Accounts     0.20
                         0.15
Proportion of Buy−Days
                         0.10
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                0.0   0.2       0.4            0.6             0.8             1.0
                                      Proportion Invested in Stock A
     Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
     is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
     Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks in the new accounts data. Bin
     width is 0.01.




                                                      66
Figure A19: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Monies Invested in Stock A by Portfolio
            Value, New Accounts Only

                                              1st Quartile                               2nd Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
  Proportion of Buy−Days
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8   1.0   0.0    0.2       0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0


                                              3rd Quartile                               4th Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8   1.0   0.0    0.2       0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0

                                                            Proportion Invested in Stock A

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks in the new accounts data. Bin
width is 0.01.




                                                                       67
Figure A20: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Monies Invested in Stock A by Investment
            Amount on the Day

                                              1st Quartile                               2nd Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
  Proportion of Buy−Days
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8   1.0   0.0    0.2       0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0


                                              3rd Quartile                               4th Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8   1.0   0.0    0.2       0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0

                                                            Proportion Invested in Stock A

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks. Bin width is 0.01.




                                                                       68
Figure A21: Proportion of Two-Stock Buy-Day Monies Invested in Stock A by Number
            of Stocks in Portfolio, New Accounts Only

                                              1st Quartile                               2nd Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
  Proportion of Buy−Days
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8   1.0   0.0    0.2       0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0


                                              3rd Quartile                               4th Quartile
                           0.2
                           0.15
                           0.1
                           0.05
                           0




                                  0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8   1.0   0.0    0.2       0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0

                                                            Proportion Invested in Stock A

Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total buy-day investment (in pounds) which
is invested in Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks purchased.
Sample comprises all buy-days on which investors buy exactly two stocks in the new accounts data. Bin
width is 0.01.




                                                                       69
Figure A22: Proportion of Sell-Day Monies From Sale of Random Stock A, All Two-Stock
            Sell-Days     0.05
                          0.04
Proportion of Sell−Days
                          0.03
                          0.02
                          0.01
                          0.00




                                 0.0       0.2       0.4          0.6             0.8              1.0
                                       Proportion of Selling Proceeds in Stock A
      Note: Figures show histograms of the proportion of the total sell-day dis-investment (in pounds) which
      is sold out of Stock A, where Stock A is a randomly chosen stock from the pair of stocks sold. Bin width
      is 0.01.




                                                           70
Figure A23: Distribution of Total Buy-Day Investment (in £) Divided by Number of
            Stocks Bought on the Buy-Day
                         0.15




                                  (A)                             N=1
                         0.10
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                1000    2000      3000    5000          10000   20000     40000
                         0.15




                                  (B)                             N=2
                         0.10
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                1000    2000      3000    5000          10000   20000     40000
Proportion of Buy−Days
                         0.15




                                  (C)                             N=3
                         0.10
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                1000    2000      3000    5000          10000   20000     40000
                         0.15




                                  (D)                             N=4
                         0.10
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                1000    2000      3000    5000          10000   20000     40000
                         0.15




                                  (E)                             N=5
                         0.10
                         0.05
                         0.00




                                1000    2000      3000    5000          10000   20000     40000


                                               Amount Invested to Each Stock (GBP)
Note: Panels illustrate the distribution (density) of funds invested on the buy-day (in pounds) divided
by the number of stocks purchased for all buy-days involving 1–5 stocks.

                                                                 71
   Figure A24: Total Buy-Day Investment Amounts By Number Of Stocks Bought
                                                                            (A) Median Buy-Day Allocation




                                                                            Median total amount invested on the day
                                                            12000
                   Total Amount Invested on the Day (GBP)
                                                            10000
                                                            8000
                                                            6000
                                                            4000
                                                            2000
                                                            0               Median amount invested to each stock




                                                                    1             2            3            4         5
                                                                            Number of Stocks Bought on the Day

                                                                        (B) Mean End of Day Portfolio Allocation
                                                            30000




                                                                            Mean total amount invested on the day
                   Total Amount Invested on the Day (GBP)




                                                                            Mean amount invested to each stock
                                                            25000
                                                            20000
                                                            15000
                                                            10000
                                                            5000
                                                            0




                                                                    1             2            3            4         5
                                                                            Number of Stocks Bought on the Day

Note: Panel A figure shows line plots of the median total amount invested on the day and the median
amount invested to each stock by number of stocks bought on the day. Panel B figure shows line plots
for the mean total amount invested on the day and the mean amount invested to each stock by number
of stocks bought on the day.



                                                                                             72
             Table A1: Summary Statistics for All Multiple-Stock Buy-Days

Panel (A)
                                    Mean         SD       25th percentile   Median     75th percentile
Account Tenure                      49.06       45.66          11.07          34.97         77.30
Investment Amount on the Day      16,480.36   50,154.36      2,995.49       7,005.23      15,040.20
Range of Past 60-days Returns       0.27        1.04            0.07          0.15          0.29
Range of Next 60-days Returns       0.22        0.25           0.07           0.15          0.28


Panel (B)
                        Male    Female    Unknown
Number of Accounts     37,421    9,805     5,640


Panel (C)
                                  Mean    SD     25th percentile   Median    75th percentile
Ave. Num. of Trades per Month     1.82    5.50        0.36          0.74          1.60
Note: Table reports summary statistics for sample of multiple-stock buy-days. Unit of data is
a single buy-day. Account tenure is number of months since account opennig. Range of Past
/ Next 60–day returns is the difference (in percent) in simple gross returns between stocks
purchased on the buy-day.




                                                 73
        Table A2: Summary Statistics for New Account Multiple-Stock Buy-Days

Panel (A)
Statistics                          Mean          SD       25th percentile    Median     75th percentile
Account Tenure                      11.16        11.02          1.77            7.77          17.80
Investment Amount on the Day      11,457.93    28,872.36      2,001.93        4,998.35      10,914.70
Portfolio Value                   60,567.92   187,747.84      6,577.45       17,328.90      46,971.01
Num. of Stocks in the Portfolio      8.29         9.10          3.00            5.00          10.00
Range of Past 60-days Returns       0.32         1.57           0.07            0.16          0.31
Range of Next 60-days Returns       0.24          0.28          0.08            0.16          0.30


Panel (B)
                       Male    Female    Unknown
Number of Accounts     7,483    1,474       25


Panel (C)
                                  Mean    SD     25th percentile   Median    75th percentile
Ave. Num. of Trades per Month     1.49    3.82        0.32          0.66          1.43
Note: Table reports summary statistics for sample of multiple-stock buy-days among the new
accounts sample only. Unit of data is a single buy-day. Account tenure is number of months
since account opening. Range of Past / Next 60–day returns is the difference (in percent) in
simple gross returns between stocks purchased on the buy-day.




                                                   74
                 Table A3: 1/N Allocations on ETF-and-Stock Buy-Days

                                  (a) Panel A: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.02))
                            N     1/N Buying (%)        LL    UL     Buy-days
                             2         23.0            21.4   24.6     3116
                             3         13.2            11.2   15.3     1459
                             4         10.9             8.5   13.6      663
                             5         14.1            10.5   17.9      355
                            6+          6.9             4.5    9.8      562
                            All        17.4            16.2   18.6     6155

                                  (b) Panel B: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.05))
                            N     1/N Buying (%)        LL    UL     Buy-days
                             2         29.1            27.4   30.9     3116
                             3         14.9            12.8   17.2     1459
                             4         13.0            10.4   15.7      663   ‘
                             5         15.2            11.6   19.1      355
                            6+          8.7             5.7   12.2      562
                            All        21.3            20.0   22.7     6155

                                  (c) Panel C: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.1))
                            N     1/N Buying (%)        LL    UL     Buy-days
                             2         36.3            34.4   38.3     3116
                             3         18.3            16.1   20.6     1459
                             4         14.8            12.0   17.7      663
                             5         17.2            13.4   21.4      355
                            6+         10.1             6.5   14.1      562
                            All        26.2            24.8   27.7     6155

Note: Table shows summary data for buy-days on which the investor bought at least one ETF together
with at least one common stock. Each row reports the percentage of buy-days involving N securities
in which the proportion invested in each security falls within the 1/N range, for differing ranges. See
Section 3 for details. Lower limit and upper limit values of 95% confidence intervals from bootstrap
mean estimates are reported in LL and UL columns. Sample is restricted to ETF-and-Stock buy-days.
See Section 2 for details on the sample construction.




                                                  75
          Table A4: 1/N Allocations on FTSE-100 ETF-and-Stock Buy-Days

                                  (a) Panel A: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.02))
                            N     1/N Buying (%)       LL    UL     Buy-days
                             2         21.7           18.4   25.5      635
                             3         12.2            8.5   16.4      319
                             4          8.4            4.5   12.8      154
                             5         10.8            3.9   19.0       65
                            6+          4.7            1.0    9.3      107
                            All        15.8           13.6   18.2     1280

                                  (b) Panel B: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.05))
                            N     1/N Buying (%)       LL    UL     Buy-days
                             2         26.8           23.1   30.9      635
                             3         12.5            8.9   16.9      319
                             4         10.4            5.2   15.4      154
                             5         12.3            5.0   21.9       65
                            6+          4.7            0.9    9.5      107
                            All        18.7           16.2   21.3     1280

                                  (c) Panel C: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.10))
                            N     1/N Buying (%)       LL    UL     Buy-days
                             2         33.2           29.5   37.5      635
                             3         15.0           11.1   19.8      319
                             4         11.7            6.8   17.4      154
                             5         16.9            8.5   27.4       65
                            6+          5.6            1.8   10.7      107
                            All        23.0           20.6   25.6     1280

Note: Table shows summary data for buy-days on which the investor bought at least one FTSE100
Index ETF together with at least one common stock. Each row reports the percentage of buy-days
involving N securities in which the proportion invested in each security falls within the 1/N range,
for differing ranges. See Section 3 for details. Lower limit and upper limit values of 95% confidence
intervals from bootstrap mean estimates are reported in LL and UL columns. Sample is restricted to
ETF-and-Stock buy-days. See Section 2 for details on the sample construction.




                                                 76
           Table A5: Naïve Buying Diversification by Investor Characteristics
                                                 (a) Gender
                           Gender                      Male           Female
                           % of Sample                 83.29           16.71
                           Proportion of 1/N            0.29            0.30
                           95% CI                   [0.28, 0.29]    [0.29, 0.32]

                                          (b) Decade of Birth
             Decade of Birth          30s              40s             50s             60s
             % of Sample              3.81            15.57           24.14           28.76
             Proportion 1/N           0.31             0.28            0.29            0.30
             95% CI               [0.28, 0.34]     [0.27, 0.30]    [0.27, 0.30]    [0.29, 0.31]

             Decade of Birth          70s              80s             90s            2000-
             % of Sample             16.32             8.63            2.17            0.14
             Proportion 1/N           0.29             0.32            0.30            0.32
             95% CI               [0.28, 0.30]     [0.31, 0.34]    [0.28, 0.32]    [0.26, 0.40]

                                            (c) Account Age
                                                    Quartiles
             Age in Months             Q1               Q2              Q3              Q4
             Quartile Mean            9.94            41.84           83.67           134.26
             Proportion 1/N           0.31             0.29            0.28            0.27
             95% CI               [0.30, 0.32]     [0.28, 0.30]    [0.27, 0.29]    [0.25, 0.28]

                                        (d) Trading Frequency
                                                     Quartiles
            Trades Per Month            Q1               Q2              Q3              Q4
            Quartile Mean              0.56             1.93            5.78           35.07
            Proportion 1/N             0.36             0.33            0.27            0.19
            95% CI                 [0.35, 0.36]     [0.32, 0.34]    [0.26, 0.29]    [0.17, 0.21]

Note: Table shows summary data the proportion of two-stock buy-days within the 1/N range. See
Section 3 for details. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock buy-days. See Section 2 for details on the
sample construction.




                                                    77
          Table A6: Naïve Buying Diversification by Trading Characteristics I
                                          (a) Day of the Week
      Day of the Week          Mon            Tue              Wed              Thu               Fri
      % of Sample             20.76          20.35            19.40            19.45            20.04
      Proportion 1/N           0.31           0.29             0.29             0.29             0.29
      95% CI               [0.31, 0.32]   [0.29, 0.30]     [0.29, 0.30]     [0.28, 0.30]     [0.29, 0.30]

                                           (b) Month of the Year
 Month                    Jan            Feb              Mar              Apr              May              Jun
 % of Sample              9.48           8.70             9.57            10.58             9.68             7.61
 Proportion 1/N           0.31           0.30             0.29             0.29             0.29             0.31
 95% CI               [0.30, 0.32]   [0.29, 0.31]     [0.28, 0.30]     [0.28, 0.29]     [0.28, 0.30]     [0.30, 0.32]

 Month                    Jul            Aug              Sep              Oct              Nov              Dec
 % of Sample              7.53           7.53             7.62             8.14             7.40             6.16
 Proportion 1/N           0.30           0.30             0.30             0.30             0.30             0.30
 95% CI               [0.29, 0.31]   [0.29, 0.31]     [0.29, 0.31]     [0.29, 0.31]     [0.29, 0.31]     [0.29, 0.31]

                              (c) Difference in Past 3 Month Gross Returns
                                                                       Quartile
 Difference in Past 3 Month Returns (%)                  Q1               Q2               Q3               Q4
 Quartile Mean                                          0.03             0.09             0.18             0.83
 Proportion 1/N                                         0.33             0.32             0.30             0.24
 95% CI                                             [0.32, 0.34]     [0.32, 0.33]     [0.29, 0.31]     [0.23, 0.24]

                              (d) Difference in Next 3 Month Gross Returns
                                                                       Quartile
 Difference in Next 3 Month Returns (%)                  Q1               Q2               Q3               Q4
 Quartile Mean                                          0.03             0.09             0.17             0.48
 Proportion 1/N                                         0.32             0.32             0.30             0.25
 95% CI                                             [0.32, 0.33]     [0.31, 0.32]     [0.29, 0.31]     [0.24, 0.26]

Note: Table shows summary data the proportion of two-stock buy-days within the 1/N range. See
Section 3 for details. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock buy-days. See Section 2 for details on the
sample construction.




                                                     78
          Table A7: Naïve Buying Diversification by Trading Characteristics II

                                        (a) Portfolio Value (£)
                                                       Quartile
            Portfolio Value (£)          Q1               Q2              Q3                Q4
            Quartile Mean             2,566.81        10,326.33        25,908.63       168,976.48
            Proportion 1/N              0.35             0.35             0.32             0.28
            95% CI                  [0.33, 0.36]     [0.33, 0.36]     [0.30, 0.34]     [0.25, 0.30]

                                       (b) Investment Value (£)
                                                        Quartile
          Investment Value (£)            Q1               Q2               Q3               Q4
          Quartile Mean                1,441.06         4,035.69         8,489.37        34,723.43
          Proportion 1/N                 0.35             0.27             0.33             0.24
          95% CI                     [0.34, 0.36]     [0.26, 0.28]     [0.32, 0.34]     [0.23, 0.25]

                                     (c) Holds Existing Position(s)
                         Existing Position Held          With           Without
                         % of Sample                     82.76            17.24
                         Proportion 1/N                   0.31             0.39
                         95% CI                       [0.29, 0.32]     [0.38, 0.41]

                                      (d) Number of Stocks Held
                                                         Quartile
         Number of Stocks Held             Q1               Q2               Q3               Q4
         Quartile Mean                    2.35             4.44             7.22            17.90
         Proportion 1/N                   0.33             0.31             0.32             0.32
         95% CI                       [0.32, 0.34]     [0.29, 0.33]     [0.30, 0.34]     [0.29, 0.35]

                                          (e) Same Day Sale
                            Sale on the Day           With           Without
                            % of Sample               20.22            79.78
                            Proportion 1/N             0.22             0.35
                            95% CI                 [0.19, 0.24]     [0.34, 0.36]

Note: Table shows summary data the proportion of two-stock buy-days within the 1/N range. See
Section 3 for details. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock buy-days. See Section 2 for details on the
sample construction.




                                                     79
         Table A8: Proportion of Sell-Days on Which Investor Splits Sales 1/N

                                  (a) Panel A: (£P/N × (1 ± 0.02))
                    N (Num. Sold Stocks)     1/N Selling (%)    LL    UL     Sell-Days
                             2                    9.6           9.2   10.0    106971
                             3                    1.6           1.4    1.9     38413
                             4                    0.8           0.6    1.0     15493
                             5                    0.5           0.3    0.7      7306
                            6+                    0.1           0.0   0.2      11578
                            All                   6.2           5.9   6.4     179761

Note: Table shows summary data for multiple-stock sell-days. Each row reports the percentage of
sell-days involving N stocks in which the proportion invested in each stock falls within the 1/N range,
for differing ranges. Lower limit and upper limit values of 95% confidence intervals from bootstrap mean
estimate reported in LL and UL columns.




                                                  80
Table A9: Proportion of Sell-Days on Which In-
          vestors Achieve 1/N Portfolios
 Existing     Sold    Resulting 1/N Resulting      Num.
 Positions   Stocks   Positions Portfolios (%)   Sell-Days
     2          1         2          2.91          2746
     2          2         2          4.90           102
     3          1         2          5.36          4947
     3          1         3          0.19          1563
     3          2         2          2.82           142
     3          2         3          0.00            75
     3          3         2         14.29            14
     3          3         3          0.00            14
     4          1         3          0.63          3644
     4          1         4          0.00          1106
     4          2         2          9.73           442
     4          2         3          0.00           105
     4          2         4          0.00            86
     4          3         2          5.56            18
     4          3         3          0.00            16
     4          3         4          0.00            10
     4          4         2          0.00             3
     4          4         3          0.00             5
     4          4         4          0.00            12
     5          1         4          0.11          2631
     5          1         5          0.00           855
     5          2         3          1.59           314
     5          2         4          0.00            68
     5          2         5          0.00            56
     5          3         2          4.44            90
     5          3         3          0.00            15
     5          3         4          0.00             5
     5          3         5          0.00            14
     5          4         2          0.00             4
     5          4         3          0.00             2
     5          4         4          0.00             1
     5          4         5          0.00             1
     5          5         2          0.00             2
   6+           1         5          0.05          2089
   6+           1        6+          0.02         12126
   6+           2         4          1.13           265
   6+           2         5          0.00           271
   6+           2        6+          0.00          1689
   6+           3         3          1.39            72
   6+           3         4          0.00            64
   6+           3         5          0.00            62
   6+           3        6+          0.00           493
   6+           4         2          6.67            30
   6+           4         3          0.00            29
   6+           4         4          0.00            31
   6+           4         5          3.70            27
   6+           4        6+          0.00           198
   6+           5         2          5.88            17
   6+           5         3          0.00            13
   6+           5         4          0.00            14
   6+           5         5          0.00            12
   6+           5        6+          0.00           110
   6+          6+         2          8.00            25
   6+          6+         3          6.67            15
   6+          6+         4          0.00            12
   6+          6+         5 81       0.00            18
   6+          6+        6+          0.00           117
Note: Table shows summary data for multiple-stock sell-days.
Table A10: Proportion of Sell-Days with
           NPD by Number of Stocks, Fea-
           sible NPD Sample


 N     1/N Portfolios (%)    LL    UL     Buy-days
 2           10.2            9.1   11.2     3004
 3            2.6            1.5   3.8      1006
 4            1.4            0.3   2.5       370
 5            1.1            0.0   2.8       183
 6+           1.1            0.0    2.8      176
 All          7.2            6.5    7.9     4739
Note: Table shows summary data for multiple-stock
sell-days. Each row reports the percentage of sell-
days resulting positions in the 1/N range, for differ-
ent number of stocks in the portfolio. Lower limit
and upper limit values of 95% confidence intervals
from bootstrap mean estimate reported in LL and
UL columns. Sample is restricted to multiple-stock
sell-days in the new accounts data. See Section 2 for
details on the sample construction.




                        82
Table A11: Proportion of Buy-and-Sell
           Days with NPD by Number of
           Stocks, Feasible NPD Sample


 N     1/N Portfolio (%)     LL    UL     Buy-days
 2          17.4            13.5   21.5     357
 3           3.0            1.6    4.5      498
 4           0.0            0.0    0.0      513
 5           0.5            0.0    1.3      400
 6+          0.0            0.0    0.1      3167
 All         1.6            1.2    2.1      4935
Note: Table shows summary data for days on which
investors make both multiple-stock buy trades and
sell trades. Each row reports the percentage of days
resulting positions in the 1/N range, for different
number of stocks in the portfolio. Lower limit and
upper limit values of 95% confidence intervals from
bootstrap mean estimate reported in LL and UL
columns. Sample is restricted to days on which in-
vestors make both multiple-stock buy trades and sell
trade in the new accounts data. See Section 2 for
details on the sample construction.




                       83
