NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DYNAMICS OF THE U.S. TRADE BALANCE AND REAL EXCHANGE RATE:
THE J CURVE AND TRADE COSTS?
George A. Alessandria
Horag Choi
Working Paper 25563
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25563

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

We thank Yan Bai, Mark Bils, Doireann Fitzgerald, Jonathan Heathcote, Patrick Kehoe, Virgiliu
Midrigan, Brent Neiman, Fabrizio Perri, Kim Ruhl, Joe Steinberg, Mike Waugh, and Kei-Mu Yi
for helpful discussions. We thank audiences at the Banque de France, Buffalo, ITAM, LSE,
Nottingham, Rochester, 2015 Warsaw SED, Toronto, Western Ontario, 2015 Fall NBER IFM,
and Chicago, Dallas, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, and St. Louis Feds for comments. The views
expressed herein are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by George A. Alessandria and Horag Choi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Dynamics of the U.S. Trade Balance and Real Exchange Rate: The J Curve and Trade
Costs?
George A. Alessandria and Horag Choi
NBER Working Paper No. 25563
February 2019
JEL No. E32,F4
ABSTRACT
We study how changes in trade barriers contributed to the dynamics of the US trade balance and
real exchange rate since 1980 - a period when trade tripled. Using two dynamic trade models, we
decompose fluctuations in the trade balance into terms related to trade integration (global and
unilateral) and business cycle asymmetries. We find three main results. First, the relatively large
US trade deficits as a share of GDP in the 2000s compared to the 1980s mostly reflect a rise in
the trade share of GDP. Second, controlling for trade, only about 60 percent of net trade flows are
due to business cycle asymmetries. And third, about two-thirds of the contribution of businesscycle asymmetries are a lagged response. For instance, the short-run Armington elasticity is about
0.2 while the long-run is closer to 1.12 with only 6.9 percent of the gap closed per quarter. We
show that a two-country IRBC model with a dynamic exporting decision, pricing-to-market, and
trade cost shocks can account for the dynamics of the US trade balance, real exchange rate, and
trade integration. The model clarifies how permanent and transitory changes in trade barriers
affect the trade balance and how to identify changes in trade barriers. We also show the effect of
temporary trade policies on the trade balance depends on whether they induce a trade war.

George A. Alessandria
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Harkness 204
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
george.alessandria@rochester.edu
Horag Choi
Department of Economics
Monash University
900 Dandenong Road
Caulfield East, VIC 3145
Australia
horag.choi@monash.edu

1. Introduction
What leads a country to run a trade de…cit or surplus? This question rose to prominence
with the large US trade de…cits in the mid to late 2000s and concurrent large surpluses by
China and some other Asian economies.1 The traditional view is that the trade balance re‡ects cross-country di¤erences in the business cycle from country-speci…c productivity, monetary, and …scal shocks, or longer-term structural asymmetries related to demographics, social
insurance, or wealth. A contrasting view, commonly advanced by politicians, is that cross
country di¤erences in trade barriers or trade policy are important drivers of the trade balance. This alternative view has much support in the US administration and is perceived to
be shaping US trade policy. The aim of this paper is to evaluate the relative importance of
these diverse views for the dynamics of the US’s trade balance. Contrary to the traditional
view, we …nd trade policy is an important driver of the US trade balance, although through
a di¤erent mechanism than those favored by politicians.
To set ideas, Figure 1 plots two salient features of the US economy’s connection with the
rest of the world (ROW): rising trade de…cits and rising trade. First, since 1980 the US trade
balance shows two cycles of increasing amplitude. In the 1980’s cycle, the US trade de…cit
as a share of GDP peaked in the third quarter of 1986 at 2.6 percent. Twenty years on, it
peaked again but now at 5.6 percent of GDP. In both cases, the maximum trade de…cit lagged
the peak real exchange rate by about 6 quarters and the peak real exchange rates change
was smaller in the 2000s , suggesting an increased sensitivity of the trade balance to the real
exchange rate. Second, the near doubling of the US trade de…cit occurred as trade, measured
as the sum of exports and imports, doubled from 12.9 percent of GDP to 26.1 percent,2 as
policy and non-policy trade barriers were reduced.
We emphasize two channels through which changes in trade barriers in‡uence the trade
balance. First, there is a scale e¤ect of trade on the trade balance. As a country becomes
more open, perhaps by entering into symmetric bilateral trade agreements that lower trade
barriers in both directions, the usual factors - country-speci…c shocks that generate asymmetries in the business cycle - can generate larger swings in the trade balance. Quite simply, a
1
2

This was also a key question at times in the 70’s and 80’s.
From 1980 to 2015 the real trade share of GDP rose from 11.5 percent to 29.0 percent.

1

closed economy cannot run a trade de…cit or surplus but an open economy can. This explanation would be consistent with real exchange rate ‡uctuations being associated with larger
‡uctuations in the trade balance over time.
Second, there is a sequencing e¤ect from a temporary unilateral change in a trade barrier.
That is, persistent di¤erences in the pace that countries open up to each other can generate
intertemporal trade. An example of this might be a US trade policy of lowering import
barriers in return for future reductions on barriers on US exports. Similarly, temporary
unilateral trade barriers such as anti-dumping duties, safeguards, quotas, or voluntary export
restraints, perhaps in response to surges from the …rst mechanism or the business cycle,
generate a temporary gap in inward and outward trade barriers. Indeed, Bown and Crowley
(2013) …nd that temporary trade barriers in the US and its main trading partners appear to
rise in recessions, following import surges, and following an appreciation. If this gap in trade
policy is expected to be persistent, but not permanent3 then when the cost of importing is
relatively low compared to the cost of exporting there is a strong motive for consumption to
be relatively high in the US relative to the ROW, leading to sustained trade de…cits.
To quantify the relative importance of changes in trade barriers versus other business
cycle asymmetries for the US trade balance requires identifying the changes in inward and
outward trade barriers. We follow the Gravity literature and use theory to identify these
changes. We measure trade costs in both partial and general equilibrium models that allow
for trade to respond gradually to aggregate shocks. Both models attribute about two-thirds of
the ‡uctuations in the US trade balance to changes in trade barriers and yield series for trade
barriers that appear consistent with the conventional narrative on the timing of US trade
policy. We start with a partial equilibrium model since this requires no assumptions about
the source of relative price ‡uctuations or the asset side of the economy, two important, but far
from settled, issues in international macroeconomics. Our partial equilibrium approach o¤ers
a convenient characterization of the cyclicality of the trade balance and its comovement with
the real exchange rate. We move to a general equilibrium model to show how assumptions
about the nature and persistence of trade shocks and modelling assumptions identify trade
3

We don’t consider the role of permanent unilateral changes in trade barriers but in models with a dynamic
export decision these can lead to intertemporal trade (see Alessandria, Choi and Ruhl, 2014).

2

policy shocks and expectations on future trade policy.
To bring our main ideas on the scale and sequencing e¤ects into focus it helps to split the
trade balance as a share of GDP into a term related to the level of trade to GDP (TRY) and
another term that is the trade balance as a share of trade (TBTR),
(1)

T BY =

X +M X M
= T RY T BT R;
Y
X +M

where X is the exports to the ROW M is the imports at home, and Y is the GDP at home.
As is well-known, most of the increase in trade integration, measured by TRY, is attributed
to cuts in average trade barriers, and thus captures the scale e¤ect. Figure 2 plots the US
trade balance to GDP ratio and a counterfactual US trade balance holding the trade share
constant at its level in 1986, prior to entering into either the Canadian-US or North-American
free trade agreements.4 The counterfactual peak trade de…cit in 2006 of only 2.7 percent is
almost the same as in 1986, suggesting that the historically large de…cits of the 2000’s were
primarily related to the historically large trade share.5 This may also explain why the swings
in the real exchange rate were of similar magnitude to the 1980s.
We next show how the sequencing e¤ect can be identi…ed from the ‡uctuations in the
trade balance to trade ratio (TBTR). We do this in partial and general equilibrium models.
Both approaches leverage the benchmark Armington trade model, the core trade block in
nearly all sticky and ‡exible price models with all asset market structures.6 In the Armington model the trade balance to trade ratio is determined by cross-country di¤erences in
expenditures, international relative prices, trade barriers, and the elasticity of substitution
between imported and domestic goods - the Armington elasticity.
Our partial equilibrium decomposition takes a very conservative approach to identifying
4

Negotiations on the CUSFTA begin in 1986 and it went into e¤ect January 1, 1989. NAFTA went into
e¤ect January 1, 1994. Both agreements contained phase-outs of tari¤s and other trade barriers.
5
This decomposition also clari…es the need to study the trade balance in a multi-good model rather
than single-good models as is common in a branch of the literature (see for example Caballero, Farhi, and
Gourinchas, 2008, Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull, 2009, McGrattan and Prescott, 2010). Beyond the
counterfactual predictions on relative prices, in a one-good model there is only net trade so that the trade to
GDP ratio equals the absolute value of the trade balance to GDP (TRY=jT BY j) and the trade balance to
trade ratio ‡uctuates between minus one and one, which are clearly inconsistent with Figures 1 and 2.
6
Heathcote and Perri (2014) discuss various asset structures. In international macro models the asset
structure relates the movements in relative prices to relative spending and the Armington trade models
relates these to the trade balance. Our partial equilibrium approach imposes no asset structure and instead
uses the data on relative spending and relative prices.

3

the sequencing e¤ect. To begin with, we assume all ‡uctuations in business cycle variables
- relative prices or relative spending - are unrelated to changes in trade barriers. The gap
between trade ‡ows in theory and data is then captured by the di¤erences in inward and
outward trade barriers or the gap in the trade wedge7 . To minimize the role of this gap
further we explicitly account for the well-known idea that the trade balance takes time to
respond to movements in the real exchange rate and terms of trade. These lagged e¤ects
are captured by allowing for a short-run and long-run Armington elasticity and a speed of
adjustment between these two horizons. By estimating these elasticities we again are being
quite conservative as any changes in trade barriers that are correlated with the business cycle
will bias our elasticity estimates and reduce our inferred gap in trade policy. Of course,
abstracting from the slow adjustment of trade to business cycle asymmetries magni…es the
importance of changes in trade barriers for the trade balance.
Our partial equilibrium decomposition of the trade balance to GDP yields three main
results. First, the relatively large trade de…cits as a share of GDP of the US in the 2000s
compared to the 1980s mostly re‡ects a rise in the trade share of GDP. Second, about 40
percent of the ‡uctuations in the ratio of the trade balance to trade re‡ect an uneven pace of
trade liberalization. Third, while asymmetries in the business cycle, as re‡ected in movements
of relative production and expenditures and relative prices, account for the remaining 60
percent of ‡uctuations in the trade balance over trade, almost 2/3 of the business cycle
induced movements in net trade ‡ows are a lagged response to asymmetries in the business
cycle. A simple way of seeing this is that the short-run Armington elasticity is estimated to
be about 0.20 while the long-run is closer to 1.12 with only 6.9 percent of the gap closing each
quarter. Ignoring the gradual response of net trade ‡ows to the business cycle substantially
increases the importance of uneven changes in trade barriers.
Our partial equilibrium decomposition also provides an accounting of the timing of trade
integration split between common, bilateral changes in trade barriers and uneven changes
in trade barriers. The dynamics of our inferred trade barriers are consistent with a typical
narrative on US trade policy. There was substantial reduction in global barriers from the
7

Our decomposition extends the trade wedge accounting approach of Levchenko, Lewis and Tesar (2010)
and Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan (2011, 2013).

4

1980s through the early 2000s. Starting in the mid 2000s trade barriers have held steady and
since the Great Recession they have increased. We also …nd substantial di¤erences in inward
and outward barriers. Namely, the ROW appears to open up relative to the US starting in
the early 80s with the rise in protectionist policies under Reagan, followed by the Canadian
and North American free trade agreements. This continues until the late 90s at which point
the US starts opening faster to the ROW around the time that it grants permanent normal
trade relations to China and China joins the WTO. And …nally, we see that the US has
opened up substantially relative to the ROW since the Great Recession.
To relate the trade balance to the shocks generating business cycles we next develop a
symmetric two-country DSGE model of trade integration and business cycles in section 4. Our
model allows for changes in trade barriers to a¤ect relative prices and relative spending. It also
allows for past and future changes to trade barriers to a¤ect a country’s wealth and desire to
borrow and lend. Our model extends the general equilibrium heterogeneous producer model
of Alessandria and Choi (2007). This is a variation of the Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994)
international real business cycle model with heterogenous producers subject to idiosyncratic
productivity shocks and a sunk and …xed cost of exporting as in Dixit (1989), Baldwin and
Krugman (1989), and Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007). These forms of heterogeneity and
…xed trade costs are consistent with both producer export dynamics and the slow rise in trade
following a trade reform, particularly for the US.
We extend the model along two dimensions. First, we introduce a reason for producers
to set di¤erent prices across countries (pricing-to-market) by allowing an exporter’s elasticity
of demand and markup to vary with the real exchange rate. Pricing-to-market is crucial
to explain the persistent deviations from the law of one price across countries and to get
the real exchange rate to ‡uctuate more than the terms of trade as in data (see Engel,
1999). Second, we introduce shocks to the costs of trade in each country and …nancial shocks
that a¤ect country-speci…c discount factors. We model changes in trade barriers as global
and unilateral shocks. Global shocks change the cost of imports and exports equally, while
unilateral shocks move the costs of imports and exports in opposite directions. Financial
shocks are a parsimonious way to capture explanations based on foreigners having a relatively
high savings rate relative to the US.
5

In our two country symmetric economy,8 global shocks to trade barriers a¤ect gross trade
‡ows but do not a¤ect net trade ‡ows. Unilateral shocks a¤ect net trade ‡ows when they are
not expected to be permanent. More importantly, for identi…cation purposes, these unilateral
shocks lead to large changes in the real exchange rate and small changes in the terms of trade
as in the data. On the other hand, …nancial shocks, tend to have large e¤ects on net trade
‡ows and small e¤ects on the real exchange rate.
The model is estimated on US net and gross trade ‡ows, relative prices, and production
using Bayesian methods and allows us to quantify the general equilibrium e¤ect of changes in
trade barriers on international relative prices and relative expenditures. We …nd that about
one quarter of the movements from our empirical decomposition that were attributed to
business cycles can be attributed to changes in international trade barriers as these unilateral
changes have a small e¤ect on the gap in spending across countries but a big e¤ect on
international relative prices. We also …nd that about 15 percent of the growth in US trade
that we attributed to changes in trade barriers can be attributed to the growth in productivity
in the ROW. Putting these together we …nd that changes in trade barriers once again account
for about two-thirds of the ‡uctuations in the trade balance as a share of GDP since 1991.
Moreover, our model predicts that holding trade barriers …xed would have lead to a smaller
trade de…cit since the Great Recession.
Our GE model also yields an estimate of the elasticity of substitution between imported
and domestic goods that di¤ers substantially from the partial equilibrium model.9 In the
partial equilibrium model we estimate a short-run elasticity of 0.20 and a long-run elasticity
of 1.12 while in the GE model we estimate an elasticity of 2.76. Moreover, in response to a
permanent decline in trade barriers, the model yields a trade elasticity of about 4.5. Thus
our GE model is consistent with what Ruhl (2004) calls the trade elasticity puzzle - the
8

Building on this paper, Alessandria, Choi and Lu (2016) consider an asymmetric variation of the current model in the context of China’s trade integration and growth. With asymmetric countries, transitory
common trade cost shocks also a¤ect intertemporal trade since they have larger e¤ects on the wealth of the
smaller, more open economy. Ravikumar, Santacreu, and Sposi (2017) show global trade reforms can generate
intertemporal trade in a model with capital accumulation and asymmetric countries.
9
A large literature estimates the trade elasticity. Similar to Hooper, Marquez, and Johnson (2000),
we estimate an error correction model of trade ‡ows, but unlike that paper we focus on net trade ‡ows.
Gallaway, McDaniel and Rivera (2003) estimate these at the industry level, and …nd that long-run elasticities
are generally two to three times short-run trade elasticities.

6

tendency for the trade response to ‡uctuations in the real exchange rate to be quite low over
the business cycle, while responses to changes in tari¤s and trade barriers are quite high.
In our case, the low short-run elasticity can be attributed to ignoring how trade barriers
in‡uence relative prices and relative expenditures and the shocks to di¤erential trade costs.
Our estimated model also generates a path of increased export participation by US producers
that closely matches the data.
We then use our estimated model to consider the e¤ect on the trade balance of some
di¤erent scenarios in which US barriers on imports rise more than exports in the future but
only temporarily. As these policies are expected in the future, they generate a trade de…cit
today and in the long-run even after the policy has been eliminated. While the policy is in
place, the US will run a trade surplus and the size of the surplus will depend on the nature
of the US’s trading partners response. A trade war will reduce the surplus more with time
as trade declines. We show these policies have a much smaller impact in models without a
dynamic exporting decision or pricing-to-market.

2. Related Literature
We conduct a dynamic analysis of US business cycles and trade integration. On the
business cycle side, it builds on the international business cycle model of Backus, Kehoe and
Kydland (1994), hereafter BKK.10 Several papers extend this model to allow for a low shortrun and high long-run trade response but abstract from changes in trade costs over time.11
Unlike these papers, which focus on the model’s ability to match …rst and second moments
of …ltered variables and highlight certain inconsistencies, our model is estimated to match
the data and thus can decompose the source of ‡uctuations in key cross-country variables.12
Indeed, while not our focus, we are able to decompose the source of the key puzzles emphasized
in the literature. Additionally, since our model nests the standard models in the literature,
it clari…es the necessary assumptions to capture aggregate ‡uctuations.
10

See Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2002), Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008), Heathcote and Perri (2002,
2014), and Croce, Colacito, Ho, and Howard (2018).
11
See Alessandria and Choi (2007), Drozd and Nosal (2011), Engel and Wang (2012), and Imura (2013).
12
Our model analysis matches relative prices, relative quantities, and trade and thus can speak to a broader
range of issues related to comovement, risk sharing, and exchange rate volatility as well as the contribution
of trade integration to consumption growth and employment changes.

7

We also contribute to the recent literature on global imbalances13 that propose alternative mechanisms to explain the widening US trade de…cit depicted in Figure 1. These papers
consider one-good models that abstract from real exchange rate ‡uctuations or trade integration. Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2005) and Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2008) consider multi-good
models of trade balance adjustment and focus on the impact on the real exchange rate of exogenous adjustments in the trade balance. They emphasize the real exchange rate adjustment
strongly depends on the elasticity of substitution and argue for di¤erent values depending
the horizon considered. Kehoe, Ruhl and Steinberg (2017) also study the dynamics of the
US trade balance but are focused on its contribution to the decline in manufacturing employment. They do not consider the role of changes in trade barriers. A key conclusion of our
analysis is that the when trade barriers are allowed to change, the same theory can explain
the 1980’s and 2000’s US trade balance dynamics.
Similar to Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2000), we consider the role of trade costs in aggregate
‡uctuations. Unlike that paper, we are interested in how changes in bilateral trade costs
may contribute to aggregate ‡uctuations. A few papers consider the aggregate e¤ects of
asymmetric trade barriers. Kose and Yi (2006) show that the cross-country correlation of
output increases with bilateral trade. Fitzgerald (2012) shows that heterogeneity in trade
costs is important for understanding the extent of observed risk-sharing. Barattieri (2014)
also considers the e¤ect of uneven changes in trade integration for trade imbalances that arise
from symmetric changes in trade barriers across sectors but with countries di¤ering in sectoral
comparative advantage. Complementary to our analysis are Eaton, Kortum, and Neiman
(2016b) and Reyes-Heroles (2016) who use multi-country multi-industry static trade models to
study the role of perfectly anticipated changes in common trade barriers and other aggregates
in the distribution of trade imbalances and aggregate ‡uctuations.14 Our estimation of a
stochastic model allows us to di¤erentiate between anticipated and unanticipated shocks.
We …nd that most movements in trade costs (and productivity) have been asymmetric and
unanticipated and that a model with a dynamic trade decision best …ts the data. Abstracting
13

See Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas, 2008, Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull, 2009, McGrattan and
Prescott, 2010.
14
These models allow for dynamic interactions in perfect foresight economies but trade is a static decision.

8

from these exporter dynamics leads to a much larger role for asymmetric trade barriers in
the ‡uctuations in the trade balance. We also make clear that the persistence of a change in
trade barriers crucially determines international borrowing and lending.
A recent group of papers motivated by the Great Trade Collapse also identify and measure the change in trade costs to understand their aggregate implications.15 Unlike these
papers, we allow trade to respond gradually to aggregate shocks and show that these lags
strongly in‡uence estimates of changes in trade barriers. A key …nding in our paper is that
abstracting from these dynamic considerations overstates the importance of trade barriers for
the dynamics of the trade balance.

3. Theory and Evidence
We begin by describing the key cyclical features of US net trade ‡ows and constructing
measures of inward and outward trade barriers using the Armington demand system common
to trade models. This demand system relates net trade ‡ows to substitution e¤ects from
movements in relative prices and income e¤ects from di¤erences in spending. It is useful
to make …ve points. First, consistent with the literature on the J-curve, net trade moves16
slowly following business cycle asymmetries such as cross-country di¤erences in spending or
international relative prices. Second, with respect to the relative prices, this slow adjustment
does not re‡ect di¤erences in the composition of spending as emphasized by BKK. Instead,
the slow adjustment of net trade ‡ows primarily re‡ects di¤erences in short- and long-run
responses to movements in relative prices or relative income. Third, the theory misses out
on substantial movements in net trade ‡ows so large cyclical ‡uctuations in unilateral trade
barriers are necessary to account for the gap between theory and data. Fourth, ignoring the
slow adjustment of net trade ‡ows would lead one to infer much larger ‡uctuations in trade
barriers over time. Finally, we show that increases in trade, or the scale e¤ect, has been the
main driver of widening US trade de…cits.
15

See Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar (2010) Alessandria, Kaboski and Midrigan (2010, 2011, 2013) and Eaton,
Kortum, Neiman and Romalis (2016a).
16
Some may take issue with our terminology as we are considering the comovement between a number of
endogeneous variables. Our analysis should be interpretted as calculating/estimating the necessary frictions
to explain the comovement between relative prices and relative quantities. In our structual model in the next
section we will take a strong stand on the underlying shocks moving relative prices and quantities.

9

There are two key reasons to describe the determinants of net trade ‡ows through the
lens of the partial equilibrium Armington trade model. First, as nearly all models share this
structure, we can go straight to the data without taking a stand on what causes international
movements in the terms of trade and real exchange rate or what asset market frictions determine the relationship between relative spending and relative prices. In our general equilibrium
model, we will see how assumptions along both dimensions in‡uence our interpretation of the
source of net trade ‡uctuations. Second, it permits us to organize the data in a way that is
closely related to both the gravity literature on gross trade ‡ows that infers trade costs from
trade ‡ows as well as the empirical literature that describes the comovement between trade
‡ows, relative prices, and spending in terms of income and price elasticities (see Marquez,
2002, and Leibovici and Waugh, 2014).
A. Theory
We now show that the simple decomposition of the trade balance in equation 1 is closely
related to the Armington trade model common to almost all multi-country trade models of
integration and business cycles. In the Armington trade model, home and foreign goods are
imperfect substitutes with a constant elasticity of substitution (CES). This yields a CES
import demand for imports at home and exports to the ROW such that the log ratio of
exports to imports is described by the following equation
(2)

ln (X=M ) = ln (! =!)

where

[ln (Px =P )

ln (Pm =P )] + ln (D =D) ;

is the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods, !; ! are preferences

for imported goods, ;

> 1 are iceberg trade costs or tari¤s on exports and imports that

create a gap between the factory and consumer price, Px and Pm are the factory export and
import prices17 , P; P are the home and foreign price levels that depend on the imported
prices inclusive of trade barriers, and D; D denote home and foreign domestic spending on
tradables.18
17

According to the BLS, U.S. import and export prices generally exclude freight charges and tari¤s. To the
extent that these international trade costs are included in import and export prices our empirical approach
will understate their importance.
18
This equation also holds in the Eaton-Kortum and Melitz-Chaney trade models.

10

The trade balance to trade ratio is approximated19 by the log export-import ratio
(3)

T BT R =

X M
X +M

0:5 ln (X=M ) ;

so that we can then decompose the trade balance to GDP into a term that depends on the
export-import ratio and another term that depends on the trade share of GDP,
(4)

T BY

0:5 ln (X=M ) T RY:

It is useful to combine the changes in trade costs and tastes into a single term that is the
trade wedge, T = !
(5)

;T =!

: De…ning the terms of trade and real exchange rate as

T OT = Pm =Px and RER = P =P;

the main equation becomes
(6)

ln (X=M ) = ln (T =T ) + (ln T OT + ln RER) + ln (D =D) :

This decomposes the real export-import ratio into changes in the di¤erence in trade wedges,
substitution from relative prices, and relative expenditures. The e¤ect of relative prices
depends on the sum of the terms of trade of the real exchange rate. When considering the
nominal export-import ratio this split matters as this equals
(7)

ln

Px X
Pm M

=(

1) (ln T OT + ln RER) + ln (RER D =D) + ln

T
T

:

Additionally, our assumption about the source of the trade wedge will also matter as trade
shocks20 will drive a wedge between the nominal export import ratio and real export-import
ratio while taste shocks will not.
The log export-import ratio does not require any assumptions about either the asset side
of the model that relate relative spending to relative prices or the price frictions that relate
the terms of trade to the real exchange rate. For instance, with complete markets, no capital
goods and CRRA separable preferences, Backus and Smith (1993) show that the ratio of cross
19

This approximation is quite precise. The maximum gap between the log export-import ratio and the
trade balance to trade ratio is less than 0.4 percentage points (22.7 percent vs 23.1 percent).
20
The size of this wedge will depend on how much of the trade cost is incurred to the border versus to the
consumer.

11

country spending moves in proportion to the real exchange rate with the proportion linear
in the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and that this risk-sharing condition is clearly
violated in the data. Likewise, in two good models and perfect competition BKK show the
terms of trade is more volatile than the real exchange rate by a factor increasing in trade
openness, which is again is violated strongly in the data.
This equation also sheds light on BKK’s famous “S-curve” result that echoes an earlier
literature’s emphasis on the J-curve. They show that the trade balance as a share of GDP
is more correlated with past movements in the real exchange rate than current movements21
and that this feature is well-described by a two country DSGE model with productivity
shocks and capital accumulation.22 In that model a positive transitory productivity shock at
home leads both to a real exchange rate depreciation and a trade de…cit. The cross country
productivity gap lowers the price of the home good yielding a depreciation while creating a
large temporary gap in investment between home and foreign leading to a trade de…cit. As
the gap in investment is relatively short-lived, the trade de…cit is also quite short-lived while
the depreciation is quite persistent yielding the cross-correlation in the data.
The apparent success of the two country RBC model in explaining the comovement between the trade balance and the real exchange rate is rooted in its two well-known failures:
the quantity and price puzzles. The quantity puzzle is the inability of the model to generate
business cycles that are synchronized across countries. The price puzzle is the inability of the
model to generate large enough relative price movements. Whenever the real exchange rate
depreciates, say from an increase in productivity, substitution makes the ratio of exports to
imports increase. To generate a trade de…cit with a depreciation then requires the second
term, the di¤erence in foreign and domestic expenditures, to respond strongly to o¤set the
substitution e¤ect. Taken together the quantity and price puzzles make the expenditure effect quite strong and the substitution e¤ect weak. With a strong but temporary gap in cross
country expenditures the ratio of expenditures will move from de…cit to surplus over time
21

BKK focus on the dynamics between the trade balance and the terms of trade. However, in their model
(and the data) the terms of trade and real exchange rate are perfectly (highly) correlated.
22
BKK focus on the nominal trade balance which is highly correlated with the real trade balance. Ra¤o
(2008) points out that in the BKK model that real and nominal trade balances are negatively correlated
when investment is constrained to match the observed pattern in the data while in the data they are quite
positively correlated. Given our focus on matching trade ‡ows and relative prices these are less of a concern.

12

explaining the gradual response of the trade balance following the depreciation.
Controlling for relative expenditures, the trade-expenditure ratio,
(8)

ln (X=M )

ln (D =D) = [ln T OT + ln RER] + ln (T =T ) ;

isolates the substitution e¤ect. A depreciation will always be associated with a surplus in this
alternative measure of net trade ‡ows in all constant elasticity models. Moreover, correlations
of the left hand side with lags of the real exchange rate will equal the autocorrelation of the
trade-expenditure ratio.
Of the series in this equation, the only one that requires some discussion is the measure
of expenditures. US expenditures are proxied with an equally weighted average of spending
on consumer goods and investment goods since this accounts for trade being intensive in
durables. We lack a direct measure of foreign spending and thus use a measure of tradeweighted foreign industrial production. Obviously, foreign industrial production will overstate
(understate) foreign expenditures when the US is running a de…cit (surplus); however, given
the level of openness this tends to be a relatively small bias.23
Figure 3 plots the cross-correlation between the real exchange rate and two measures of
the export-import ratio in the data and the BKK model. Panel A shows that the contemporaneous correlation of the export-import ratio with the real exchange rate is positive24 in
the data but that the export-import ratio is more strongly correlated with lagged real exchange rate movements with a peak correlation at about 6 quarters. Panel B shows that the
cross-correlation is quite similar between the real exchange rate and trade-expenditure ratio.
Indeed, there is a stronger lagged relationship. Thus, di¤erences in the timing of expenditures
do not drive the asymmetry in the data.
We next examine the cross-correlation of these variables in the BKK model from productivity shocks. The theory generates an asymmetric cross correlation function although it
overpredicts the cross-correlation at all horizons. Moreover the gap between the correlation
23

We explore some of the biases from the weighting on expenditures as well as using ROW production
rather than expenditures in Appendix 2. We …nd these biases tend to be relatively small when we account
for them both in our measure of expenditures and in our GE model.
24
BKK actually emphasize a negative contemporaneous correlation. This negative correlation is only
present when the model and data are HP …ltered.

13

of the export-import ratio at lags and leads is much smaller than the data. More importantly, panel B demonstrates that controlling for expenditures eliminates the asymmetry in
the cross-correlation function.25 This clearly suggests a need for a time-varying Armington
elasticity and/or shocks to the gap in the trade wedge to capture the dynamic relationship
between relative prices and relative quantities.
B. Evidence
To evaluate the determinants of the ‡uctuations in the export-import ratio we follow the
trade wedge literature by measuring the gap between observed net trade ‡ows and predicted
trade ‡ows using the observed relative prices and relative spending. Doing so requires a
measure of the Armington elasticity. There is much disagreement about this parameter. For
instance, Eaton, Kortum, Neiman and Romalis (2016a) set it to 3 in their study of trade
in the Great Recession while Heathcote and Perri (2014) advocate for an elasticity closer to
0.4. Given this disagreement, and our desire to minimize the importance of the gap in trade
barriers on net trade ‡ows, we estimate equation 8, where now ln (T =T ) can be interpreted
as a combination of trade integration shocks plus a residual. Of course, we are cautious about
a structural interpretation of this parameter. Our estimation minimizes the importance of
these trade wedges as a source of net trade ‡ows and provides a simple summary of the
comovement between net trade, relatives prices, and relative spending.
Table 1 reports the results of three types of regressions, in levels, …rst di¤erences, and
…rst di¤erences with an error correction term.26 The error correction regression permits us to
distinguish between short-run and long-run relationships and are common in studies of trade
dynamics (Hooper, et al., 2000, Marquez, 2002). For the level regression the term on relative
expenditures is constrained to be unitary as theory suggests. All coe¢ cients are signi…cant.
We consider two regressions in levels. The …rst follows the trade literature and constrains
the Armington elasticity to 3. It implies we are only estimating the mean in the data. It is
25

For the US measure of expenditures we use a weighted average of consumption and investment while we
proxy foreign expenditures on tradables with foreign industrial production from the Dallas Fed. Using this
empirical measure in the BKK model delivers an almost identical result in Figure 3B. See the Data appendix
for more details.
26
The error correction model is yt = + SR pt + d
(yt 1
dt 1 ) + "t were y is the
LR pt 1
dependent variable, p is the relative price term, and d is the relative spending term.

14

equivalent to measuring the trade wedge as a residual but leads to a very poor …t, supporting
our approach to estimate the elasticity of substitution. When we estimate the elasticity
separately (column Level 2) we …nd an elasticity of substitution closer to 0.28 which is closer
to the value used in the international macro literature, although this elasticity mixes the
short-run and long-run e¤ects of relative prices on the export-import ratio.
Our regressions in di¤erences separate the short-run and long-run source of movements
in net trade ‡ows. Now the Armington elasticity is quite low in the short run. The error
correction model yields a short run elasticity of 0.119 and a long-run elasticity of 1.026 with
6.6 percent of the gap between the current and long-run gap in the export-import ratio closed
each quarter. If the short-run e¤ect of di¤erences in expenditures is allowed to di¤er27 from
1, generalizing the slow adjustment, we estimate a coe¢ cient on expenditures of 0.608, a
short-run price elasticity of 0.18 and a long-run Armington elasticity of 1.09 with only 6.7
percent of the gap closed per quarter. If we follow Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan,
(2011, 2013) by accounting for the change in net inventory investment,28;29 we …nd a slightly
higher short-run and long-run elasticity of 0.204 and 1.124 and slightly faster adjustments
(6.9 percent), although now the impact response of di¤erences in expenditures is lower (0.58).
The …t, measured by adjusted R2 ; of the empirical model rises from 26.2 percent in
di¤erences to 43.7 percent in our short-run/long-run model. The …t of the empirical models
suggests there are substantial movements in the export-import ratio that are related to trade
integration. These shocks could re‡ect a di¤erent pace of liberalization (contemporaneous
and lagged e¤ects) or perhaps inventory type considerations that we haven’t fully accounted
for. The improved …t of the error correction model, plus the relatively low short-run price and
expenditure coe¢ cients, suggest that a substantial fraction of the e¤ects of relative spending
and relative prices occur gradually. In what follows the best …t is our benchmark dynamic
model.
27

This case also helps to capture any di¤erences related to the composition of trade being di¤erent than
our measure of expenditures. A sign that this is not overly important is that when we estimate a coe¢ cient
on the long-run expenditure term it is not signi…cantly di¤erent than 1.
28
Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan, (2011 and 2013) show that international trade frictions lead to
higher inventory holdings on imported than domestic goods and that periods of rapid trade adjustment are
strongly related to inventory adjustments.
29
In this regression we only use a measure of the change in net inventory investment in the US as we lack
a similar measure in US trading partners. The gain in explanatory power is thus perhaps understated.

15

The estimated coe¢ cients from the regressions can be used to construct a predicted path
of the export-import ratio. We decompose the export-import ratio into two components,
ln (Xt =Mt ) = ln (Xt =Mt )BC + ln (Xt =Mt )T W , where ln (Xt =Mt )BC is the business cycle component that can be explained by variation in the current and past relative prices and relative
expenditure, and ln (Xt =Mt )T W is the gap in the trade wedge that is composed of the current
and past residuals. Figure 4A plots the predicted export-import ratio, ln (Xt =Mt )BC ; for
the static and dynamic statistical models and Figure 4B plots the gap in the trade wedge,
ln (Xt =Mt )T W , for static and dynamic model. The dynamic model clearly captures the gradual movements in the export-import ratio to movements in the real exchange rate and relative
spending. In particular, the delayed response of the trade-expenditure ratio to the Plaza and
Louvre Accords and the depreciation of the dollar in the early 2000’s are quite evident.
The …rst four columns of Table 2 report the source of ‡uctuations in the export-import
ratio from each of our statistical models over the whole sample and in the post 1991 period.
The contribution of trade liberalization and business cycle shocks is measured by their share
of the variance. With a single Armington elasticity, the business cycle components account
for about 40 to 52 percent of the variance in the export-import ratio. If we allow for a
short-run and long-run elasticity then it increases to almost 77 percent. There is substantial
positive comovement between the trade wedge and business cycle components in the single
elasticity movements. If we include the comovement component to the contribution, the single
elasticity models account for about 69 percent of the variance while the error correction model
accounts for 83 percent of the variance.30 A conservative reading of the data is that about 2/3
of the ‡uctuations can be explained by the model. We also split the error-correction model
into the predicted movements coming from the short-run part of the model in the column
SR . Using this decomposition we estimate that about 1/3 of the ‡uctuations in the exportimport ratio are the delayed response to the business cycle. We attribute the movements
of the export-import ratio that are not explained by the movements in relative prices or
relative expenditures as arising from unilateral trade integration shocks. Thus depending on
our empirical model, uneven trade liberalization explains between 23 and 56 percent of the
BC

30

With the restriction of the coe¢ cient of the relative expenditure being 1, ln (Xt =Mt )
are correlated.

16

TW

and ln (Xt =Mt )

‡uctuations in the export-import ratio.
Using the decomposition of the export-import ratio, we next decompose the trade balance
to GDP ratio into the business cycle, the trade wedge, and the scale e¤ect components31 ,
T BYt = 0:5 T RY
|

ln (Xt =Mt )BC +0:5
{z
} |

T BYtBC

h
T RY ln (Xt =Mt )T W + T RYt
{z
T BYtT W

i
T RY ln (Xt =Mt ) :
}

The …rst and second terms hold the trade share of GDP constant, T RY , and the third
term accounts for the changes in the trade share. Since the scale e¤ect is one of the novel
mechanisms that we emphasize, we combine these terms into T BY T W . The last three columns

of Table 2 reports a variance decomposition of T BYt and we now include our decomposition
using the initial trade share labelled as Business Cycle in Figure 2: When we set the T RY
to the initial period, the business cycle component explains only 16 percent of the T BYt
variation. Indeed, …gure 2 shows that trade wedges account for nearly all of the trade balance
since the Great Recession. As we raise the T BY ; the contribution of the business cycle
component increases (16 to 52 percent) due to the scale e¤ect. The contribution of the trade
barriers (common and di¤erential) is quite substantial. Including the comovement e¤ects
they explain about 48 to 83 percent of the T BYt variations. The importance of business
cycle versus trade shocks varies over time. Looking narrowly at the post 1991 swing we …nd
that the contribution of the business cycle component rises 8 to 24 percentage points.
We now show that increased trade integration also accounts for a substantial share of
the increased dispersion in the trade balance as a share of GDP across countries over time.
Using Penn World Tables 9.0 data, in Figure 5 we plot the cross-sectional dispersion in
the nominal trade balance to GDP and the nominal export-import ratio, measured as the
standard deviation, against the median trade share of GDP from 1970 to 2014. There is a
very strong positive correlation between the annual cross-sectional dispersion in the trade
balance as a share of GDP and the median trade share of GDP but a very weak correlation
between the export-import ratio and trade.32
31

This is a decomposition of the source of ‡uctuations in the trade-balance to GDP coming from an
accounting identity. It is in no way attributing the ‡uctuations in the trade balance to particular shocks. We
will use the model to decompose the shocks leading to these ‡uctuations.
32
We explored controlling for other factors such as dispersion in output growth and found this had almost
no explanatory power particularly once we controlled for aggregate trade ‡ows.

17

C. Changes in trade barriers
We next consider the inferred changes in policy and non-policy trade barriers from our
empirical models. So far, our empirical work yields the gap in the ROW and US trade wedge.
Each country’s trade wedge is constructed as a residual using the estimated coe¢ cients.
Figure 4B plots the export-import ratio and the gap in trade wedges from the static and
dynamic empirical models. The gap in the wedge from the static model is highly correlated
with the data while the gap in the wedge from the dynamic model is much less correlated.
Focusing on the gap in the wedge from the dynamic model, there is a substantial swing
in trade policy from 1979 to 198333 followed by more gradual change beginning in 1983 with
the ROW becoming relatively more open to the US. This year certainly marks a turning
point in US trade policy as Voluntary Export Restraints (VERs) on Japanese cars begin to
bind34 , Steel Quotas are imposed, Congress passes the Buy America Act, and the Reagan
administration steps up its push for reciprocity in trade relations. The pace of integration
accelerates in the late 1980s at about the time of the Canadian-US Free Trade Agreement
and again with NAFTA. Both agreements lowered barriers on US exports much more than
barriers on US imports which were already quite low (see Tre‡er 2004).
The gradual opening of the ROW relative to the US continues until about 1989 at which
point the US begins to become relatively more open to foreign goods. Our dynamic model
suggests this is an in‡ection point in relative trade policy while the static model points to
quite a large reversal in the direction of opening. Since the Great Recession the US has
become substantially more open to the ROW. This may re‡ect the strong home bias inherent
in …scal expansions in a number of countries such as China. Absent this change in the gap
in trade policy, US net trade ‡ows would have been expected to move strongly to balance as
a result of the persistently weak dollar and strong expansion in foreign output.
Figure 6 plots the common trade wedge that comes from the empirical dynamic trade
model along with the HP trend with a smoothing factor of 1600.35 A few interesting points
33

These movements coincide with the second oil shock and may re‡ect changes in OPEC’s market power.
In May 1981 Japanese automakers agreed to limit exports of passenger cars for three years. This VER
was initially not very binding given the weakness in auto sales in 1981 and 1982, but became quite binding
as the economy took o¤ in 1983. The policy was extended and remained in place through 1994. Berry,
Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1999, provide a structural analysis of these policies.
35
Here, we use the empirical model to obtain the home and foreign trade wedges, ! H and ! F . Then,
34

18

are evident. First, trade integration was fairly steady until the early 2000s. Second, since the
mid 2000s, a couple of years prior the Great Recession, trade integration has slowed. The
timing of the slow-down in the trade wedge is perhaps a bit earlier than one might suspect
given the trade data, which was continuing to grow up to the Great Recession and with the
Great Trade rebound. However, our empirical model allows for trade barriers and relative
prices to only gradually a¤ect trade and so the continued growth in trade re‡ects the …nal
stages of the transition to changes in trade policy.

4. General Equilibrium Model
We now develop a DSGE two-country model with heterogenous producers entering and
exiting the export market so that trade responds gradually to aggregate shocks. We extend
the dynamic exporting model of Alessandria and Choi (2007) to include more shocks, variables
markups, an endogenous discount factor, and incomplete …nancial markets. The model nests
models with a static export decision or no export decision and is able to capture the observed
comovement between the terms of trade, real exchange rate, and relative spending. It also
allows for non-trade related aggregate shocks to cause “changes”in inferred trade wedges from
mismeasured prices owing to changes in the extensive margin of exporting that introduce gains
from variety absent from trade prices (Feenstra, 1994).
The model is useful to evaluate the impact of persistent changes in symmetric and asymmetric changes in trade costs, productivity, and …nancial shocks on net ‡ows and the aggregate
economy. We estimate the model to identify the source of aggregate ‡uctuations and conduct counterfactual policy experiments. We show how changes in trade barriers can lead to
large e¤ects on net trade ‡ows, particularly when the shocks are temporary. We also show
that alternative, simpler models that abstract from exporter dynamics yield very di¤erent
accountings of the source of net trade ‡ows and counterfactuals.
In each country, there is a …nal non-tradeable good made of a di¤erent mix of tradable
intermediates. The …nal good price in each country is normalized to 1, Pt = Pt = 1; but the
real exchange rate, qt ; is de…ned as the relative price of a basket of home to foreign goods:36
we estimated the bilateral wedge, ! C , with a common factor model: ! Ht = H + ! Ct + Ht and ! F t =
F + ! Ct + F t with AR(1) processes for ! Ct ; Ht ;and F t .
36
This assumes that the price of goods in the US in dollars is 1 and the price of a basket of goods in euros

19

Consumers: Consumers choose consumption and leisure to maximize welfare
W0 = max E0
fCt ;Lt g

1
X

tU

(Ct ; Lt ) ;

t=0

subject to a sequence of budget constraints
Ct + Qt Bt +

b

2

Qt Bt
YtN

= Wt Lt + Bt
1

L)1

where U (C; L) = C (1

= (1

1

+

):

t;

t

for all t,

is the dividend payments from home …rms

and Qt is the discount price of a non-contingent bond. To ensure stationarity, there is a small
bond holding cost in each country,

b

2

Qt Bt
YtN

with YtN equal to nominal home GDP.

The stochastic cumulative discount factor evolves as
ln (
where

t+1 =

t)

= ln

t

= (1

is the steady state

b ) ln

+

b

ln

t 1

et =C + " =2;
ln C

et is the average (aggregate)
; C is the steady state C; and C

consumption in the economy, and " is a shock. The discount factor

t

is external. The

foreign discount factor evolves similarly but with the discount factor shock coming in with
a negative sign. Since Uzawa (1968), endogenous discount factors are commonly used in
international models (Corsetti, et al. 2008).37 This introduces a channel for aggregate shocks
to move the real exchange rate and relative consumption in a way that models with pure
time separable preferences lack (Backus and Smith, 1993). The shocks are quite common in
international …nance papers (Pavlova and Rigobon, 2007, or Maggiori and Gabaix, 2015)
The model abstracts from capital accumulation since this mechanism does not seem to
be critical for the dynamic relationship between international relative prices and the trade
balance. Empirically, investment is in our measure of spending and so one should view the
consumer as having some preference for a ‡ow of consumption and investment but ignores
the e¤ect of investment on future output.
Aggregation Technology or Consumption Index: A competitive retail sector combines
a continuum of domestic varieties with the available imported varieties to produce the …nal
is 1 and that q is the exchange rate of dollars per euro.
37
As in Kehoe, Ruhl, and Steinberg (2017) the discount factor shock captures aspects outside of the model
that a¤ect consumption directly but not trade.

20

good. The aggregators are
1

Dt =

1

1

Z

1

YHt + ! YF t

; YHt =

1

1

1

Yhit di

; YF t =

Z

1

t

Yf it di
t

i2Et

0

!

t
t

1

:

where YH ; YF are the composite domestic and imported goods, ! denotes the weight on imported goods and

is the Armington elasticity. The elasticity of substitution across imported

varieties is allowed to be time varying,

t

= qt with qt being the real exchange rate (a rise

in q means real depreciation of home): We treat exported varieties symmetrically so that
YHt =

R

(Yhit )
i2Et

t

1

t
t

t

di

1

with

t

= qt : This is a parsimonious way of introducing

pricing-to-market and can be microfounded with search frictions.38 A key advantage of this
form of pricing-to-market, rather than nominal rigidities, is that it generates quite persistent
deviations from the law of one price. The ideal price indices for the aggregates are
!1 1
1
Z
Z
1
Phit

PHt =

t

1

di

Pf1it

; PF t =

t

di

1
; Pt = PHt
+ !PF1 t

1

1

= 1:

i2Et

In equilibrium Dt = Ct :
Firms: The …rm’s production function is Yit = ezt + it Lit ; where zt is the country-wide
productivity,

is a …rm-speci…c productivity shock with

it

iid
it

N 0;

2

: Country-speci…c

productivity follows an AR(1) process.
To capture the dynamics of export participation, …xed export costs are Wt f0 for starters
and Wt f1 for continuing exporters. The (gross) marginal trade cost is given by
exporters, and

t

t

for home

for foreign exporters. The resource constraint for each good equals

Yit = Yhit + mit t Yhit ;
where mit = f0; 1g is the current export status of …rm i. The marginal trade cost is stochastic
and also follows and AR(1) process. We abstract from changes in the two types of …xed export
costs although these do move around over the cycle as the …rm must hire workers to pay these
costs and the real wage does ‡uctuate.
38

See Alessandria (2009), Alessandria and Kaboski (2011), or Drozd and Nosal (2012).

21

The dynamic program of a …rm is then
Vt ( ; m) = max
pyt (p) + m0 qp yt ( p )
0

Wl

m ;p;p ;l

m0 W fm + Qt EVt+1 ( 0 ; m0 )

where m summarizes past export status and determines the current …xed export cost, and
q is the real exchange rate. The aggregate state which includes the exogenous trade costs,
productivity, and discount factor and endogenous assets and distribution of exporters and
nonexporters is subsumed in the time subscript of the value function.
As …rms face market-speci…c demand elasticities they set a destination-speci…c price,
w

ph ( ; m) =

1 ez+

q

; and ph ( ; m) =

q

w
;
1 qez+

and deviations from the law of one price will be proportional to the real exchange rate, q,
ln (qph =ph )
ln q
If

= 4 and

1

;

= 0:75; then a 10 percent appreciation will reduce the foreign price by 2.5

percent compared to the home price. In terms of the literature on exchange rate pass-through
this implies a pass-through of 75 percent.
When the cost of starting to export exceeds the cost of continuing to export, Wt f0 > Wt f1 ;
the decision to export is dynamic. There is a threshold technology for exporters to continue
exporting,
1t .

1t ;

and a second threshold technology for non-exporters to start exporting,

0t

>

Firms will move in and out of the export market in response to shocks to idiosyncratic

and aggregate shocks. These thresholds satisfy the following equations
Wt fm

t

(

mt )

= Qt Et Vt+1

t+1 ; 1

Vt

t+1 ; 0

; m 2 f0; 1g :

The mass of …rms over productivity and exporting in each country is a state variable.
When idiosyncratic shocks are iid, this reduces to only one additional state variable per
country, the stock of past exporters, which evolves as
Ntj = Ntj 1 Pr

j
1t

+ 1

Ntj

1

Pr

j
0t

; j=f , g

Given the iid nature of idiosyncratic costs, the export decision introduces a way to lower the

22

cost of trade by increasing the mass of low …xed-cost exporters.39
Aggregate Variables: The key moments of interest in the model are listed below.
YtN

=

Z

(Phit YHit + qt Phit YHit ) di;

YtR = YtN =PHt ;
Z
Z
1
N
N
EXt =
qt Phit Yhit di = ! qt PHt Dt ; and IMt = Pf it Yf it di = !PF1 t Dt ;
EXtN IMtN
;
YtN
Z
1
= qt
(P )1
Nt i2Et hit

N XYt =
PXt

1
1
t

di

t

e

"m
2

; PM t =

1
Nt

Z

Pf1it t di

i2Et

!1 1

EXtN
IMtN
; and IMtR =
;
PXt
PM t
tot = ln (PM =PX ) ;
EX N =PX
=( t
d;
ln EX R =M R = ln
t ) + (tot + rer) + d
IM N =PM
!
ln Nt
ln Nt
+ ln t + (
1)
+ "m ;
t = ln
t
!
1
1
t
t
t
EXtR =

Export and import price indices are factory gate prices, ignore the bene…ts of increased
varieties, and include a measurement error. Real export and imports are nominal trade
de‡ated by trade prices. The trade wedge will vary from changes to the ratio of trade costs
and export participation, which varies from business cycle and trade cost shocks.

5. Solution and Estimation
The model is solved by linearizing around the steady state.40 Several parameters are …xed
to conventional values and the rest are estimated using Bayesian techniques (Table 3).
The time period is a quarter ( = 0:99): The weight on leisure is set so that hours worked
equals 1/4. The bond adjustment cost is set to ensure stationarity. The …xed trade costs
(f0 ; f1 ), standard deviation of idiosyncratic productivity shocks (
39

) ; and the weight in the

Enriching the model with persistent idiosyncratic shocks or a growth pro…le for new exporters yields
somewhat similar propagation of trade cost and aggregate shocks (see Alessandria, Choi, and Ruhl, 2015).
40
Even though we consider some large shocks to trade costs, trade remains a relatively small of output and
so most of the dynamics look similar when we solve the model using global or local methods.

23

t

e

"m
2

;

aggregator (! = ! ) are chosen so that in steady state trade is 10 percent, export participation
is 20 percent, the quarterly exporter exit rate is 2.5 percent, and exporters are 50 percent
larger than non-exporters, which are consistent with US trade and exporter characteristics
in the early 90s (see Alessandria and Choi, 2014b).
There are four preferences parameters to estimate: 1) the Armington elasticity, ; 2) the
pricing-to-market elasticity, ; 3) risk-aversion , ; and 4) the weight on external habit, :
We rewrite the country-speci…c shocks to include a common and di¤erential shock,
3
2
3 2
3
3 2
2
ln zt
ln zct + ln zdt =2
ln ct + ln dt =2
ln t
5 and 4
5=4
5:
5=4
4
ln zt
ln zct ln zdt =2
ln ct ln dt =2
ln t

Productivity and trade cost shocks follow an AR(1) process. It is assumed there are no
spillovers of shocks and that shocks are uncorrelated. Recall that shocks to the discount
factor and export/import prices move them in opposite directions across countries so that we
are estimating the persistence and variance of 6 shocks. Finally, because relative prices and
relative production are indices their levels must be estimated.
The …fteen parameters are estimated using six time series from the US and the rest of
the world: 1) US real trade share of GDP, ((X + M )=Y ), 2) the terms of trade plus the
real exchange rate (totq), 3) the US real export-import ratio (EXIM R), 4) US detrended
industrial production, (IP ), 5) The ratio of foreign to US Industrial Production and 6) the
terms of trade. Note that this implies we can match the real exchange rate and nominal
export-import ratio. For these parameters we have relatively ‡at priors. Figure 7 shows the
data and model along with the estimated innovations to productivity and trade costs.
A. Estimation Results
The shocks are found to be quite persistent as expected given this is a period of substantial
trade integration, persistent trade imbalances, and persistent swings in production. The
posterior mean of the common (di¤erential) trade cost shock is close to a unit root,
(

d

= 0:999). The common trade cost is less volatile with

c

= 0:006 vs.

d

c

= 0:998

= 0:04: The

common productivity shock is slightly less persistent than the di¤erential productivity shock
(0.995 vs. 0.996) and slightly more volatile (0.012 vs. 0.011). The persistence of the beta
shock is 0.937 with a standard deviation of 0.0006.
24

The posterior mean of the Armington elasticity is

= 2:76; which is quite a bit higher than

in our empirical analysis and provides some sense of the biases arising from not accounting
for the extensive margin of trade, the endogeneity of prices and quantities, and the trade cost
shocks. The risk aversion parameter equals

= 7:47; or only slightly larger than that used by

Chari et al. (2002) in their study of real exchange rate ‡uctuations. The pricing-to-market
parameter equals 0.56. Finally, we …nd very little external habit of only 0.2 percent.
Figure 8 plots the path of trade costs, productivity, and discount factors along with their
expected path in 1980, measured as deviations from the steady state. The gap in trade costs
was quite large initially and was expected to not change much, although there were sizeable
‡uctuations over time. The common trade cost was quite large initially, and expected to fall
slightly. The actual path of trade cost involved a much larger drop than expected (25 percent
vs.. 3 percent). For productivity, the US was 15 percent below41 the ROW in 1980 but the
gap has widened instead of closing as predicted. Average productivity starts 12 percentage
points above steady state and has grown. Initially, US agents are more patient but there are
two large swings with US agents less patient in the 1980s and 2000’s.
B. Evidence on Exporting Margin
We now show that the model generates realistic movements in export participation. A
key feature of our model is the inclusion of a dynamic exporting decision. Models of this sort
have been shown to explain the entry and exit decision of …rms in response to changes in
trade barriers (Das, Roberts, and Tybout, 2003, Alessandria and Choi, 2014b). The bottom
two panels of Figure 8 plot the estimated share of US and ROW …rms exporting along with
a series for US exporters42 Despite not being targeted, and the minimal heterogeneity in the
model, it captures most of the growth and cyclical ‡uctuations in export participation.
C. Identi…cation
In our model only asymmetric shocks a¤ect relative quantities and relative prices. In the
data there are relatively large movements in relative prices compared to relative quantities
41

Our model does not seperate out productivity from population, employment, or capital and thus productivity primarily re‡ects country size.
42
The data is described in the data appendix

25

hence the low Armington elasticity estimated in our empirical model. We now show that this
aspect of the data suggests relatively large shocks to asymmetric trade barriers. Figure 9A
plots the impulse response of key macroeconomic variables to the three asymmetric shocks.
First, consider a persistent shock to the discount factor, ; that makes the home country’s
agents relatively impatient. Home would like to borrow and run a real and nominal trade
de…cit. Because of the home bias in consumption, this increases world demand for home
goods relative to foreign goods and leads to an appreciation of the home real exchange rate.
This appreciation is modest compared to the movements in net trade ‡ows. There are small
increases in foreign output relative to home output and the real trade share.
Second, consider a shock that increase the ratio of home to foreign productivity, zd . This
shock decreases the ratio of foreign to home output. With an endogenous discount factor,
it generates a large and persistent trade de…cit. The increased borrowing combines with the
change in the relative costs to generate a modest real exchange rate depreciation. Again, net
trade ‡ows move substantially more than international relative prices.
Third, consider a trade cost shock,

d;

lowering the cost of home imports and raising the

cost of home exports. This lowers home’s retail price of imports and raises the retail price
of exported goods in foreign; shifting world demand towards foreign goods causing a large
depreciation and a small nominal and real trade de…cit. The nominal trade de…cit is larger
than the real trade de…cit as it includes the direct e¤ect of the change in trade costs. The
e¤ects on net trade ‡ows are small as the shock is very close to permanent.
Figure 9B plots the dynamics of output, consumption, trade and export participation
in response to shocks to common productivity. Shocks to productivity, zc ; primarily a¤ect
output and consumption while trade costs,

c;

a¤ect trade and exporting. Owing to the

gradual expansion of exporters from the sunk cost, exports grow gradually.
Finally, we consider each shock’s contribution to the dynamic correlations observed in
our partial equilibrium analysis. Table 5 reports the results of similar regressions on model
generated data of 100,000 observations. The top row shows that the level regressions yield
a higher Armington elasticity than in di¤erences and that the long-run coe¢ cient is larger
than the coe¢ cient from the level regression. In the bottom three rows we run the same
regression, but now eliminating one shock from the model. Without productivity or discount
26

factor shocks we still have a very low Armington elasticity. Without trade shocks, we recover
a very high Armington elasticity with a short-run elasticity of 2.3, an average elasticity of
4.2, and a long-run elasticity of 6.1. Thus, asymmetric trade shocks bias down estimates of
the Armington elasticity. These estimates along with our …nding of higher elasticity from a
common trade costs is consistent with Ruhl’s (2004) trade elasticity puzzle.
D. Temporary Trade Protection
To highlight the in‡uence of trade policy on the trade balance we consider a temporary
trade policy such as an anti-dumping penalty, safeguard measure,43 or voluntary export restraint.44 This is modelled as a shock that raises the gap between import and export costs
by 10 percentage points. As these policies are rarely a surprise the policy is announced to
start in two quarters and last for three years. The timing of this policy (pre-announced with
a 3 year duration) mimics the 1981 US policy on Japanese autos. The present value of the
shock is equivalent to an AR(1) shock with a persistence of 0.92.
Four scenarios are considered. First, we consider a Negotiated adjustment with an increase
in import costs and reduction in export costs. Second, we consider an immediate Trade War
such that common trade costs rise with the gap. Third, we consider a Trade War that
escalates gradually and de-escalates gradually. And …nally, we consider a Trade War that
gradually escalates and remains in place, much like in the Great Depression.
The Negotiated adjustment isolates the sequencing e¤ect while in the Trade War cases
the scale e¤ect also matters. Each case starts from a steady state trade share of GDP of
30 percent. Agent’s know which case they are in and fully anticipate how changes in trade
barriers will a¤ect trade ‡ows.
Figure 10 depicts the dynamics of trade barriers, trade, and net trade ‡ows under all
policies. In all four cases, as agents know that barriers will be relatively high for trade into
the home country in two quarters there is an incentive for the home country to consume in
advance (and foreign to delay) and so the home country will run a small trade de…cit initially
followed by a surplus for the next 12 quarters. Once the policy is removed the home country
43

Safeguard measures (Section 201 of 1974 Trade Act) restrict imports temporarily if an industry is injured
or threatened with injury.
44
Given the nature of the shocks we solve the model using global methods.

27

will run a persistent trade de…cit.
Even though the gap in trade barriers is the same in all the policies, the Negotiated
policy leads to larger swings in the trade balance than the Trade Wars since these also lower
trade.45 The di¤erence in the trade balance is not monotonic since trade falls gradually with
the implementation of the policy and rises gradually in anticipation of the removal, or lack
thereof. In total, surpluses are 75 to 85 percent of the negotiated policy and there is a smaller
de…cit upon removal.
E. Variance Decomposition
We now discuss the source of ‡uctuations in some key variables that determine the trade
balance. We focus on the contribution of di¤erent shocks. Figure 11 plots the source of
‡uctuations in the real trade share, export-import ratio, and real trade balance as a share of
output split between the initial conditions and the subsequent shocks.
Growth in the US real trade share is plotted in panel A. About 78 percent of the growth
in trade is attributed to changes in trade costs, 17 percent re‡ects the growth in productivity
in the rest of the world, and 5 percent is the waning e¤ects of initial conditions which mostly
captures some small mean reversion in trade costs and accumulation of exporters. Discount
factor shocks have no e¤ects on the real trade share.
The real export-import ratio is plotted in the panel B. Here we see that the initial conditions, mostly the US net foreign assets could have been expected to generate a de…cit over
time and that this should have led to a de…cit twice as large as the data by 2015. There are
sizeable swings from the shocks to the di¤erence in productivity and discount factor shocks
but by the end of the sample these two together would predict a surplus. Shocks to the gap
in trade costs and measurement error in the terms of trade contributed to a modest surplus
in the beginning and end of the sample, but a de…cit from the mid 1980s to early 2000’s.
The trade balance as a share of output is plotted in the panel C. To construct this from
the model we use the following accounting identity
T BYt = T RY0 ln EXtR =MtR =2 + (T RYt
45

T RY0 ) ln EXtR =MtR =2;

The e¤ect of the policy on output, consumption, and employement depend on the response. In the
negotiated case, US consumption falls and employment rises during the policy.

28

which permits us to measure the direct and interacted e¤ects of shocks and initial conditions.
With 6 possible determinants of each variable it is impractical to separate out each e¤ect.
Instead, we plot a few reasonable counterfactuals. First, we plot the dynamics assuming that
there are no shocks to either type of trade cost. This substantially reduces what we called
the scale e¤ect since about 85 percent of the growth in trade could be attributed to changes
in common trade cost. Now the peak trade de…cit in the 80s and 2000s are nearly identical at
about 2 percent. Moreover, the US trade balance is roughly in balance from 1990 to 1997 and
half as big since the Great Recession. Compared to our crude accounting for trade integration
in Figure 2, our GE model suggests changes in trade barriers are an even more important
source of the trade de…cit over the sample.
We also plot the impact of the asymmetric trade shock plus the common trade cost shock
interacted with all the other shocks. This makes it clear that the larger de…cits in the 2000s
relatively to the 1980s is almost entirely due to trade policy.

6. Sensitivity Analysis
Here we examine the sensitivity of our …ndings for the benchmark model by varying
some key modelling assumptions. A general …nding is that the benchmark model is most
conservative in measuring the contribution of asymmetric trade policy shocks to net trade
‡ows.46 We …rst show that the persistence and variance of the asymmetric trade cost shock is
a crucial determinant of net trade ‡ows and relative prices. If we slightly lower its persistence
we substantially increase its importance for net trade ‡ows. If we eliminate it, so that there
are no unilateral changes in trade barriers, the model fails to match the dynamics of relative
prices or the nominal trade balance. If we replace asymmetric trade costs with asymmetric
demand shocks to the taste for imports, we …nd almost identical results to the low persistence
calibration. We vary the …xed export cost to make exporting a static decision and …nd trade
cost shocks to be a bigger driver of net trade ‡ows. We also make exporting more persistent
by increasing the ratio of the startup to continuation cost and …nd a larger role for asymmetric
trade cost shocks. We eliminate pricing-to-market and …nd the model attributes much more
46

We will focus on the export-import ratio rather than the trade balance to gdp ratio since the impact of
common trade costs on trade ‡ows is not very sensitive to our modelling assumptions.

29

of the ‡uctuations in the nominal trade balance to shocks to asymmetric trade shocks. The
results from these calibrations are reported in Table 6.
A. Persistence and variance of asymmetric trade policy shocks
We have shown that asymmetric trade policy shocks generate a motive for intertemporal
trade. We have also found that they are important to match the high volatility of relative
prices with limited ‡uctuations in relative trade ‡ows. We now consider an experiment in
which we lower their persistence and one in which we eliminate them entirely.
The persistence of shocks determines the incentive to borrow and lend. In our benchmark
estimation, the asymmetric trade costs are near a unit root, leading us to …nd a relatively small
role from asymmetric trade cost shocks for the real or nominal export-import ratio. There
are a couple of reasons to suspect our estimation overstates the persistence of asymmetric
trade shocks. First, many asymmetric trade policies are temporary such as anti-dumping
duties, voluntary export restraints, quotas, or even tari¤s, with well de…ned terminal points.
Second, these asymmetric shocks identify the real exchange rate, which is well-known to be
near unit root. To account for these concerns, we consider a version with a less persistent
process.
We re-estimate a version of the model with

d

= 0:975 and …nd asymmetric trade cost

shocks to be more important in real and nominal net trade ‡ows ‡uctuations. An interesting
feature is that these shocks tended to o¤set the ‡uctuations in net trade ‡ows. Absent these
shocks, from 2010 to 2015, the nominal export-import ratio would have averaged only -6.4
percent rather than -23.4 percent.
We next eliminate the asymmetric trade shocks

d

= 0 . This variation provides a much

worse …t to the data as we can no longer match the terms of trade and real exchange rate
separately. Figure 12 plots the real exchange rate, terms of trade, and nominal export-import
ratio for this variation. The US real exchange rate now ‡uctuates very little and primarily
mirrors the di¤erence in productivity growth which implies a sustained appreciation of about
10 percent over the sample. On the other hand, the terms of trade ‡uctuates much more than
the data and is even more volatile than the real exchange rate. However, nearly all of the
terms of trade ‡uctuations are attributed to measurement error. This then implies that the

30

nominal export-import ratio is quite far o¤ from the data with trade de…cits that are nearly
twice as large as those observed in the data since 2010.
B. Demand shocks
Asymmetric trade policy shocks a¤ect the relative cost of getting products from foreign
factories to domestic consumers and tilt world demand towards the relatively low trade cost
country which then causes their goods to appreciate. An alternative approach is to shock
the relative taste for imported goods as in the international …nance literature (Pavlova and
Rigobon, 2007, Gabaix and Maggiori, 2014). In our partial equilibrium trade wedge accounting, taste and trade cost shocks work identically for real trade ‡ows but not for nominal
trade ‡ows as trade cost shocks create a gap between these di¤erent trade ‡ows. In our GE
estimation this feature leads us to estimate a less persistent shock process and thus a larger
role for them in net trade ‡ows.
From Table 6 we see that treating these asymmetric shocks as taste shocks leads them to
generate larger ‡uctuations in real and nominal net trade ‡ows. Without these taste shocks
as the driver of asymmetries, since 2010 the US would have run a nominal trade de…cit of
about 8 percent versus a de…cit of 23 percent. Their importance in net ‡ows is quite similar
to the case with less persistent asymmetric trade shocks.
C. Persistence of exporting - altering the short-run and long-run elasticity
Now we consider how the time it takes to expand exports a¤ects our results. Speci…cally,
a key feature of the micro and macro data is that export participation and exports only
gradually respond to changes in trade policy or other aggregate shocks. We capture this by
using a version of the Baldwin-Dixit-Krugman-Roberts-Tybout sunk cost of exporting model.
In this model, a relatively high up-front cost of exporting makes part of the entry decision an
investment in lowering future export costs. We can vary the size of this investment by varying
the ratio of the startup to continuation costs. We consider two variations. The …rst is a static
model of exporting so that f0 = f1 . The second is a model with an even larger gap between
the entry and continuation cost. As we move from the static to benchmark to the higher sunk
cost model, we increase the gap between the short-run and long-run trade elasticity. In the
static model, there is only one trade elasticity. In our high sunk cost model, trade responds
31

less in the short-run and more in the long-run relative to our benchmark model.
The static model provides a worse …t to the data. We estimate a slightly higher Armington
elasticity and slightly large asymmetric trade cost shocks. It also attributes a larger fraction of
the ‡uctuations in real net trade ‡ows to these asymmetric trade shocks than our benchmark
model and a smaller share of the ‡uctuations in the nominal export-import ratio.
The high sunk cost model is a slightly worse …t than our benchmark estimation. It suggests
that asymmetric trade costs are more important in the ‡uctuations in nominal and real net
trade ‡ows than our benchmark estimation. It also suggests somewhat di¤erent contributions
in key moments. For instance, the Plaza Accord in 1985 shows up as sharply reducing the
real export-import ratio.
D. Pricing-to-market
Now we consider the role of pricing-to-market in accounting for net trade ‡ows. Specifically, we eliminate pricing-to-market in the static exporting model which yields the conventional model used in both studies of trade integration and international business cycle
‡uctuations. In this model asymmetric trade shocks are more important drivers of net ‡ows.
Figure 13 compares the estimated contribution of asymmetric trade shocks in this model for
net trade ‡ows, relative production, and relative spending to those in the benchmark and
static export model with pricing-to-market.
Without pricing-to-market we estimate a much lower Armington elasticity of 1.37 and
thus require much larger shocks to the asymmetric trade costs. This substantially increases
the importance of asymmetric trade costs in accounting for nominal net trade ‡ows (see
Table 8). The model now predicts that about half of the nominal export-import ratio since
2010 is accounted for by these shocks. Without pricing-to-market these shocks contribute
signi…cantly more to the real export-import ratio and have been a strong force pushing that
towards surplus. Indeed, without these shocks the real trade de…cit would have been about
10 percentage points larger. The bottom two panels show that these asymmetric trade shocks
are now about twice as important for cross country di¤erences in output and about 5 times
as important for cross-country di¤erences in real spending. Indeed, the static model with no
pricing-to-market suggests US real expenditures relative to the rest of the world have risen

32

by 10 percent since 2000 compared to only 3 percent in the benchmark model.
We conclude by comparing the impact of a temporary change in trade policy in the
conventional trade model to our benchmark model in the bottom two panels of Figure 10. For
simplicity, we focus just on the case of a gradual trade war and put the same shocks through
both models. Here we see that the conventional model predicts negligible ‡uctuations in
the trade balance and a much smaller e¤ect on trade (15% of the decline in the benchmark
model). This is largely a result of having a much lower trade elasticity and no reasons for
…rms to act in advance of changes in trade policy.

7. Summary
There is little doubt that the tripling of US trade from 1980 to 2015 is due to changes in
trade barriers and that these barriers have di¤ered on imports and exports over time. There
is more doubt about how these trade barriers have in‡uenced the trade balance. To quantify
the role of changing trade barriers for the US trade balance, we undertake a dynamic analysis
of US business cycles and trade integration. Interpreting the data on business cycles and
trade integration through two standard dynamic trade models, we …nd that changes in trade
barriers matter for the trade balance, particularly when measured as a share of GDP.
Our analysis uses observed trade ‡ows and relative prices to examine the sources of trade
balance dynamics in a large class of models. The relatively large movements in relative prices
compared to net trade ‡ows is key to identifying shocks. We show that the traditional source
of movements in the trade balance operating through changes in relative prices or relative
expenditure are less important than previously understood, particularly if one focuses solely
on their contemporaneous e¤ects. Allowing for gradual trade dynamics is important to not
overstate the contribution of trade barriers. Extending standard models to allow for gradual
trade dynamics and changing trade barriers appears necessary for understanding the cyclical
behavior of the trade balance and the transmission of business cycles. While we focus on
gradual trade expansion from the entry and exit decisions of …rms, alternative mechanisms
for gradualness should be explored, but in a manner that is disciplined by the movements in
the terms of trade, real exchange rate, and relative expenditures.
We show that changes in trade policy matter for the US trade balance (and relative

33

prices) in a period when trade grew. Whether changes in trade barriers continue to in‡uence
the trade balance depends on future policy and non-policy developments. There appear
con‡icting prospects though. On the one hand, common trade barrier have been fairly stable
since the early to mid-2000s after steadily falling from the 1980s. As these trade barriers
likely re‡ect bilateral changes in trade policy and there are limited prospects for US trade
agreements on the horizon trade may be less important for the trade balance going forward.
On the other hand, there is strong evidence that US inward and outward barriers have moved
apart since the Great Recession. If trade policy is aimed at bringing these back to pre-Great
Recession levels, then these may strongly in‡uence the trade balance going forward.
Our paper clari…es how alternate assumptions about price setting and export participation
identify the source of aggregate ‡uctuations. Without pricing-to-market or a dynamic export
decision, we infer a much larger role of asymmetric trade policy shocks for borrowing and
lending and aggregate ‡uctuations. These assumptions also imply very di¤erent estimates of
the Armington elasticity and outcomes for alternative changes in trade policy.
Finally, we have focused quite narrowly on how changes in trade policy and traditional
business cycle shocks a¤ect the trade balance as this is a key variable in many models and
a political lightning rod. Since our general equilibrium model is estimated to match international relative prices, US and ROW production, net and gross trade ‡ows, there are many
other features of international business cycles that are puzzling in standard models that our
analysis can account for, such as the tendency of the output to be more correlated than consumption, the high real exchange rate volatility, and the weak correlation between relative
consumption and the real exchange rate (the Backus-Smith puzzle). Our framework is also
useful for understanding how much changes in trade barriers may have boosted growth along
the transition to a more integrated economy as well as the source of the global slowdown in
trade and growth since the Great Recession (see Alessandria and Mix, 2017).

34

Data Appendix
Here we describe the main series. Recall that our main equation is
ln (X=M ) = ln (! =!)

[ln (Px =P )

ln (Pm =P )] + ln (D =D) ;

D - equally weighted avg. of Real PCE: Goods and Real Gross Private Domestic Investment
D - US trade-weighted World Economies Industrial Production (Dallas Fed)
P/P - Real Broad Trade-Weighted Exchange Value of the US$ (Mar-73=100) (FRB)
X - Real Exports of Goods & Services (SAAR, Bil.Chn.2005$) (BEA)
M - Real Imports of Goods & Services (SAAR, Bil.Chn.2005$) (BEA)
PX - Exports of Goods & Services: Chain Price Index (SA, 2005=100) (BEA)
PM - Imports of Goods & Services: Chain Price Index (SA, 2005=100) (BEA)
NII - Real Net Inventory Investment (SAAR, Bil.Chn.2005$) (BEA)
P - Consumption de‡ator (Consumption : Chain Price Index (SA, 2005=100)) (BEA)
Time period: 1979q1 to 2015q4.
An Export participation series is calculated using Compustat (1978-1996), the Census’
Pro…le of US Exporters (1996-2015), and number of …rms from Business Dynamics Statistics. For 1980 to 1996 we calculate the share of manufacturing and wholesale …rms
exporting in Compustat. To account for Compustat overweighting large …rms we focus
on participation among …rms with annual sale less than 20 percent of the median …rm.
For 1996 to 2014, we use a count of exporters from the Census data and divide by the
BDS …rms in manufacturing, wholesale, transportation and retail sectors. We only use 20
percent of the retail …rms in our count of total …rms to adjust for the low export participation and size. We adjust participation in 1996 for a poor match rate in the Pro…le data
and then scale the Compustat data using the 1996 ratio of Compustat to Census Pro…le
participation.
Penn World Tables 9.0 Data: We used the nominal export and import share of GDP.

References
Alessandria, G. 2009. “Consumer Search, Price Dispersion, and International Relative Price
Fluctuations”International Economic Review, 50(3) 803-829.
Alessandria, G. and J. Kaboski. 2011. “Pricing-to-Market and the Failure of the Absolute
PPP”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011(1) 91-127.
Alessandria, G. and H. Choi, 2007. “Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net Export
Dynamics?”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 289-336.
— — , 2014a. “Establishment Heterogeneity, Exporter Dynamics, and the E¤ect of Trade
Liberalization.”Journal of International Economics.
— — , 2014b. “Do Falling Iceberg Costs Account for Recent US Export Growth?”Journal of
International Economics.
Alessandria, G., J. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan, 2011. “US Trade and Inventory Dynamics,”
American Economic Review 101 (3), 303-07.
35

— — , 2013. “Trade Wedges, Inventories, and International Business Cycles,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(1), 1-20.
Alessandria, G. and C. Mix, 2017. “The Global Trade Slowdown: Trade and growth, cause
and e¤ect”mimeo.
Backus, D., P. Kehoe, and F. Kydland. 1994. “Dynamics of the Trade Balance and the Terms
of Trade: The J Curve?”American Economic Review, LXXXIV, 84–103.
Baldwin, R. and P. Krugman, 1989. “Persistent Trade E¤ects of Large Exchange Rate
Shocks,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4), 821-854.
Barattieri, A., 2014. “Comparative Advantage, Service Trade, and Global Imbalances,”Journal of International Economics, Vol. 92, 2014, pages 1-13.
Bown, C. and M. Crowley, 2013. “Import Protection, Business Cycles, and Exchange Rates:
Evidence from the Great Recession,”Journal of International Economics, 90(4): 50-64.
Caballero, R., E. Farhi, and P. Gourinchas. 2008. “An Equilibrium Model of “Global Imbalances”and Low Interest Rates.”American Economic Review 98(1), 358–393.
Chari, V.V., P. Kehoe, and E. McGrattan, 2002. “Can Sticky Price Models Generate Volatile
and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?”Review of Economic Studies, 69(3): 533-63.
Corsetti, G., L. Dedola, and S. Leduc, 2008, “International Risk Sharing and the Transmission
of Productivity Shocks,”Review of Economic Studies, 75(2), 443-473.
Croce, M., R. Colacito, S. Ho, and P. Howard, 2012.“BKK the EZ Way. International LongRun Growth News and Capital Flows.”American Economic Review, 108(11): 3416-49.
Das, S., M. Roberts, and J. Tybout, 2007. “Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity,
and Export Dynamics,”Econometrica, 75(3), 837-873.
Dixit, A.K., 1989a. “Hysteresis, Import Penetration, and Exchange Rate Pass-Through,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CIV, 205–228.
— — , 1989b. “Entry and Exit Decisions Under Uncertainty,” Journal of Political Economy,
XCVII, 620–638.
Dekle, R., Eaton, J., S. Kortum, 2008. “Global Rebalancing with Gravity: Measuring the
Burden of Adjustment,”IMF Sta¤ Papers, 55(3), 511-40.
Drozd, L. and J. Nosal, 2012. “Understanding International Prices: Customers as Capital,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 102 (1).
Eaton, J. S. Kortum, B. Neiman and J. Romalis, 2016a. “Trade and the Global Recession,”
American Economic Review, 106(11), 3401-38.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum and B. Neiman, 2016b. “Obstfeld and Rogo¤’s International Macro
Puzzles: A Quantitative Assessment”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 72, 5-23.
36

Engel, C., 1999, “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
Economy, 107(3), 507-538.
Engel, C. and J. Wang. 2011. “International Trade in Durable Goods: Understanding Volatility, Cyclicality, and Elasticities,”Journal of International Economics, 83(1), 37-52.
Feenstra, R., 1994. “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
American Economic Review, 84(1), 157-77.
Fitzgerald, D. 2012. “Trade Costs, Asset Market Frictions and Risk Sharing,” American
Economic Review, 102 (6), 2700-33.
Gabaix, X. and M. Maggiori. 2015. “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), 1369–420
Gallaway, M.., C. McDaniel, S. Rivera. 2003. “Short-run and long-run industry-level estimates
of U.S. Armington elasticities” North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 14, 49–
68.
Heathcoate, J. and F. Perri. 2002. “Financial Autarky and International Business Cycles”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(3), 601-27.
— — , 2014. “Assessing International E¢ ciency”, Handbook of International Economics.
Hooper, P., K. Johnson and J. Marquez, 2000. “Trade Elasticities for G-7 Countries,”Princeton Studies in International Economics No. 87 (Princeton University Press: Princeton NJ).
Kehoe, T. J., K. J. Ruhl, and J. B. Steinberg, 2017, “Global Imbalances and Structural
Change in the United States,”Journal of Political Economy.
Kose, A. and K. Yi. 2006. “Can the Standard International Business Cycle Model Explain the
Relation Between Trade and Comovement,”Journal of International Economics 68 267–95.
Junz, H. and R. Rhomberg, 1973. “Price Competitiveness in Export Trade Among Industrial
Countries.”American Economic Review, 63(2), 412-418.
Leibovici, F. and M. Waugh, 2014. “International Trade and Intertemporal Substitution,”
NBER WP 20498.
Levchenko, A., L. Lewis and L. Tesar, 2010. “The Collapse of International Trade During the
2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun,”IMF Economic Review, 58(2): 214-53.
Marquez, J. 2002. “Estimating Trade Elasticities,” Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht.
Magee, S., 1973. “Currency Contracts, Pass-through and Devaluations,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity. 1: 303-325.
McGrattan, E. and E. Prescott, 2010. “Technology Capital and the US Current Account,”
American Economic Review, 100(4): 1493–1522
37

Meade, E., 1988. “Exchange Rates, Adjustment, and the J-Curve.”Federal Reserve Bulletin,
74(10): 633-644.
Mendoza, E., Quadrini, V., and V. Rios-Rull, 2009, “Financial integration, …nancial deepness
and global imbalances,”Journal of Political Economy 117.
Obstfeld, M and K. Rogo¤, 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics:Is
There a Common Cause?”NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15
— — , 2005. “Global Current Account Imbalances and Exchange Rate Adjustments.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 67-146.
Pavlova, A., and R. Rigobon, 2007. “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” The Review of
Financial Studies, 20, 1139-80.
Ra¤o, A., 2008. “Net Exports, Consumption Volatility and International Business Cycle
Models.”Journal of International Economics, 75 (1), 14-29.
Roberts, M. and J. Tybout, 1997. “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical Model
of Entry with Sunk Costs,”American Economic Review, 87(4), 545-564.
Ruhl, K., 2004. “The international elasticity puzzle,”mimeo.
Ravikumar, B., A. Santacreu, and M. Sposi, 2017. “Capital Accumulation and Dynamic
Gains from Trade,”mimeo.
Tre‡er, D., 2004. “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,”American
Economic Review, 94(4) 870-895.
Uzawa, H., 1968. “Time Preference, the Consumption Function, and Optimum Asset Holdings,” J. N. Wolfe, ed., Value, Capital, and Growth: Papers in Honour of Sir John Hicks
(Edinburgh, Scotland: University of Edinburgh Press, 1968)
Waugh, M., 2011. “International trade and income di¤erences,”American Economic Review
100(5), 2093-124

38

Table 1: Estimates of US Export-Import Ratio
Level1 Level2 Di¤erence
Short-run
Price

Spending

3

0.283*
(2.52)

0.137***
(4.66)

1

1

1

Adjustment

ECM2

ECM3

0.119*** 0.180***
(5.02)
(6.57)
1

0.204***
(7.98)

0.608***
(4.17)

0.576***
(4.01)

0.0659*** 0.0667** 0.0687***
(3.54)
(3.54)
(3.98)

Long-run
Price
N
rmse
R2a
Inventory

ECM1

148
0.348
-5.82
N

148
0.075
0.682
N

148
0.0215
0.262
N

1.026*** 1.091***
(7.75)
(6.36)
148
148
0.0201
0.0192
0.352
0.411
N
N

1.124***
(5.78)
148
0.0187
0.437
Y

Period: 1979Q1-2015Q4. T-stats based on Newey-West s.e. in parentheses. ECM
stands for error correction model. p < 0:05,
p < 0:01,
p < 0:001

Table 2: Decomposition of Export-Import Ratio and Trade Balance to GDP Ratio (%)
Real Export-Import Ratio
Trade Balance to GDP Ratio
Level Di¤erence SR SR/LR
Initial Trade 1986 Trade Avg. Trade
Whole sample
Business Cycle 51.5
43.6
40.2
76.8
16.4
21.8
52.0
Trade Wedge
31.6
30.6
26.8
16.8
58.0
54.5
48.1
Comovement
16.9
25.8
33.1
6.5
25.5
23.7
-0.1
Since 1991
Business Cycle 66.8
53.6
42.2
93.2
24.0
31.9
76.0
Trade Wedge
28.1
22.8
20.5
13.9
42.7
37.7
28.7
Comovement
5.1
23.6
37.2
-7.0
36.8
33.9
-1.2
11.2

T RY
Note: SR uses coe¢ cient on di¤erence terms only.

39

13.0

20.0

Table 3: Parameters
Fixed Parameters
0.99 0.0001
Calibrated Parameters
Parameter Value Target
0.301 Labor
25
!
0.277 Trade share
10
f0
0.128 Export
20
f1
0.037 Exporter stopper rate 2.5
0.150 Exporter premium
50
4.000 Markup
33

zc
zd
c
d

b
c
d

zc
zd
b
p

Estimated Parameters
prior mean post. mean 90% HPD interval prior pstdev
0.950
0.995
0.990
0.999
unif
0.029
0.950
0.996
0.993
0.998
unif
0.029
0.950
0.998
0.996
1.000
unif
0.029
0.950
0.999
0.998
1.000
unif
0.029
0.950
0.937
0.913
0.962
unif
0.029
0.004
0.006
0.005
0.007
invg 0.200
0.004
0.040
0.035
0.044
invg 0.200
0.010
0.012
0.011
0.014
invg 0.200
0.010
0.011
0.010
0.012
invg 0.200
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002
invg 0.200
0.010
0.023
0.021
0.025
invg 0.050
0.500
0.559
0.531
0.587
norm 0.100
0.010
0.002
0.002
0.003
invg 0.100
2.495
2.764
2.407
3.106
unif
0.863
4.500
7.469
6.786
8.000
unif
2.021

40

Table 4: Alternative Models - Parameter Estimates
Benchmark
Static
Full
=0.975
=0 High Sunk Demand
PTM No PTM
d
d
0.995
0.984
0.990
0.995
0.990
0.995
0.994
zc
0.996
0.990
0.991
0.996
0.990
0.995
0.998
zd
0.998
0.998
0.994
0.998
0.992
0.999
0.999
c
0.999
0.975
0.999
0.997
0.999
0.994
d
0.937
0.977
0.962
0.937
0.972
0.934
0.94
b
0.006
0.010
0.003
0.007
0.027
0.004
0.038
c
0.040
0.047
0.029
0.090
0.043
0.104
d
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
zc
0.011
0.011
0.011
0.011
0.012
0.011
0.011
zd
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002
b
0.023
0.024
0.162
0.024
0.024
0.019
0.052
p
0.559
0.535
0.524
0.720
0.682
0.597
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
2.764
2.249
3.622
2.724
2.124
3.330
1.385
7.469
7.822
7.434
7.318
7.586
7.644
7.577
Density 2158.3
2134.9
1550.3
2155.3
2144.4
2136.4
2032.0

Table 5: Armington Elasticity Estimates from Simulated Data
Level
Di¤.
ECM
SR
LR
All Shocks
0.511
0.152
0.152
0.714
(0.002) (0.002) (0.002)
(0.002)
No Prod. Shocks 0.476
0.159
0.159
0.485
(0.000) (0.002) (0.002)
(0.003)
No Trade Shocks 4.202
2.358
2.357
6.085
(0.007) (0.005) (0.005)
(0.069)
No Beta Shocks 0.509
0.014
0.015
0.934
(0.002) (0.000) (0.000)
(0.028)

41

Table 6 : Contribution of Shocks to Conditional Variance (%)
Zc
Zd
"p
Initial Joint
c
d
Real Export-Import Ratio
Bench-Full
0.0
43.8
0.0
0.5
50.6
2.6
22.2
Bench- d =0.975
0.0
72.5
0.0
27.4 216.4
2.8
81.6
Bench- d =0
0.0
41.1
0.0
0.0 223.8 132.4
36.5
Bench-High Sunk 0.0
52.7
0.0
1.1
50.7
2.7
26.6
Bench-Demand
0.0
75.5
0.0
13.7 123.1
2.6
49.3
Static-PTM
0.0
28.6
0.0
1.7
44.1
2.6
17.3
Static-No PTM
0.0
38.4
0.0
11.6 91.5
12.3
29.6
Real Trade Share
Bench-Full
0.0
1.9
94.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.5
Bench- d =0.975
0.0
0.9
100.3 0.0
0.1
0.0
1.5
Bench- d =0
0.0
1.4
69.4
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.5
Bench-High Sunk 0.0
1.9
90.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
Bench-Demand
0.0
2.0
56.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
1.5
Static-PTM
0.0
2.0
108.5 0.0
0.0
0.0
3.8
Static-No PTM
0.0
1.5
110.3 0.0
0.0
0.0
3.5
Real TB to GDP Ratio
Bench-Full
0.00 39.5
0.00
0.3
37.3
1.9
1.8
49.0
Bench- d =0.975
0.0
61.7
0.0
20.4 160.0
2.1
13.9
21.9
Bench- d =0
0.0
34.9
0.0
0.0 169.9 97.8
6.2
16.4
Bench-High Sunk 0.0
47.5
0.0
0.8
37.5
2.0
2.7
49.8
Bench-Demand
0.0
68.7
0.0
10.2 91.3
1.9
10.2
19.6
Static-PTM
0.0
25.7
0.0
1.2
32.6
1.9
0.7
50.8
Static-No PTM
0.0
32.4
0.0
8.7
67.7
9.1
1.6
58.2
Nominal Export-Import Ratio
Bench-Full
0.0
66.3
0.0
6.1
56.6
0.0
27.5
Bench- d =0.975
0.0
99.8
0.0
68.3 227.9
0.0
89.9
Bench- d =0
0.0
41.9
0.0
0.0 194.1
0.0
32.2
Bench-High Sunk 0.0
74.9
0.0
8.7
53.5
0.0
30.8
Bench-Demand
0.0 101.1
0.0
45.3 131.4
0.0
52.6
Static-PTM
0.0
54.5
0.0
4.7
57.2
0.0
25.1
Static-No PTM
0.0
51.7
0.0
20.4 60.4
0.0
12.4
Nominal Trade Share
Bench-Full
0.0
0.7
58.2
3.1
0.0
0.0
0.2
Bench- d =0.975
0.0
0.5
61.4
3.3
0.0
0.0
0.1
Bench- d =0
0.0
0.6
49.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
4.8
Bench-High Sunk 0.0
0.6
54.9
3.3
0.0
0.0
0.4
Bench-Demand
0.0
0.6
33.0
3.2
0.0
0.0
5.2
Static-PTM
0.0
0.9
64.2
2.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
Static-No PTM
0.0
0.8
70.4
2.2
0.2
0.0
0.1
Nominal TB to GDP Ratio
Bench-Full
0.0
45.5
0.0
3.6
32.7
0.0
4.3
49.1
Bench- d =0.975
0.0
68.2
0.0
44.7 135.5
0.0
8.3
22.6
Bench- d =0
0.0
25.7
0.0
0.0 109.7
0.0
4.2
4.1
Bench-High Sunk 0.0
50.0
0.0
5.1
30.5
0.0
5.9
45.1
Bench-Demand
0.0
70.1
0.0
30.0 77.0
0.0
7.3
19.9
Static-PTM
0.0
47.3
0.0
3.3
40.9
0.0
0.9
78.2
Static-No PTM
0.0
48.8
0.0
17.5 46.7
0.0
0.1
67.7

42

Total
186.3
186.3
186.3
186.3
186.3
186.3
186.3
39.8
39.8
39.8
39.8
39.8
39.8
39.8
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.6
147.5
147.6
208.5
147.6
147.6
147.6
147.6
50.3
49.6
40.6
48.7
54.2
54.9
50.2
2.5
2.5
3.8
2.6
2.5
2.1
1.3

Figure 1: US Trade Balance, Trade Share, and Real Exchange Rate
A. Trade Balance and Real Exchange Rate
1

Real Trade Weighted US Dollar Index: Broad

Real Trade Balance (% of GDP)

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

-6
1979Q1

TB/Y
RER
1984Q1

1989Q1

1994Q1

1999Q1
Year

2004Q1

2009Q1

2014Q1

B. Trade Balance and Trade Share
1

30

25

-1

-2
20
-3

-4
15
-5

-6
1979Q1

TB/Y
TRY
10
1984Q1

1989Q1

1994Q1

1999Q1
Year

43

2004Q1

2009Q1

2014Q1

Real Trade Share of GDP (%)

Real Trade Balance (% of GDP)

0

Figure 2: Contribution of Trade Growth to Trade Balance
1

Trade Balance (% of GDP)

0

-1

-2

-3

-4
TB/Y
TBY/Y 86wt
Business Cycle

-5

-6
1979Q1

1984Q1

1989Q1

1994Q1

1999Q1
Year

2004Q1

2009Q1

2014Q1

Figure 3: Comovement of RER
B. Trade-Expenditure Ratio (t+k)
1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4
Correlation

Correlation

A. Trade Ratio (t+k)
1

0.2

0.2

0

0

-0.2

-0.2
Data
Data

-0.4

-0.4

Theory

Theory
-0.6

-0.6
-12

-8

-4

0
Quarter (k)

4

8

12

-12

44

-8

-4

0
Quarter (k)

4

8

12

Figure 4: Net Trade Flows and Wedges
A. Export-Import Ratio
0.2
Data
Static
Dynamic

Predicted Export-Import Ratio

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4
1979Q1

1984Q1

1989Q1

1994Q1

1999Q1
Year

2004Q1

2009Q1

2014Q1

B. Export-Import Ratio and Trade Wedges
0.2
Data
Static
Dynamic

0.1

Trade Wedge

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4
1979Q1

1984Q1

1989Q1

1994Q1

1999Q1
Year

45

2004Q1

2009Q1

2014Q1

Figure 5: Dispersion in Net Trade Flows and Trade Share of GDP

Figure 6: Common Trade Wedge
1
0.9
0.8

Common Trade Wedge

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
Wedge
Trend (HP1600)

0
-0.1
1979Q1

1984Q1

1989Q1

1994Q1

1999Q1
Year

46

2004Q1

2009Q1

2014Q1

Figure 7: Smoothed Series and Shocks
A. Smoothed Series (Data and Model)
US Real Export-Import RatioUS Trade share of GDP
0.1

0
-0.1

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.1

US IP

0
0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.3

-0.1

-0.4

-0.4
1980

1990

2000

-0.6
1980

2010

Relative IP (US-ROW)

1990

2000

-0.2
1980

2010

1990

US Relative Price (RER +TOT)

2010

TOT

0.1

0.2

2000

0.1
0.05
0
0

0
-0.2

-0.1

-0.2
1980

-0.05

1990

2000

-0.4
1980

2010

1990

2000

2010

-0.1
1980

1990

2000

2010

B. Estimated Shocks
Common Technology (Zc)
2

Productivity Gap

Beta gap (US - ROW, %)

4

4

2

0

2

0
-2

0
-2

-4
-6
1980

-2

-4

1990

2000

2010

Common Iceberg Cost
2

-6
1980

1990

2000

2010

Differential Iceberg Cost
4

-4
1980

4

1990

2000

2010

TOT error

2

1
2
0

0
0

-1

-2

-2
1980

1990

2000

2010

-2
1980

1990

2000

47

2010

-4
1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 8: Dynamics of Trade Costs and Productivity: Expected and Actual

Trade Cost Gap (
0.2

d

)

0
-0.2

Common TC (

c

)

0.2
0.15

2

0.1

-0.4

0.05

-0.6

0

-0.8

-0.05

-1

-0.1

0
-2
-4
-6
1980

0

H

10 -3
4

Productivity Gap (Z d )

Common Prod. (Z c )

0.3
0.25

-0.1

20

1990

2000

2010

d

10 -3

15

0.2
-0.2

10
0.15

-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
1980

0

0.05

1990

2000

2010

0
1980

US Exporters

1990

2000

2010

ROW Exporters

0.4

0.3

5

0.1

0.25

Initial
Model
Data

0.2
0.15

0.2
0.1
0.1

0
1980

0.05

1990

2000

2010

0
1980

1990

48

2000

2010

-5
1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 9: Impulse Response
A. Di¤erential Shocks
A. Real Export-Import Ratio

0.5

b. Nominal Export-Import Ratio
0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1.5

-1.5

c. RER

3

2

1
-2

-2

-2.5

-2.5

-3

0

-3
0

10

20

d. TOT

3

-1
0

10

20

0

e. Y*/Y

1

10

20

f. Home Trade Share of GDP
1

Zd

2

0

0

1

-1

-1

0

-2

-2

d

-1

-3
0

10

20

-3
0

10

20

0

10

20

B. Common Shocks
a. Output

1.5

b. C

1.5

Zc
c

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

0

c. Real Trade Share of GDP

2

5

10

15

20

25

15

20

25

d. Exporters

2.5
2

1.5

1.5
1
1
0.5
0.5
0

0

-0.5

-0.5
0

5

10

15

20

25

0

49

5

10

Figure 10: Temporary Trade Protection
A. Di¤erential Trade Costs ( d )

B. Common Trade Costs ( c )

12

16

10

Negotiated

Trade War (TW)

Gradual TW

Permanent TW

14
12

Negotiated

Trade War (TW)

Gradual TW

Permanent TW

8

Percent

Percent

10
6

4

8
6
4

2
2
0

0

-2

-2
0

5

10

15

20
Period

25

30

35

40

0

C. Trade Share of GDP

5

10

15

20
Period

25

30

35

40

D. Trade Balance of GDP

35

0.6
Negotiated

Trade War (TW)

Gradual TW

Permanent TW

0.5

Negotiated

Trade War (TW)

Gradual TW

Permanent TW

30
0.4

0.3
Percent

Percent

25

20

0.2

0.1

0
15
-0.1

10

-0.2
0

5

10

15

20
Period

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20
Period

25

30

35

40

Trade War Dynamics - Dynamic and Static Models
E. Trade Share of GDP

F. Trade Balance of GDP

35

0.6
Dynamic
Dynamic
Static

0.5

Static

30
0.4

0.3
Percent

Percent

25

20

0.2

0.1

0
15
-0.1

10

-0.2
0

5

10

15

20
Period

25

30

35

40

0

50

5

10

15

20
Period

25

30

35

40

Figure 11: Decomposition Tade, Export-Import Ratio and Trade Balance
A. Real Trade Share

B. Real Export-Import Ratio
40

120
Productivity

Trades

Discount

Initial

Productivity

Data

Trades

Discount

Initial

Data

30
100
20
80

10
0
Percent

Percent

60

-10

40

-20
-30

20

-40
0
-50
-20
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

-60
1980

2015

1985

1990

1995

Period

2000

2005

2010

2015

Period

C. Real Trade Balance to GDP Ratio

D. Real TBY excluding each shock

6

1
Productivity

Trades

Discount

Initial

Joint

Data

0

4

-1

2

Percent

Percent

-2
0

-3

-2

-4
Data
-4

-5

No trade shocks
No tech. shocks

-6

-6

No discount shocks
( d+ c)* (all the other shocks)

-8
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

-7
1980

2015

Period

51

1985

1990

1995

2000
Period

2005

2010

2015

Figure 12: Estimated Time series in model with no Asymmetric Trade Shocks

Real Exchange Rate

30

Terms of Trade

40

20

Data
Model
Measurement

20

%

%

10
0

0
-20

-10
-20
1980

20

1990

2000

-40
1980

2010

1990

2000

2010

Nominal Export-Import Ratio

%

0
-20
-40
-60
1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 13 : Contribution of Asymmetric Trade Costs and Pricing-to-market

15

Nominal Export-Import Ratio
Benchmark
Static-NoPTM
Static-PTM

10

0

5
0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15
1980

3

1990

2000

-15
1980

2010

Relative Production (Y*/Y)

10
5

1

0

1990

2000

2010

Relative Spending (D*/D)

%

2

%

Real Export-Import Ratio

10

%

5

%

15

0

-5

-1

-10

-2
1980

1990

2000

2010

-15
1980

52

1990

2000

2010

Appendix 2 (not for publication)
A. Empirical Sensitivity
In our estimates of the partial equilibrium model, our use of rest of world industrial
production as a proxy for world demand introduces a bias. Here we show the bias is relatively
small. The main problem is that industrial production may di¤er from expenditures owing
to the ROW trade balance. We can construct a foreign measure of real expenditures by
recognizing that the US trade balance will account for the di¤erence between production and
spending in the rest of the world.
DN = Y N + IM N

EX N

Assuming a steady state with all prices equal to 1 we can rewrite
DR = Y R 1 +

IM R

EX R
YR

=YR 1

tby U S

Y US
YR

Using this equation, we construct a new measure of foreign expenditures. The following
table reports our original …ndings along with this alternative measure of foreign demand
with various controls. In general, we …nd that price elasticities seem to be slightly lower
with this measure while the response to the gap in spending is slightly higher as the gap
in spending is now smaller than the gap in production. These regressions explain about
5 percent more of the ‡uctuations in the export-import ratio but our …nding that there is
substantial unexplained component and net trade ‡ows respond gradually remain robust.
The following …gure shows the pattern of trade wedges, common and the gap, are quite
similar to our benchmark case and still di¤er in substantial ways compared to a static trade
model.

B. Common Trade Wedge Computation
Using the empirical estimates, we compute home and foreign trade wedges with the equations for demands imported and exported goods, ! Ht and ! F t ; respectively. Then, we estimate
the common trade wedge, ! Ct ; using a common factor model with
! Ht
!F t
! Ct
vHt
vF t

=
=
=
=
=

+ ! Ct + vHt ;
F + ! Ct + vF t ;
C ! Ct 1 + "ct ;
H Ht 1 + "Ht ;
F F t 1 + "F t ;
H

with the constraint of SD ("Ht ) = SD ("F t ) :

1

Table A1: Estimates of US Export-Import Ratio
IP
Short-Run
Price

IP

D*

D*

D*

D*

0.204***
(7.98)

0.202***
(7.63)

0.171***
(7.54)

0.171**
(7.43)

0.168**
(7.25)

0.168**
(7.19)

1.351**
(4.74)

1.385**
(4.84)

1.315**
(5.34)

1.334**
(5.39)

0.992*
(5.74)

0.991*
(5.70)

-1.530*
(8.45)

-1.513*
(8.49)

-1.090
(6.60)

-1.081
(6.58)

-1.145
(7.44)

-1.145
(7.36)

0.576***
(4.01)

0.590***
(4.09)

0.690***
(5.81)

0.698***
(5.89)

0.671***
(4.55)

0.672***
(4.52)

Adjustment 0.0687*** 0.0752*** 0.0775*** 0.0810*** 0.0727***
(3.98)
(3.99)
(4.51)
(4.66)
(4.01)

0.0730***
(3.93)

NIIY

2

NIIY

1

Spending

Long Run
Price

1.124***
(5.77)

0.977**
(5.63)
1.290***
(12.86)

0.938***
(5.8)

0.868**
(5.91)
1.145***
(17.58)

9.985**
(2.82)
148
0.0187
0.437

10.67**
(3.04)
148
0.0188
0.436

9.783**
(4.17)
148
0.0178
0.490

10.16**
(4.27)
148
0.0179
0.488

Spending

N IIY
N
rmse
Ra2

0.949**
(6.79)

0.941**
(6.56)
1.016***
(15.72)

148
0.0180
0.481

148
0.0181
0.477

Period: 1979Q1-2015Q4. T-stats based on Newey-West s.e. in parentheses, ECM stands for
error correction model.* p<0.05** p<0.01*** p<0.001". No LR Spending coe¢ cient implies=1.

2

Figure A1: Trade Wedges
a. Common Trade Wedge
0.6

0.4

Common Trade Wedge

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4
Benchmark
No Inventory

-0.6

Foreign Demand
-0.8
1979

1984

1989

1994

1999
Period

2004

2009

2014

b. Trade Wedge Gap
0.2
Benchmark
No Inventory

0.15

Foreign Demand

Trade Wedge Gap

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15
1979

1984

1989

1994

1999
Period

Note: 1979Q1 to 2015Q4

3

2004

2009

2014

