                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     BRINGING SATELLITE-BASED AIR QUALITY ESTIMATES DOWN TO EARTH

                                        Meredith Fowlie
                                        Edward A. Rubin
                                          Reed Walker

                                       Working Paper 25560
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25560


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2019




We thank both Qian Di and Aaron van Donkelaar for sharing their high-resolution, satellite-based
PM2.5 estimates. We thank Ellen Lin and Catherine Wright for extraordinarily helpful research
assistance. Financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Meredith Fowlie, Edward A. Rubin, and Reed Walker. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bringing Satellite-Based Air Quality Estimates Down to Earth
Meredith Fowlie, Edward A. Rubin, and Reed Walker
NBER Working Paper No. 25560
February 2019
JEL No. H23,H41,Q50,Q52,Q53

                                         ABSTRACT

We use state-of-the-art, satellite-based PM2.5 estimates to assess the extent to which the EPA's
existing, monitor-based measurements over- or under-estimate true exposure to PM2.5 pollution.
Treating satellite-based estimates as truth implies a substantial number of "policy errors"—over-
regulating areas that comply with air quality standards and under-regulating other areas that
appear to violate standards. We investigate the health implications of these apparent errors and
highlight the importance of accounting for prediction error in satellite-based estimates.
Uncertainty in "policy errors" increases substantially when we account for these underlying
prediction errors.

Meredith Fowlie                                           Reed Walker
Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics           Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley                        University of California, Berkeley
301 Giannini Hall                                         2220 Piedmont Ave
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310                                   Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                                  and NBER
fowlie@berkeley.edu                                       rwalker@haas.berkeley.edu

Edward A. Rubin
Department of Economics
University of Oregon
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
edwardr@uoregon.edu
1    Introduction
Particulate matter pollution poses serious health risks—particularly for children, the elderly, and sen-
sitive populations. In the U.S., air pollution regulations have increasingly focused on smaller particles,
such as those less than 2.5 micrometers (PM2.5 ). These regulations are enforced using ambient air
pollution measurements, collected from the EPA’s air-quality monitoring network.
    The network of regulatory-grade monitors is spatially sparse; more than 80 percent of U.S. counties
do not contain a PM2.5 monitor. Coarse measurements of air-pollution concentrations can lead to
significant gaps in our understanding of the burden of exposure for certain areas. These gaps have
potentially important implications for the design and implementation of existing air-quality regulations.
    Recent advances in satellite technology, combined with advances in prediction techniques—e.g., ma-
chine learning—may relax some of these information constraints. For instance, a growing suite of satellite
observations of aerosol optical depth (AOD) make it possible to estimate ground-level concentrations of
PM2.5 at fine spatial resolutions (<1km). Social scientists are increasingly using these satellite-based
estimates of PM2.5 concentrations to analyze the health and economic impacts of ambient pollution
exposure (e.g., Sullivan and Krupnick (2018), Voorheis (2016), Di et al. (2017)).
    This paper uses two state-of-the-art, satellite-based PM2.5 data products (Di et al., 2016; van Donke-
laar et al., 2019) to assess the extent to which the EPA’s existing, monitor-based measurements over-
or under-estimate true exposure to PM2.5 pollution. We show that regulatory-grade monitor measure-
ments fail to capture a significant amount of spatial variation in the satellite-based estimates. Treating
satellite-based estimates as truth would imply a substantial number of “policy errors” by the EPA —over-
regulating certain areas that are already in compliance with the Clean Air Act (CAA) National Ambient
Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) and under-regulating other areas that, according to the satellite-based
estimates, are in violation of the standards. Somewhat counter-intuitively, we show that re-calibrating
existing policies to capture more spatially resolved measures of pollution exposure need not improve
health outcomes overall.
    We also highlight the importance of accounting for prediction error in satellite-based estimates. These
highly spatially resolved datasets offer the potential for new and important insights into the distribution
and impacts of air quality. However, these data are estimates of the true PM2.5 concentration at a
location and contain prediction or forecast errors. The forecast errors associated with these satellite-
based data products have largely been ignored by the social-science research community, and many of
our original conclusions in regards to “policy errors” become substantially more uncertain.


2    Pollution-Concentration Measurement and Estimation
The U.S. EPA directly measures surface PM2.5 concentrations using in situ, filter-based monitors. To-
gether these monitors form a precise but spatially sparse network of PM2.5 measurements that is fairly
expensive to maintain. Recent work in atmospheric, computer, and environmental sciences offers the
potential to extend the spatial coverage of PM2.5 measurements.
    By combining satellite-based measures of AOD with chemical-transport modeling and land character-
istics, researchers are able to estimate ground-level concentrations of PM2.5 at high levels of spatial dis-
aggregation. Further, the in situ EPA monitors provide training data for statistical models—mitigating
bias and increasing precision in these satellite-based estimates.
    We obtained two data products that estimate annual PM2.5 concentrations in the continental United
States at a high spatial resolution. First, Di et al. (2016) use a neural network to predict daily PM2.5


                                                     2
      concentrations at nationwide 1 km×1 km grid cells over the period 2000 to 2015. Second, van Donkelaar
      et al. (2019) combine satellite remote-sensing data with chemical transport modeling and geographically
      weighted regression to predict annual PM2.5 concentrations at 1-kilometer resolution 1998–2016. We
      spatially intersect both sets of data with U.S. Census block-group (CBG) boundary files from the year
      2000. Appendix Figures 2a and 2b plot estimated PM2.5 concentrations for 2005 by Di et al. (2016) and
      van Donkelaar et al. (2019), respectively.


      3     Policy Context
      The United States’ Clean Air Act National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) specify maximum
      allowable concentrations for common air pollutants (e.g., PM2.5 and lead). Compliance (attainment)
      within NAAQS is determined using monitor-based design values. For PM2.5 , each EPA monitor is used
      to construct two design values: a 3-year annual average concentration and a 3-year average of the annual
      98th percentile of 24-hour concentrations. If either design value exceeds its respective NAAQS PM2.5
      threshold, the EPA classifies the monitor’s jurisdiction (usually its county) as non-attainment. Areas
      that fail to meet these standards must take steps to improve air quality (e.g., mandatory pollution
      abatement technologies for air pollution point sources).
          Our analysis focuses on the 1997 PM2.5 NAAQS, which set an annual-average standard of 15 µg/m3
      and a 24-hour standard of 65 µg/m3 . Following court challenges, these 1997 standards were enacted in
      2005. Virtually all non-attainment designations from the 1997 standard occurred due to violations of
      the annual (versus 24 hour) standard.1 We use the satellite-based estimates to construct design values
      for each CBG, and we compare these design values to the de jure, county-level design values (i.e., design
      values based on the maximum EPA monitor readings within the county).
          We first use EPA AQS monitors to construct the 3-year annual average design values for all 685
      counties that had monitors in 2005. Counties that do not have a monitor receive a design value of 0
      and are accordingly classified as in attainment. Next, we use the satellite-based estimates constructed
      by Di et al. (2016) and van Donkelaar et al. (2019) to construct the 3-year annual average design values
      for every CBG in 2005. Figure 1 summarizes the relationship between the satellite-based design values
      and the corresponding monitor-based design values. Figure 1a explores these relationships using the Di
      et al. (2016) data, whereas Figure 1b plots the monitor versus van Donkelaar et al. (2019) data. The
      distribution to the left of each figure shows the extent of variation in satellite-based estimates in counties
      with no EPA monitor.
          These figures illustrate the striking variation in satellite-based measurements for counties that share
      the same monitor-based, county-wide design value. Recall that the monitor-based, county-wide design
      value is the only piece of information that the EPA currently uses to regulate counties under NAAQS.
      If we assume that these satellite-based estimates are precise and unbiased, these figures suggest that
      the county-level, monitor-based design values are a very crude proxy for true pollution concentrations
      in many locations.
          However, some of the observed variation in satellite-based estimates likely reflects prediction errors,
      rather than true variation in underlying PM2.5 concentrations. Ideally, our analysis would account for
      both bias and uncertainty in these estimates. We explore the extent of prediction errors by focusing
      on the 911 CBGs equipped with an EPA monitor, comparing the satellite-based estimates to the EPA
   1
     In contrast, violations of the current standards (enacted in 2009) were mostly triggered by violations of the 24-hour
standard. We cannot construct these design values using annual satellite-based estimates, so we focus on the earlier standard.



                                                              3
      monitor readings for the same area. Appendix Figures 3a and 3b provide a sense of the range of satellite-
      based estimates we observe across CBGs with similar monitor readings. The range of these estimates,
      particularly at higher measured PM2.5 concentrations, is significant.
          Regulatory-grade monitors measure pollution concentrations directly and with high precision at a
      particular location. If we assume that spatial variation within a CBG is minimal, we can interpret the
      difference between monitor-based design values and the satellite-based design values as prediction errors
      for the 911 CBGs that have a monitor. However, there are over 215,000 CBGs without a monitor, so
      we try to forecast the prediction errors for these CBGs “out of sample.” We begin by regressing the
      “in-sample” prediction errors on a set of seven CBG-level observable variables.2 We use this regression
      model to predict errors in the satellite-based predictions—for both in-sample (the 911 CBGs that contain
      a monitor) and out-of-sample predictions (the more than 215,000 CBGs without a monitor).We use the
      standard error from this regression model to create a 95% prediction interval for each CBG pollution
      estimate.3 We will use these prediction intervals below to better understand the extent to which our
      conclusions are sensitive to this measure of satellite-based estimation uncertainty.


      4      Nonattainment Designations, Revisited
      We distinguish between two types of attainment designation “errors”. A “Type 1” error (i.e., False
      Positive) occurs if the 3-year annual average of satellite-based estimates of PM2.5 concentrations in a
      CBG falls below the NAAQS standard of 15 µg/m3 , but the associated county-level, EPA monitor-
      based design value exceeds this threshold. Conversely, a “Type 2” error (i.e., False Negative) occurs
      if the estimated CBG pollution concentration exceeds the regulatory standard, whereas the associated
      county-level, monitor-based design value does not.


      4.1     Policy “Errors”
      Panel A of Table 1 summarizes the results of this classification exercise using the Di et al. (2016) satellite
      data, whereas Panel C presents results using van Donkelaar et al. (2019) PM2.5 estimates. We first
      calculate designation errors assuming that the satellite-based estimates provide an unbiased and precise
      estimate of true PM2.5 concentrations. We then incorporate uncertainty stemming from prediction
      errors, using the lower and upper bounds of the 95% prediction interval to compute designation errors.
      Numbers in parentheses report results using the lower and upper estimates, respectively.
          Panels A and C in Table 1 show how populations are distributed across correctly classified and
      misclassified attainment designations, respectively. Column (1) shows that a majority of the population
      live in areas that have been correctly designated as in attainment based upon year-2005 design values
      (satellite-based point estimates imply around 78% fall into this category). Column (4) shows that the
      share of the population living in properly designated non-attainment areas is much smaller. We find
      Type 1 errors (Column (2)) are much more prevalent than Type 2 errors (Column (3)). 11-14% of the
      population live in areas that are designated as non-attainment using the de jure monitor measurement
      but are associated with satellite-based estimates of PM2.5 concentrations that fall below the NAAQS
   2
     The CBG-level explanatory variables in this regression are: The monitor-based PM2.5 estimate, total population, the
share of the population that is white, the share of the population that is rural, minimum and maximum elevation, and land
area.
   3
     For this simple thought exercise, we are assuming that the regression error is independent of the x’s, normally distributed,
with zero mean, and constant variance.



                                                               4
      limits. Only 1-2% of the population live in areas that appear to exceed the NAAQS threshold (using
      either satellite-based data product), but are classified as “attainment” under the de jure, monitor-based
      NAAQS policy. Estimates in parentheses show how the relative importance of Type 1 and Type 2 errors
      is sensitive to the prediction interval bounds we use. Intuitively, when we use the lower bound of the 95%
      prediction interval for the satellite data, we are more likely to see CBGs misclassified as non-attainment
      based on de jure monitor readings when “true” pollution concentrations, as measured by satellites,
      meet the standard (i.e., Type 1 errors). When we use the upper bound of the 95% prediction intervals
      from the satellite data, we see more CBGs designated as in-attainment based on monitor-readings when
      satellite-based estimates exceed the NAAQS threshold (Type 2 errors).


      4.2     Health Implications
      The vast majority of the damages associated with PM2.5 exposure are mortality related. Panels B and
      D of Table 1 use the satellite-based estimates of PM2.5 concentrations to estimate the likely health
      implications of the classification errors we have identified.
          To assess the mortality impacts of our findings, we adopt an approach similar to the regulatory
      impact analyses conducted by the EPA which is based on estimated concentration-response (or“hazard”)
      functions. These functions relate PM2.5 exposure to mortality risk. Importantly, the scientific evidence
      on health impacts has yet to identify a safe threshold for PM2.5 exposure.4 In contrast, the threshold-
      based design of NAAQS is most consistent with marginal damages that are low or zero below the
      threshold and high above. This mismatch between the structure of the NAAQS and the underlying
      concentration-response relationship has important implications when assessing the health implications of
      designation errors. In particular, it implies that Type 1 errors (i.e., over-regulation) generate potentially
      significant benefits in the form of reduced mortality.
          Panels B and D of Table 1 summarize estimated annual mortality benefits associated with a 1 µg/m3
      reduction in PM2.5 concentrations. “Lower” estimates of deaths avoided are based on Krewski et al.
      (2009). “Higher” estimates are based on Lepeule et al. (2012). See Appendix A for more details.
      We speculate that moving a county into non-attainment would induce a reduction in annual average
      concentrations of at least 1 µg/m3 . To put this assumption in perspective, Sullivan and Krupnick (2018)
      estimate that a non-attainment classification under the 2012 standard reduced pollution concentrations
      by more than 2 µg/m3 .
          Satellite-based point estimates imply that the mortality implications of Type 1 errors (i.e., reduction
      in mortality from regulating areas already in compliance) may be much more consequential than the
      foregone mortality benefits associated with Type 2 errors (i.e., the mortality increase associated with
      failing to regulate areas that are out of compliance). Panel B of Table 1 suggests that when using the
      higher hazard ratio parameters of Lepeule et al. (2012), 335 deaths resulted from a failure to designate
      areas exceeding the NAAQS threshold as non-attainment, whereas 1,982 deaths were avoided as a
      consequence of designating areas that met the standard as non-attainment. The estimates from Panel D
      are qualitatively similar. However, these results are sensitive to which prediction-interval bounds we use.
      In other words, our estimated prediction errors suggest significant uncertainty underlies these estimated
      mortality impacts of Type 1 and Type 2 errors.
  4
    In fact, there is some evidence that the mortality-related benefits from incremental reductions in PM2.5 concentrations
may be higher at lower concentrations U.S. EPA (2018).




                                                            5
5    Conclusion
Newly available, spatially resolved pollution data present a host of new opportunities—for both research
and policy. We use state-of-the-art satellite estimates to assess the extent to which the limited network
of EPA monitors leads to over and/or under detection of violations of PM2.5 standards.
    We arrive at the surprising conclusion that using more spatially disaggregated measures of PM2.5
concentrations to determine NAAQS attainment need not be welfare improving, relative to the current
status-quo. The reason is twofold. First, we find that a significant share of the population is living in
areas where satellite-based estimates of pollution concentrations fall below the NAAQS threshold, but
EPA monitor-based design values exceed the threshold (i.e., these populations received health benefits
from “over-regulation”). In contrast, the share of the population living in areas where the reverse appears
to be true is small. Second, the design of the NAAQS standards poorly approximate the underlying
damage function. This implies that marginal benefits from pollution reductions are significant in areas
that meet NAAQS standards.
    Finally, it is important to recognize that satellite-based estimates of pollution concentrations are not
direct measures. Prediction error appears to be economically significant, and the error structure is poorly
understood. In general, satellite estimates appear to be biased down at higher PM2.5 concentrations,
which could explain the prevalence of what appear to be “Type 1” designation errors. We conclude
that further work exploring the precision, bias, and limits of these estimates remains important to
understanding the health and policy implications of spatial heterogeneity in pollution exposure.


References
Di, Qian, Itai Kloog, Petros Koutrakis, Alexei Lyapustin, Yujie Wang, and Joel Schwartz.
  2016. “Assessing PM2.5 exposures with high spatiotemporal resolution across the continental United
  States.” Environmental science & technology, 50(9): 4712–4721.

Di, Qian, Lingzhen Dai, Yun Wang, Antonella Zanobetti, Christine Choirat, Joel D
  Schwartz, and Francesca Dominici. 2017. “Association of short-term exposure to air pollution
  with mortality in older adults.” The Journal of the American Medical Association, 318(24): 2446–2456.

Krewski, Daniel, Michael Jerrett, Richard T Burnett, Renjun Ma, Edward Hughes, Yuanli
 Shi, Michelle C Turner, C Arden Pope III, George Thurston, Eugenia E Calle, et al.
 2009. Extended follow-up and spatial analysis of the American Cancer Society study linking particulate
 air pollution and mortality. Health Effects Institute Boston, MA.

Lepeule, Johanna, Francine Laden, Douglas Dockery, and Joel Schwartz. 2012. “Chronic
  exposure to fine particles and mortality: an extended follow-up of the Harvard Six Cities study from
  1974 to 2009.” Environmental health perspectives, 120(7): 965.

Sullivan, Daniel M, and Alan Krupnick. 2018. “Using Satellite Data to Fill the Gaps in the US
  Air Pollution Monitoring Network.” Working Paper.

U.S. EPA. 2018. “Integrated Science Assessment (ISA) for Particulate Matter.” (External Review
  Draft). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-18/179.

van Donkelaar, Aaron, Randall V Martin, Chi Li, and Richard T Burnett. 2019. “Regional Es-
  timates of Chemical Composition of Fine Particulate Matter using a Combined Geoscience-Statistical
  Method with Information from Satellites, Models, and Monitors.” Environmental Science & Technol-
  ogy, 0(just accepted).



                                                     6
Voorheis, John. 2016. “Environmental Justice Viewed From Outer Space: How Does Growing Income
  Inequality Affect the Distribution of Pollution Exposure?” Working Paper.




                                             7
      Tables and Figures

                         (a) Di et al.                                       (b) van Donkelaar et al. (2019)




         Figure 1: Comparing PM2.5 Measurements: Monitor-Based vs. Satellite-Based Estimates
Notes: These figures plot the relationship between satellite-based design values and monitor-based design values in 2005. An
observation is a Census block group. The graphs show the variation in satellite-based design values for each level of monitor
design values. The distribution to the left of each figure shows the variation in satellite-based estimates in counties with no
EPA monitor. Source: Authors, Di et al. (2016), van Donkelaar et al. (2019), EPA-AQS.




                                                              8
                 Table 1: Comparing NAAQS Designation: Monitors and Satellite-Based Estimates

                                              Satellite Attain                         Satellite Nonattain
         Monitor Designation:            Attain            Nonattain                Attain            Nonattain
                                          (1)                 (2)                    (3)                 (4)
                                                    Panel A: Population Summary (Di et al.)
         Population (millions)           234.3                 33.1                   5.7                29.9
                                     (239.7, 111.7)        (29.2, 0.2)           (0.3, 128.3)        (33.8, 62.9)
         Population share                77.3%                10.9%                  1.9%               9.9%
                                    (79.1%, 36.9%)        (9.6%, 0.1%)          (0.1%, 42.3%)      (11.2%, 20.8%)
                                                      Panel B: Mortality Impacts (Di et al.)
         Avoided deaths                   4,640                694                    116                614
           Lower estimate            (4,748, 2,201)         (651, 5)               (8, 2,556)        (657, 1,303)
         Avoided deaths                  13,489               1,982                    335              1,726
           Higher estimate          (13,802, 6,448)        (1,868, 14)            (22, 7,376)       (1,840, 3,694)
                                             Panel C: Population Summary (van Donkelaar et al.)
         Population (millions)           238.8                42.3                    1.2                20.8
                                     (240.0, 106.2)        (43.8, 0.2)           (0.0, 133.8)        (19.3, 62.8)
         Population share                78.8%               14.0%                   0.4%               6.9%
                                    (79.2%, 35.0%)       (14.5%, 0.1%)          (0.0%, 44.2%)       (6.4%, 20.7%)
                                              Panel D: Mortality Impacts (Van Donkelaar et al.)
         Avoided deaths                   4,733                883                    23                 425
           Lower estimate            (4,757, 2,080)         (949, 5)              (0, 2,676)         (359, 1,302)
         Avoided deaths                  13,758               2,532                   66                1,175
           Higher estimate          (13,824, 6,097)        (2,721, 15)            (0, 7,727)         (987, 3,693)

Notes: These estimates come from comparing satellite-based estimates to EPA AQS monitor data. We spatially intersect the
Di et al. and van Donkelaar et al. estimates with census block groups to provide the relevant demographic characteristics and
baseline mortality rates. The column NAAQS classifications are based on the 2005 3-year Annual Design Values, calculated at
(i) the county-level for EPA monitors or (ii) at the census block-group level for the satellite-based estimates. Avoided death
estimates come from two concentration-response functions: lower estimate (Krewski et al., 2009) and higher estimate (Lepeule
et al., 2012).




                                                              9
       A      Appendix: Concentration-Response Functions
       Concentration-response (or “hazard”) functions relate exposure to concentrations of a PM2.5 to risk of
       negative health impacts. Notably, no safe threshold has been identified, and some research suggests that
       marginal benefits from abatement are decreasing in baseline concentrations (see, for example, Krewski
       et al. (2009)). Here, we follow the EPA standard for Regulatory Impact Analysis and assume a log-linear
       functional form over the range of PM2.5 concentrations we observe.
           These functions are typically estimated using random-effects Cox proportional-hazard models. Log-
       linear specifications regress the natural log of mortality risk on PM2.5 concentration levels:

                                                              b + X ′ β + γP M2.5 ,
                                        ln(λ(X, P M2.5 ) = ln(λ)
                 b is the baseline mortality risk; X is a matrix of covariates that presumably affect mortality;
           where λ
       and PM2.5 is the pollution concentration level. We are primarily interested in γ which captures the
       estimated average effect of an incremental change in PM2.5 concentrations on mortality (conditional on
       X.
           Taking the ratio of two hazard functions identifies the relative mortality risk (RR) or hazard ratio
       (HR) between a relatively high concentration of pollution and a low concentration:
                                                        ′
                                          λ(X, P M2.5 )            ′′       ′
                                     HR =         ′′    = exp(γ(P M2.5 − P M2.5 ))
                                          λ(X, P M2.5 )
           Note that, using the log-linear function of the concentration-response function, an incremental change
       in pollution concentration will lead to the same value of the hazard ratio, regardless of the baseline level
       of the concentration.
           We use these hazard ratios to evaluate, for a given location, the impact of an incremental change
       in air pollution concentrations (relative to the baseline concentrations we observe). To implement this
       empirically, we use mortality relative risk (RR) ratios estimated by two influential studies.
           • Krewski et al. (2009) analyze a large, ongoing American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention Study
             of mortality in adults initiated in 1982. Krewski et al. (2009) incorporate additional years of follow-
             up and include refinements of statistical methods and incorporate sophisticated control of bias and
             confounding. Data analyzed included all causes, cardiopulmonary disease (CPD), ischemic heart
             disease (IHD, reduction of blood supply to the heart, potentially leading to heart attack), lung
             cancer, and all remaining causes.
             When estimating PM mortality impacts based on the Krewski et al. (2009) study, the U.S. EPA
             applies mortality risk coefficients stratified by educational attainment. We follow this approach.5
           • In another influential study, Lepeule et al. (2012) estimate cause-of-death specific hazard ratios.
             We use these cause-of-death-specific estimates from this study to construct our ‘high’ mortality
             impact estimates.
           We estimate the census block group mortality rates using the average annual deaths in county i
       divided by the county population. Following the literature, we focus exclusively on mortality rates asso-
       ciated with cardiovascular diseases, ischemic heart disease and cerebrovascular disease, and respiratory
       complications. We estimate the mortality impacts of an incremental (i.e., 1 µg/m3 ) reduction in PM2.5
       concentrations as:

                                                                             1
                                        ∆Deathsij =P opij · λij [1 −                 ]
                                                                        HRj (Ci − 1)
                                                     =P opij · λij [1 − exp(−γj )],

           where i denotes county and j denotes the population cohort.
   5
    Krewski et al. (2009) find that educational attainment is inversely related to mortality risk. Populations with lower levels
of education are more vulnerable to PM2.5 related mortality.


                                                              10
      B      Appendix Figures

                        (a) Di et al.                                             (b) van Donkelaar et al.




          (c) EPA Monitor-Based Measurements

          Figure 2: Satellite-Based PM2.5 Measurements and EPA AQS Monitoring Network, 2005
Notes: These figures display the 2005 annual mean pollution concentrations from Di et al. (2016), van Donkelaar et al. (2019),
EPA-AQS monitors, respectively. We winsorized the EPA monitor data above their 95th percentile (17.5).




                                                             11
                         (a) Di et al.                                       (b) van Donkelaar et al. (2019)




            Figure 3: Comparing PM2.5 : Monitors’ Measurements vs. Satellite-Based Estimates
Notes: These figures display the relationships between satellite-based pollution measurements and monitor based pollution
measurements for the 911 census block groups that contain an EPA PM2.5 monitor. The blue boxes depict the range of
estimates (2.5th –97.5th percentiles) from the satellite-based datasets (y axis) for the given PM2.5 level measured by the EPA-
AQS monitor (x axis). Source: Authors, Di et al. (2016), van Donkelaar et al. (2019), EPA-AQS.




                                                              12
