                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE EFFECT OF HEALTH INSURANCE ON MORTALITY:
                POWER ANALYSIS AND WHAT WE CAN LEARN FROM
               THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT COVERAGE EXPANSIONS

                                       Bernard Black
                                     Alex Hollingsworth
                                       Leticia Nunes
                                        Kosali Simon

                                     Working Paper 25568
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25568


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2019




We thank Marcus Dillender, William Evans, Ted Joyce, Robert Kaestner, Amanda Kowalski,
Sarah Miller, Dan Sacks, Ben Sommers, Coady Wing, Engy Ziedan, and participants in
workshops at Bar-Ilan University Conference on Law and Big Data (May 2018); Georgia State
University, Economics Department (August 2018); Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Economics
Department (Nov. 2018); Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya (May 2018); ASSA 2018; Stanford
University Health Economics Seminar (May 2018); ASHEcon (2018); APPAM (2017); Tel Aviv
University, Economics Department (Nov. 2018), Texas A&M (May 2017); and the UK Institute
for Fiscal Studies (Nov. 2018). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Bernard Black, Alex Hollingsworth, Leticia Nunes, and Kosali Simon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Health Insurance on Mortality: Power Analysis and What We Can Learn from
the Affordable Care Act Coverage Expansions
Bernard Black, Alex Hollingsworth, Leticia Nunes, and Kosali Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 25568
February 2019
JEL No. I1

                                            ABSTRACT

A large literature examines the effect of health insurance on mortality. We contribute by
emphasizing two challenges in using the Affordable Care Act (ACA)’s quasi-experimental
variation to study mortality. The first is non-parallel pretreatment trends. Rising mortality in
Medicaid non-expansion relative to expansion states prior to Medicaid expansion makes it
difficult to estimate the effect of insurance using difference-in-differences (DD). We use various
DD, triple difference, age-discontinuity and synthetic control approaches, but are unable to
satisfactorily address this concern. Our estimates are not statistically significant, but are imprecise
enough to be consistent with both no effect and a large effect of insurance on amenable mortality
over the first three post-ACA years. Thus, our results should not be interpreted as evidence that
health insurance has no effect on mortality for this age group, especially in light of the literature
documenting greater health care use as a result of the ACA. Second, we provide a simulation-
based power analysis, showing that even the nationwide natural experiment provided by the ACA
is underpowered to detect plausibly sized mortality effects in available datasets, and discuss data
needs for the literature to advance. Our simulated pseudo-shocks power analysis approach is
broadly applicable to other natural-experiment studies.

Bernard Black                                      Leticia Nunes
Northwestern University                            Department of Economics
Pritzker School of Law                             Fundação Getulio Vargas
375 East Chicago Ave                               leticiafcnunes@gmail.com
Chicago, IL 60201
bblack@northwestern.edu                            Kosali Simon
                                                   School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Alex Hollingsworth                                 Indiana University
School of Public and Environmental Affairs         Rm 443
Indiana University                                 1315 East Tenth Street
375C                                               Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
1315 E. Tenth St.                                  and NBER
Bloomington, IN 47405                              simonkos@indiana.edu
hollinal@indiana.edu




A Problem Set version of code to demonstrate shock-based power calculation approach is available at
https://github.com/hollina/health_insurance_and_mortality
I. Introduction

The relationship between health insurance and mortality is at the center of much empirical inquiry
in the health economics literature. Since the first rigorous study of this relationship through the
RAND Health Insurance Experiment, researchers have studied this question using varying study
designs and populations, finding mixed results on the existence and strength of any relationship; a
recent literature review found over 200 studies published on the topic (Gaudette et al., 2016). Many
papers in this literature focus on mortality as an extreme, but readily measurable outcome. Most
earlier studies, including the RAND Experiment, studies of Medicare, and the more recent Oregon
Health Insurance Experiment find no statistically significant impacts of health insurance on overall
mortality for the general adult population (Levy and Meltzer 2008; Finkelstein and McKnight
2008; Finkelstein et al., 2012), 1 but several more recent studies report mortality reductions from
state or federal insurance expansions for adults (e.g. Sommers, Long, and Baicker, 2014). A
separate literature finds health and mortality gains from health insurance for children (e.g., Currie
and Gruber, 1996a,b; Wherry and Meyer, 2015; Brown, Kowalski, and Lurie 2017). Health
insurance expansions have also been shown to have substantial improvements in access to health
care and in health status (Currie and Gruber 1996a, Sommers et al 2013, Simon et al 2018 JPAM,).
Other studies examine the effect of insurance on non-physical health outcomes, such as mental
health stress levels and financial health, finding improvements (e.g., Hu et al, 2016; Baicker et al.
2013).
         The Affordable Care Act produced substantial insurance expansions for the low-income,
non-elderly adult population (e.g. Kaestner et al., 2015; Wherry & Miller, 2016; Frean et al., 2017;
Simon et al., 2017; Courtemanche et al., 2017). These expansions provide a new opportunity to
study the link between health insurance and mortality, and to examine issues of statistical power
for these studies and, more generally, natural experiment studies of low-frequency outcomes. Our
study examines this relationship using mortality microdata from 1999-2016. We use both
difference-in-differences (DiD) and triple-difference/age discontinuity approaches to study the
effect of state Medicaid expansions, and ACA expansion more generally, on mortality during the


1
  These are studies of the effect on mortality of health insurance, not health care. For example, Finkelstein and
McKnight (2008) observe that “part of the explanation for [finding no mortality effect could be that], prior to
Medicare, elderly individuals with life-threatening, treatable health conditions sought care even if they lacked
insurance, as long as they had legal access to hospitals.”

                                                       2
first three post-ACA years (2014-2016). We exploit heterogeneity in assignment to “treatment”
(health insurance) and potential treatment effect heterogeneity along several dimensions:
healthcare amenable vs. non-amenable causes of death; specific major causes of death (cancer,
heart disease, diabetes, and respiratory disease); and sociodemographic factors at the individual
(gender, race/ethnicity, and education) and the county (baseline percent uninsured and percent in
poverty) levels. Our triple-difference/age-discontinuity design compares the near-elderly (age 55-
64) to the young-elderly (ages 65-74), who were already covered by Medicare. We focus on the
near-elderly, both because they are more likely than younger persons to have health conditions for
which healthcare is important for survival, and because focusing on this age band makes the above
and below-65 groups more comparable.          Our age-discontinuity approach is similar to the
Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) study of Medicare, except their treatment group is our control
group. We obtain similar results in analyses using broader age ranges (age 45-64, or all non-
elderly adults).
        We do not find a statistically significant pattern of results consistent with Medicaid
expansion causing mortality changes, but we also cannot rule out large effects in either direction.
We note here that prior evidence on the effects of insurance expansion on mortality lead one to
expect modest effects of incremental insurance expansions on mortality. Reasons for modest
overall effects include: many of those in greatest need of healthcare are already insured; and many
uninsured persons already receive substantial healthcare. One reason for our “null result” is that
the first stage on insurance coverage is weak: our principal identifying variation (the relative
change in uninsurance rates for Medicaid expansion versus non-expansion states) amounts to a
very small fraction of the population.     The average increase in health insurance coverage
attributable to Medicaid expansion over 2014-2016 is only around 1.1% for persons aged 50-64,
and only around 4% even when we hone in on low-educated populations; precise income measures
used to determine ACA eligibility are unavailable in mortality data. A second reason for failure
to reject the null of no effect is a high level of “noise” - substantial background variation in
mortality, and mortality trends, across states and demographic groups. A third reason is that
mortality is a low-frequency outcome. We note too that effects of health insurance on mortality
are more likely to emerge over a long time frame.
        Our second contribution is to highlight that observational studies can often benefit from
performing and reporting power analyses. We use a simulation-based power analysis, in which we

                                                3
impose treatment effects of varying sizes on actual data during the pre-treatment period, and assess
whether ACA expansion effects on mortality of plausible size can be detected with our data. We
conclude that even the nationwide natural experiment provided by the ACA is severely
underpowered to detect effects on mortality of plausible size in county-level death certificate data.
To reliably detect effects of insurance coverage on mortality, one would need very large-sample
panel data on individuals, which is not currently available. Such data could include information
on health, income, and insurance status, which would allow the study to focus on subsamples with
a larger first stage and/or higher sensitivity of health and mortality to healthcare use. Even with
such hypothetical data, it is likely that only fairly large effects of health insurance on mortality
could be reliably detected.
         We estimate power using our pre-treatment period data (pre-2014) by first applying a
pseudo-shock to health insurance rates at the beginning of 2011 as if the ACA expansion had
occurred then. We choose pseudo-treated states at random, and then apply pseudo treatment effect
(mortality shocks) of different sizes to the group of pseudo-treated states (by randomly removing
deaths from our mortality data). We repeat this process 1,000 times. We then assess the likelihood
that these pseudo shocks we introduce in 2011-2013 would be detected, using methods similar to
our actual specifications. This approach (applying simulated treatment effects to actual data,
drawn from a period when no effect should exist) can be applied to a wide-variety of research
settings, including both structural and non-parametric work; The Appendix provides sample Stata
code for implementing our power analysis using publicly available mortality data from CDC
Wonder.
         The minimum detectable effect (MDE) – the minimum reduction in amenable mortality for
all persons aged 55-64 years in expansion states, detectable at the 95% confidence level (two-tailed
test), 80% of the time (a standard threshold for a study to be considered adequately powered) as a
result of a state expanding Medicaid is about 0.018. Together with a 0.011 first-stage, this implies
that the MDE is roughly a 160% drop in amenable mortality among the newly insured.2 The DD
and triple difference models have similar power. Power does not improve when we examine
subgroups: non-parallel trends remain common, the first-stage remains modest, and the gain in


2
  This estimate assumes that baseline amenable mortality rate is the same for those who differentially gained insurance
in expansion states as for the general population, controlling for observable covariates. If the baseline mortality rate
for the newly, differentially insured was twice that of the overall population, the MDE would be half as large, thus
80% rather than 160%.

                                                           4
power from a higher first-stage and a higher base mortality rate is more than offset by smaller
sample size.
        By comparison to the very large MDE from the natural experimental variation available in
our study, the historic introduction of sulfa drugs reduced maternal mortality by 24-36%
(Thomasson and Treber, 2008; Jayachandran et al., 2012). Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) found
no significant effect of the introduction of Medicare on mortality for those aged 65-74 years (point
estimate after 5 years = -0.15%; 95% CI [-3.9%, +3.6%]); Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2004) use
an age-discontinuity design and find no reduction in mortality at age 65 (point estimate +0.5%,
95% CI [-3.3%, +4.3%]); the RAND Experiment found no significant overall effect of health
insurance on mortality but found a 10% reduction in mortality for a subsample of persons with
vulnerable health; and the Oregon Experiment found no significant effect, with a point estimate of
-13% but a wide 95% confidence interval (95% CI [-39%, +13%]).3 Large effects are also unlikely
because prior research finds that the uninsured already consume substantial healthcare -- about
80% as much as the insured (e.g., Black et al., 2017). Our prior expectation, considering the near-
zero estimates and confidence intervals in the largest prior studies (Finkelstein and McKnight,
2004; Card, Dobkin and Maestas, 2004), the substantial healthcare consumed by the uninsured,
the imperfect safety net that already covers some vulnerable populations (e.g., the elderly and the
disabled), and the availability of emergency care regardless of insurance status (Card, Dobkin, and
Maestas, 2009), were that any effect of the 2014 insurance expansion on mortality was unlikely to
exceed 10% for the newly insured, and that any effect would likely appear only over time.
        Combining this past literature with a power analysis perspective, we expect that if
significant effects of expanding health insurance eligibility on general adult mortality are found,
these are likely to greatly overstate actual magnitudes. Reasons to re-examine results from low-
powered studies include: they may draw from the right tail of a probability distribution; failure to
adequately balance treated and control units or address non-parallel trends; specification searches;
and “file-drawer bias” (the tendency for insignificant results to remain unpublished). McCrary,
Christensen and Fanelli (2016) propose a minimum t-statistic around 3 to correct for file-drawer
bias alone.


3
  Sulfa drugs: See Jayachandran et al. (2012), table 1. Medicare adoption: See Finkelstein & McKnight (2008),
App. A. Oregon Experiment: See Finkelstein et al. (2012), Table IX. Medicare age discontinuity: see Card et al
(2004) table 11, RAND experiment: see Brook et al. (1983) Table 7.

                                                      5
        Power analyses are common in the design (ex ante) stage of a randomized trial; researchers
use them to ensure that the trial does not “fail” to find a true effect due to inadequate sample size.
They are rare, however, for DiD and other observational studies. Ioannidis et al. (2017) and
McCloskey (1985) criticize the failure of economics researchers to conduct power analyses. DiD
and other shock-based, observational studies with panel data would often benefit from assessing
plausible effect sizes and conducting power analyses, ideally in an explicit “design stage” (with
outcomes hidden; see Rubin, 2008).             Conducting these analyses can reduce the chance of
inadvertently publishing false positive results or results with inflated magnitudes (Button et al.,
2013; Gelman and Carlin, 2014).4
        For example, we find non-parallel pre-treatment trends between treated and control states;
mortality among those aged 55-64 drops fairly substantially in treated states over 2009-2013
relative to control states (Figure 2). The triple difference design cannot fully address this problem,
because we also find non-parallel within-state trends for persons aged 55-64 compared to those
aged 65-74, which vary across subgroups. DD and triple difference regression estimates ignore
these non-parallel trends. For example, we find implausibly large, statistically significant effects
of ACA expansion on mortality for blacks and Hispanics, in both DD and triple difference
specifications (Appendix Table A2). The power analysis and parallel trends examination (for
which a long pre-treatment period can be important) reduce the likelihood that we would
inadvertently interpret these significant coefficients as robust results.5
        We note several limitations of our work. First, our analysis should not be interpreted as
evidence that health insurance does not affect mortality or health, either overall or for particular
diseases or subgroups.        Second, studying mortality with ACA-induced variation in health
insurance is marginal in three senses: (i) those previously uninsured (implying average lower
demand for health insurance; see Kowalski’s (2018) evidence on better health among new
enrollees in Massachusetts reform than existing enrollees) may experience lower marginal gains
from insurance than the already insured; (ii) prior policy interventions already provide emergency
care and some healthcare access for vulnerable populations; and (iii) access to health insurance



4
  We discuss below the limited prior examples we have found on use of a simulated power analysis in applied
economics research; none involve imposing a simulated treatment effect on actual data.
5
 As we were finalizing this draft, we became aware of Borgschulte and Vogler (2019), who find a post-ACA drop in
mortality attributable to Medicaid expansion for both amenable and non amenable causes of death.

                                                       6
does not equate to access to healthcare, as even the uninsured consume substantial healthcare, so
that some insurance-induced healthcare could be at the “flat” (or even the downslope) of the
marginal benefit curve. We also study a relatively short post-shock time frame, yet any effects of
health insurance on mortality may appear only over a longer time frame. However, our simulations
suggest that longer-term effects on mortality, with plausible effect sizes, cannot be reliably
detected with currently available datasets. Moreover, concern with non-parallel trends during the
treatment period increases as one moves further away from the shock. Thus, additional years of
data, using existing sources, are unlikely to allow a convincing longer-term effect to emerge.
         In Part II we summarize the prior literature on the relationship between health insurance
and mortality. This literature presents a mixed picture. There is no consistent evidence for
statistically significant effects of insurance on mortality for the general adult population. There
are some effects for specific vulnerable populations such as those with HIV, but not for others,
such as those with a disability. Part III provides an overview of the conceptual concerns that
inform our analysis. Part IV summarizes the ACA insurance expansions. Part V describes our
data and presents summary statistics. Part VI summarizes our empirical approach. Part VII
presents our results. Part VIII presents our power analysis, highlights the limited sources of
identifying variation and the risk of false positives, and assesses which data and sample sizes might
provide adequate power. Part IX concludes.

II. Prior Research

A. The Effect of Health Insurance on Health and Mortality

         Our first contribution, on whether Medicaid expansion predicts lower mortality, fits into a
large literature that examines the connection between health insurance and health status. This
literature spans experimental and quasi-experimental settings, and examines morbidity and
mortality, physical and mental health, elderly and non-elderly adults, pregnant women, children,
infants, short- and long-run effects, and specific diseases and demographic subpopulations.
         For our first aim, we focus on the effect of health insurance on mortality in the general
adult population.6 Historically, the first rigorous evidence on how health insurance affects health


6
  In early research using a natural experiment, Currie and Gruber (1996a,b) find that Medicaid expansions in the late
1980s and early 1990s reduced infant mortality by 8% and all-cause child mortality by 5%.However, Howell et al
(2010) find that the effects of Medicaid expansion on child and infant mortality are limited to accidental deaths, not
disease-related deaths – a puzzling result, since emergency care regardless of insurance has been required since 1996

                                                          7
and mortality comes from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Brook et al., 1983; Keeler,
1985; Newhouse, 1993) which provided experimental exposure to varying degrees of insurance
generosity; none of the study subjects was fully uninsured. Brook et al. (1983) found no significant
overall effect on mortality for the full sample (of persons aged 14 to 61, followed for 3-5 years
(point estimate -0.02; 95% CI [-0.05, +0.02]), but found 10% lower mortality for high-risk
individuals who received generous insurance. The RAND HIE also found some improvements in
blood pressure for low-income populations receiving generous insurance, but otherwise found
limited evidence that generous insurance led to improved health.
         Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) study Medicare’s introduction in 1965, which remains
the largest health insurance policy change in US history. Their first stage is around 75%, because
private insurance for the elderly was uncommon pre-Medicare (Finkelstein, 2007). Finkelstein and
McKnight (2008) find a 40% drop in out-of-pocket medical expenditures, but no discernible
mortality effects over a 10-year period (point estimate after 5 years = -0.15%; 95% CI [-3.9%,
+3.6%]). Finkelstein and McKnight observe that these results may be due to the fact that prior to
Medicare, those with life-threatening but treatable conditions likely sought care even if they were
uninsured.
         Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2004) exploit the age-65 discontinuity in coverage using more
recent data from 1989-1998; they find no significant effect of turning 65 on population mortality
(point estimate +0.5%, 95% CI [-3.3%, +4.3%]).7 Their first stage is around 8% for the full sample
(Table 3) and 14% for a low-education subsample. In a related study that speaks to possible
mechanisms, Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2009) find a drop in mortality at age 65 among those
admitted to hospital through the ED for severe, non-deferrable reasons for which individuals would
seek care at the ED whether insured or not: having insurance through Medicare increases treatment
intensity by around 3% and results in a 1% absolute (20% relative) reduction in 7-day mortality
and a 3% relative reduction in 1-year mortality.



under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) and was widely available pre-EMTALA.
Wherry and Meyer (2015) examine the long-run impact of eligibility expansions for children using a regression
discontinuity design and find lower mortality for nervous system diseases and cancer, rather than for accidents, among
black but not white children. These studies, while pointing in different directions, suggest that there is important
heterogeneity based on both cause of death and race.
7
 The overall mortality results are included in the 2004 NBER working paper but not later published papers (Card,
Dobkin, and Maestas, 2008, 2009).

                                                          8
         Doyle (2005) studies a subpopulation with strong need for emergency medical care
(victims of auto accidents who are alive when they reach the hospital) and finds higher adult
mortality rates for uninsured persons in Wisconsin during 1992-1997. He finds that being
uninsured increases in-hospital mortality by 39%, relative to other auto accident victims (1.5 more
deaths per 100, relative to a mean of 3.8 deaths per 100) (point estimate 0.015, 95% CI [0.003,
0.027]), which he attributes to differences in treatment intensity, rather than pre-accident
differences in health; in this sense, the paper also speaks to a specific channel involving in-hospital
treatment intensity for emergency care for severe traumatic injury.8
         Levy and Meltzer (2004, 2008) review the literature and conclude that, consistent with
Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) and Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2004), the literature presents
evidence at most of modest health benefits from general adult health insurance expansions. They
note potential exceptions for specific vulnerable populations, but conclude that “for most of the
population at risk of being uninsured (adults of ages 19 to 50), we have limited reliable evidence
on how health insurance affects health.” (Levy and Meltzer 2008, p.404).
         In addition to the RAND Experiment, two other randomized experiments deserve attention.
Weathers and Stegman (2012) find no significant mortality effect for adults receiving Social
Security Disability Insurance when they receive health insurance immediately rather than after the
usual 2-year waiting period, even when given assistance in navigating the health insurance system
(point estimate for odds ratio 1.28, 95% CI [0.71,1.85]. However, their sample of 2,000 persons
is small, and thus confidence bounds are wide. They do find that those receiving insurance have
higher self-reported health. The second is the Oregon Experiment, involving Medicaid expansion
for adults, administered through a lottery among those who applied. Finkelstein et al. (2012) and
Baicker et al. (2013) find limited changes in mortality or measures of physical health after 2 years.
They find increased healthcare use, increased diabetes detection and care (but not lower blood
sugar levels), reduced financial strain, and less depression. Their first stage on health insurance
coverage is strong at around a 25% relative rise in coverage for those in the treatment group; this
difference shrinks rapidly, however, and is only half as large after 16 months. Their point estimate
for mortality reduction is large, at -13%, but with a wide 95% CI [-26%, +13%]. Thus, both


8
  Another example of health insurance affecting health among a uniquely vulnerable population is Goldman et al.
(2001), who use state HIV policies and Medicaid generosity as instruments for insurance status; they find that 6-month
mortality falls by 71% as a result of gaining insurance.

                                                          9
experiments find statistically insignificant effects for relatively vulnerable populations (the
disabled for Weathers and Stegman (2012), and poor adults who signed up for the Medicaid lottery
and later enrolled if eligible for the Oregon Experiment).
         In contrast, several recent papers on insurance expansions for nonelderly adults find large
effects of health insurance on mortality rates. Sommers, Baicker and Epstein (2012) considers
Medicaid expansion for non-elderly adults in three states (Arizona, Maine, and New York) that
expanded Medicaid in the early 2000s compared to neighboring non-expansion states; Sommers,
Long and Baicker (2014) and Powell (2018) consider the Massachusetts insurance expansion in
2006. McClellan (2017) considers the ACA mandate that requires employers to cover young
adults under their parents’ employment-based insurance policies until age 26, and Dunn and
Shapiro (forthcoming) considers the effect of Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage for
elderly adults.

B. Power analyses and prior use of simulated power in economics research

         Our second contribution focuses on the value of conducting and reporting a power analysis
in an observational study. We perform a power analysis in a form that is generally usable for DiD
studies with reasonably long panels by using simulation, in which one imposes treatment effects
of varying sizes on actual data during the pre-treatment period.
         Ex ante power analyses, before research is carried out, are often used in randomized trial
designs to assess feasibility and determine necessary sample size,9 as well as in grant applications
for observational studies.10 However, even when performed at an early stage in a research project,
power analyses are rarely reported in published research. It is rarer still to find simulated power
analyses. The exceptions we found include Hsiang et al. (2015) and Croke et al. (2016) from
economics and Hannon et al. (1993) from bird ornithology. Of these only Hannon et al. (1993)




9
  For example, after making assumptions about the mean and sampling distribution of a potential treatment effect, a
researcher designing an RCT could use a standard formula to estimate the minimum number of subjects needed to
detect an effect of that size at a 5% significance level 80% probability – termed 80% power. This ex ante power
analysis is helpful in ruling out study designs that are underpowered given realistic assumptions, and can allow
researchers to assess the needed sample size, and to enhance power by changing the research design.
10
   The National Institutes of Health (NIH) require reviewers of grant applications to evaluate how statistical power
has been addressed and advice to potential grant applicants is to aim for at least 80% power (NIH, 2016; Gerin et al.,.
2017).

                                                          10
modify observed data to discern power, while Hsiang et al. (2015) and Croke et al. (2016) create
synthetic data that is designed to proxy for real world variables of interest.11
        Some have argued that power analysis should not be done after results are available
(Hoenig and Heisey, 2001; Senn, 2002); citing concerns that a lack of power will be used to justify
insignificant findings, which could be due to lack of a treatment effect. Conversely, Gelman and
Carlin (2014) point out in low-powered studies which find a statistically significant effect, the
estimated effect size will often have the wrong sign or have magnitude far larger than the true
effect; this implies a need for power analysis in studies which find significant effects.12
        A growing literature documents the prevalence of underpowered studies in a number of
fields, including neuroscience, psychology, medicine, and economics (Button et al., 2013;
Maxwell, 2004; Ioannidis, 2005; Ioannidis et al., 2017). Related early work in this vein by
economists includes the lament by McCloskey and Ziliak that power analyses are rarely conducted
(McCloskey, 1985; McCloskey and Ziliak, 1996; Ziliak and McCloskey, 2004). Ioannidis et al.
(2017) estimate that the median statistical power in a large set of economics articles is 18%, which
is far lower than the 80% standard used in experimental design. The authors determine power by
relying on meta-analyses of these articles, and comparing the weighted effect size from the meta-
analysis to a weighted standard error. Their approach, however, cannot be used to assess power in
a single study.13 In addition, Banerjee et al. (2015) review six randomized trials assessing
microcredit and find that most suffer from low power due to a limited take up rate.
        Single-study power analyses can be either closed form (based on an assumed data
generating process) or simulation-based; the simulation can involve either artificial data (from an
assumed data generating process) or actual data, to which a treatment effect is added. A study of
bird nest visitation by Hannon et al. (1993), the earliest simulated power analysis we found, is
similar in spirit to our own in that the authors apply a simulated treatment effect to actual data.


11
    Hannon et al. (1993) are also the only researchers who conduct a power analysis on their own results. Hsiang et
al. (2015) and Croke et a. (2016) run power analysis on studies by others.
12
    Gelman (2018) and Button et al. (2013) note a technical concern: power analysis should not be based upon the
estimated treatment effect size since noise in the estimated effect size will cause error in the estimated power; an
estimated effect that exceeds the true effect would lead to estimated power that exceeds actual power.
13
   Zhang and Ortmann (2013) and Gallet and Doubouliagos (2017) use similar approaches to estimate power for a
series of related studies. Zhang and Ortmann report median power of 25% in experimental papers using the dictator
game. Gallet and Doubouliagos report that 59% of studies examining the impact of healthcare spending on life
expectancy have adequate power.

                                                        11
The authors modify their outcome variable (nest visitation) using draws from the binomial
distribution, gradually increasing (or decreasing) the probability of visitation. For each modified
sample, they draw 50 bootstrapped samples, re-estimate their statistical model, and report power
for each imposed effect size as the percentage of times the imposed effect is statistically significant
among the bootstrapped samples.
          In contrast, Hsiang et al. (2015) estimate power using synthetic data. They generate the
dependent variable (likelihood of conflict) using a normal distribution with a fixed mean and
standard deviation; they impose a treatment effect by varying the mean to indicate a “treatment
effect.” For each imposed effect size, they analyze the synthetic data using their preferred
specification and report power as the percent of times a statistically significant result is found at
the 95% confidence level. Croke et al. (2016) examine a meta-analysis done by Taylor-Robinson
et al. (2015) on the impact of mass administration of deworming drugs on childhood health. Croke
et al. (2016) demonstrate that the meta-analysis is under-powered by using a simulation similar to
Hsiang et al. (2015).
          An advantage of entirely synthetic data is that there will be no pre-treatment trends or
treatment effect unless one is imposed. However, fully synthetic data involves large sacrifices,
similar to those noted for closed form power analyses by Burlig et al. (2017); one must implicitly
impose structure on the variance-covariance matrix, for which the true structure may not be known.
For example, in a panel data setting, values could be autocorrelated across time, pre-treatment
trends could be non-parallel in complex ways (as we find for our data), and unobserved covariates
could predict both treatment and outcome. As Stigler (1977) points out, real data are rarely drawn
from a “perfect distribution.” Our approach, of applying a simulated treatment effect by modifying
existing data during the pre-treatment period, does not guarantee a distribution centered around
the null when we impose a zero treatment effect (the data can exhibit an “accidental” effect), but
it preserves both the obvious and more subtle relationships present in the actual data that can affect
power, and lets us take accidental effects into account in estimating power. We have yet to find a
prior example of this exact approach other than Hannon et al. (1993). However, similar procedures
are suggested in the online appendix of Burlig et al. (2017), § D.2 and by Gelman and Carlin
(2014).




                                                  12
III. Conceptual Concerns

        We study the end result (mortality) of a process that starts with policy changes to eligibility
for free or subsidized health insurance. To assess the plausible magnitude of any treatment effect
and the challenges in measuring that effect using available datasets, one must keep in mind the
chain of causation between policy changes and health or mortality. Because large-scale datasets
available to researchers do not adequately measure morbidity, many studies (including ours) focus
on mortality. However, mortality records are generally not linkable at the individual level to other
information, including pre-ACA insurance status (which one could use to exclude the always
insured from the sample, thus increasing the first stage)14 or income (which determines eligibility
for Medicaid and subsidized private insurance).
        Several concepts inform our analysis and the interpretation of our results. One is the
existence of prior policies that provide vulnerable populations with health insurance, or with
healthcare regardless of health insurance status. These include health insurance and healthcare
for the elderly and disabled through Medicare or Medicaid; pregnant women through Medicaid;
many children through the Children’s Health Insurance Program; persons needing emergency care
through the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA); persons with
specific high-cost health conditions (AIDS through the Ryan White Act and end-stage renal
disease under Medicare); those who suffer workplace or automobile injuries; and those with access
to public hospitals, publicly supported clinics, or the charity care provided by nonprofit hospitals.
Thus, further health insurance expansions will affect principally populations and medical
conditions outside these groups.
        A second concept that informs our analysis is selection into coverage for a new program,
such as the ACA Medicaid expansion, including selection effects for both take-up of new coverage
and crowd-out of other coverage. The less policymakers are practically or politically able to target
groups likely to be uninsured and promote a high take-up rate, the less likely it is that studies like
ours will have sufficient statistical power to find detectable effects on health or mortality. For
example, the ACA changes eligibility but does not directly provide insurance. As in any “intent-
to-treat” (encouragement) experimental design, we can estimate a treatment effect only for the



14
  An analogy: The Oregon Experiment achieved a 25% first stage because insurance was offered only to persons
who were previously uninsured and had applied for the Medicaid lottery.

                                                     13
“compliers” with the encouragement. Multiple selection effects are possible, including that those
who sign up: (i) may be more health-conscious in other ways; (ii) may have greater healthcare
needs (e.g., Kenney et al., 2012); (iii) may be more likely to use additional healthcare once insured;
and (iv) may be more compliant with medical advice than the “never-takers” who do not sign up.
Thus, estimates for compliers may differ from those for never takers or always takers (the already
insured). For example, Kowalski (2018) reconciles differences in the effects of the Oregon
experiment and the Massachusetts health insurance expansion on emergency department visits on
the basis of better initial health for the Massachusetts complier populations.
          Third, there could be substantial treatment heterogeneity even among the compliers, with
health insurance improving health for some, but being neutral for others (“flat of the marginal
benefit curve” medicine) or even detrimental due to overtreatment (e.g., opioid addiction as an
unintended effect of pain treatment). Yet the available data limits our ability to study specific
subpopulations.
          A fourth concern is heterogeneous health insurance quality. In many states, Medicaid
insurance is considered to be of lower quality than commercial insurance (Polsky et al., 2015).
          Fifth, health insurance is only one factor potentially affecting trends in health and mortality.
Other factors can vary by age and ethnic group (e.g., Case and Deaton, 2015, find rising mortality
in middle-age for less-educated whites, but not other groups), and by state (as we find below).
Differing trends complicate any effort to define a suitable control group.
          These concerns, taken together, highlight the complex relationship between health
insurance and health outcomes, and anticipate the limitations of the available data and policy
shocks.

IV. Data

     We measure mortality using the confidential version of the Compressed Mortality File (CMF),
which contains records on approximately 2.6 million deaths a year.15 This dataset is compiled by
the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) and contains individual death records from the
National Death Index, with county-level geographic identifiers.16 Other data in the mortality files

15
  The public-use version of this data can be found at http://wonder.cdc.gov/mortSQL.html, but that version suppresses
death counts in county-years with 10 or fewer deaths in any query.
16
  http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/cmf.htm#data_availability. We do not use data prior to 1999 because that is
the first year in which death certificates began using ICD10 codes.

                                                         14
include (1) race, ethnicity, and gender; (2) year of death; (3) age at death (which we collapse into
5yr-age groups, e.g., 55-59, 60-64, etc., because county population, which we use as the
denominator for measuring mortality rates, is available only for these groups); and 4) primary
cause of death (4 digit ICD-10 code). We use data from 2009-2013 as the pre-treatment period and
2014-2016 as the treatment period for our main DD analysis, but use longer periods for selected
analyses. We conduct county-level analyses, using county population (from the U.S. Census
Bureau) as weights, to produce state-level and national estimates that are representatives of the
respective populations. To examine the first-stage health insurance estimates that correspond to
our mortality analyses, we use information on uninsurance rates from the Census Bureau’s Small
Area Health Insurance Estimates (SAHIE).17

V. ACA Insurance Expansions and Identifying Variation

        In 2014, the two main insurance expansions under the ACA took place, with Medicaid
expansions occurring in 27 states (including the District of Columbia) on or soon after January 1,
2014, in three more states on or soon after January 1, 2015, and in two more in late 2015 or the
beginning of 2016. “Standard” expansion included coverage for all non-elderly adults with family
income less than 138% of the federal poverty level (FPL). Of these 32 expansion states, 10 had
conducted significant expansions prior to 2014 and are not included in our main specifications.
The “treated” states for our principal DD analyses are the remaining 22 “Full Expansion States”;
the control group consists of the 19 “Non-Expansion States”; we also treat the five late-expansion
states as part of the control group during pre-expansion years. A number of other studies of
Medicaid expansion also focus on the Full-Expansion States (e.g., Wherry and Miller, 2016).
Table 1 lists the states in each expansion group, as well as the change in percent uninsured in each
state from 2013-2015 for persons between the ages of 50 and 64; Appendix Table A-1 provides
additional details on each state’s expansion status.
        The second major way in which the ACA expanded coverage was by creating
“marketplaces” with private insurance subsidies for those with income between 138% and 400%
of the FPL in expansion states, and 100-400% of the FPL in Non-Expansion States and WI (which
expanded Medicaid only to 100% of the FPL). Our study design exploits mainly variation in

17
   Source: https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/sahie/estimates-acs.html. SAHIE data is available
for ages 50-64, rather than the 55-64 age group we study in our main analyses, but first-stage magnitudes should be
similar.

                                                        15
Medicaid expansion, but we also provide estimates that use both sources of variation provided by
the ACA by comparing areas that received different shocks to uninsurance rates due to differing
pre-ACA characteristics.
         There is ample evidence that the proportion of uninsured adults fell, and that the sources
of payment for hospitalizations shifted toward more Medicaid and less self-pay. However, the
uninsured population fell in both Expansion and Non-Expansion States. As Table 1 shows, the
population-weighted drop in uninsurance rates from 2013 to 2015 for the 50-64 age group
averaged 7.1% in Full-Expansion States versus 5.4% in Non-Expansion States; the difference
between the two groups is 1.7%.18
         This small difference in secular uninsurance declines between treatment and control groups
poses a major challenge to any effort to use Medicaid expansion to estimate the effect of health
insurance on mortality. The “first stage” of the encouragement design is only modestly higher for
particular subgroups who were more likely to be affected by Medicaid expansion, for whom we
still find first stages of 5% or less (Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4).
         Although the ACA unambiguously reduced uninsurance rates, causal effects on healthcare
delivery appear more modest and uneven across types of care (e.g., Mazurenko et al., 2018). The
Oregon Experiment (Taubman et al., 2014) found a 40% increase in ED visits among the newly
Medicaid eligible, and Ghosh et al. (2017) find that ACA Medicaid expansion predicts a nearly
20% increase in prescription drug use. In contrast, there is no evidence that the ACA Medicaid
expansion led to a significant rise in ED visits in expansion states (Pines et al., 2016; Wherry and
Miller, 2016). Both from this evidence and from prior studies of the effect of health insurance on
mortality discussed above, we expect the effect of receiving health insurance on mortality during
our study period to be modest.




18
   Here, we use uninsurance rates for persons aged 50-64 as the closest available match in the Small Area Health
Insurance Estimates (SAHIE) data on uninsurance rates to our principal treatment group of those aged 55- 64. The
drop in uninsurance rates was somewhat larger for the entire adult population. See Appendix. If one weighs states
equally, rather than by population, the drop in uninsurance rates is 6.4% versus 4.4% (a difference of 2.0%). But the
apparent gain in first-stage strength is offset by greater reliance on small states, for which mortality rates are noisier;
moreover, this approach answers a different question: ‘how is the average US state affected, rather than how is the
average newly insured person affected?’

                                                            16
VI. Empirical Approach

         A. Effect of Health Insurance on Mortality
To investigate the effect of Medicaid expansion on mortality, we use several DD specifications:
(i) a “simple DD” specification, which assumes a one-time change in mortality rates; (ii) a “leads-
and-lags” model, which allows for a separate treatment effect in each year, both before and after
Medicaid expansion, and lets us assess whether pre-treatment trends are parallel; and (iii) a “triple
difference” model, in which the third difference is persons aged 55-64 versus persons in the same
county aged 65-74. Treatment is recorded in event time, relative to the year in which each
expansion state expanded Medicaid. For states that expand on a date other than January 1 of year
t, we treat year t as post-expansion if expansion occurred in the first half of the year; we treat year
t as pre-expansion otherwise (see Table 1 for details). All models use county-level data, county
and year fixed effects (FE), county population weights, standard errors clustered at the state level,
and data from 2009 through 2016.19 The simple DD model is:

                             !"# = % + '()*+,# + -."# + /# + 0" + 1"#               [1]

Here, i indexes individuals; j indexes county; s indexes state; t indexes time in years, the dependent
variable; Yjt is ln((deaths)/100,000 persons)+1); we add 1 to the mortality rate to avoid dropping
county-years with zero deaths.20 We limit the sample to Full- and Non-Expansion States to form
a stronger comparison. The predictor variable of interest is Post =1 for Full Expansion States in
post-expansion years (2014 and 2015 for the 17 states that fully expanded Medicaid in 2014; 2015
for the 3 states that expanded in 2015). The covariate vector Xjt includes the following county-
level demographic characteristics: % male; % Black; % White, % Hispanic; % aged 0-19, 20-34,
35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84, and 85+; managed care penetration (Medicare Advantage
beneficiaries as % of all Medicare beneficiaries); % disabled (% of Medicare beneficiaries
receiving SSDI benefits); % in poverty; unemployment rate; median household income; mean per-
capita income; % with diabetes; % obese; % physically inactive; % smokers; active practicing non-



19
   A small number of small, rural counties experienced boundary changes over the study period, which are reflected
at different times in different datasets. To handle this problem, we merged some counties (see the Appendix for
details).
20
   We use a log-linear model for convenience, so that the regression coefficients are interpretable as (approximate)
fractional changes in mortality. We obtain similar results with a linear model, with Yjt = (deaths)/100,000 persons.

                                                         17
federal physicians/1,000 persons.21             We convert all amounts to 2010 dollars.22 In some
specifications, we use a narrower set of covariates or no covariates, partly to assess whether our
results are sensitive to including observable, time-varying, county-level factors, and also because
expansion could affect some covariates. We include county and year fixed-effects (/# 234 0" t) in
all models to control for potential unobserved covariates that vary across counties but are fixed
over time, and for determinants of mortality that are constant across counties but vary over time.
          Appendix Table A-2 provides a covariate balance table showing mean values for each
covariate by state, averaged over the pre-reform period of 2009-2013. As expected, there are
differences in a number of covariates. Expansion states differ from non-expansion states in a
number of ways, including age structure (more weighted towards middle ages), race (more White),
poverty (less poor), health status (less diabetes, more physical activity), health care access (more
physicians per capita) and health insurance (less uninsured). To address covariate imbalance, we
also implement an inverse propensity score weighting approach in which we compute ATT
weights and use ATT*population weights.23 Results with these weights, presented in the
Appendix, are consistent with those we report in the text.
          We principally study mortality due to healthcare-amenable causes (Nolte and McKee,
2003), but also provide some estimates for non-amenable and total mortality. The concept of
amenable mortality seeks to capture deaths from conditions that are potentially preventable with
timely care; examples include heart disease, stroke, cancer, diabetes, and infections.24
          To study the time pattern of any apparent treatment effect, and to assess whether pre-
treatment trends differ between Full- and Non-Expansion States, we use a leads-and-lags model in
event time, with the first expansion year set to zero, following Equation (2):

21
   We take population data from the Census Bureau at http://www.census.gov/popest/. We use mid-year inter-censal
estimates for 1999 and 2001-2009, and post-census estimates for 2011-2015. We obtain physician counts
(interpolating from adjacent years for 2009 due to missing data), unemployment rate, median household income,
percent in managed care (interpolating from adjacent years for 2006-2007 due to missing data), and percent disabled
from the Area Health Resource File (AHRF) at http://arf.hrsa.gov/. County per-capita personal income comes from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis at http://www.bea.gov/regional/. Data on health variables comes from the Centers
for Disease Control at https://www.cdc.gov/dhdsp/maps/atlas/index.htm.
22
     Source: www.bls.gov/cpi/. We use the annual average consumer price index for all urban consumers.
23
   To generate propensity scores, we average the covariates over the pre-treatment period (2009-2013). We then run
a logit regression, which predicts whether a county is in a Full- or Non-Expansion State, using all variables in Table
A-2 to generate the fitted propensity p. ATT weights are calculated as (p/(1-p)).
24
  We implement the concept of amenable mortality using the ICD-10CM causes of death tabulated in Sommers, Long,
and Baicker (2014), App. 1, last column. This definition is somewhat broader than the Nolte and McKee definition.

                                                         18
                    !"# = % + ∑89:;<( β> ∗ D"#
                                            >
                                               ) + -."# + /# + 0" + 1"#      [2]

Here, k indexes “event time” in years relative to Medicaid expansion. Djtk = 0 for Non-Expansion
States for all t and k. For Full-Expansion States, Dstk = 1 for the kth year relative to the adoption
year, and 0 otherwise. For states that expanded Medicaid on January 1, 2014, Dst1 = 1 for 2014 and
2 for 2015. Thus, β1 provides the estimated population average treatment effect for the first
expansion year, while β-1 is the estimated effect one year before adoption, and so on. We adjust
the coefficients by subtracting β-3 from each, so that reported β-3 ≡ 0.
       We find evidence that states have differing mortality trends during the pre-treatment
period, which casts doubt on the parallel trends assumption required for valid DD analysis. To
address these sources of differing trends, we use a further source of within-state variation:
mortality trends among those who are 65 or older (and thus always insured) can potentially control
for the otherwise unobserved state-specific factors that generate non-parallel trends. We thus also
use a triple-difference/age-discontinuity specification (similar to Finkelstein and McKnight,
2008), where the third difference is mortality among persons between the ages of 65 and 74, who
are eligible for Medicare and should not be affected by Medicaid expansion, and limit the sample
to persons between the ages of 55 and 74, thus comparing mortality trends for the 55-64 age group
to thosein the 65-74 age group. The triple-difference specification, analogous to simple DiD, is:
!"# = % + '()*+,# ∗ B34CD65,# + '()*+,# + 'B34CD65,# + -."# + /# + 0" + 1"#               [4]
Heterogeneity/Robustness
       We also seek to strengthen the first stage (the fraction of county population that gains
insurance due to Medicaid expansion) and to investigate potential heterogeneous treatment effects,
by estimating a model that interacts the double difference with an indicator for counties with high
uninsurance rates in 2013, prior to Medicaid expansion. High2013 indicator equals 1 for the
counties with the highest uninsurance rates in 2013, such that together they contain 20% of the
population of our treated and control states (or demographic subsamples), and 0 for the counties
with the lowest uninsurance rates in 2013, containing another 20% of this population; we remove
from the sample counties with moderate uninsurance rates (containing 60% of the U.S.
population). We thus compare high-uninsurance counties to low-uninsurance counties. The
regression equation is:
       !"# = % + '()*+,# GHIJℎ2013" + '()*+,# + -.P+ + /# + 0" + 1"#               [5]


                                                 19
We similarly compare counties with high poverty rates in 2013, containing 20% of the sample
population, to counties with low poverty rates, also containing 20% of this population. This
approach exploits variation from the ACA overall, rather than just the Medicaid expansion
component.
       We also estimate separate models for subsamples stratified on covariates that may predict
uninsurance rates or response to health insurance, for which we also have mortality data: education,
gender, and race/ethnicity. For example, lower-educated subgroups will have larger first stages
and higher mortality rates, and thus will (before the offsetting effect of reduced sample size) could
be more likely to produce detectable mortality changes.
   B. Power Analysis
       The power of a statistical test is the probability that the test will correctly reject a false null
hypothesis, at a given confidence level. For a regression coefficient, power is normally taken to be
the likelihood that the coefficient will be found to be significantly different from zero, at that
confidence level. We conduct a simulation-based power analysis by artificially introducing
treatment effects of different sizes into the data in the pre-treatment period, and then assessing
(over 1,000 iterations) how often our DD and triple-difference regression models can detect these
effects at the 90%, 95%, 99%, and 99.9% confidence levels (using two-tailed tests). The goal of
this analysis is to determine the minimum effect of health insurance on amenable mortality that is
reliably detectable with our data and research design.
       The alternative of a closed-form power analysis requires fully modeling the data generating
process, including parameterizing the error term for both variance and covariance terms, and is
especially hard to construct with panel data in which observations can be correlated over time
(Burlig et al., 2017). A simulation using entirely artificial data has similar problems. We therefore
use simulation methods applied to real data. For example, our simulation approach builds in
“noise” from non-parallel trends in the actual data; with a closed-form analysis we would have to
model the level and form of these trends. Our use of regression weights and clustered standard
errors further contributes to the difficulty in producing a tractable and credible form for an analytic
power calculation. Simulation, applied to real data, avoids these challenges and lets us use the
same research design and econometric specification as the main analysis (Burlig et al., 2017).
       Our simulation proceeds as follows. We exclude all data from the post-treatment period
and use data from 2007-2013 rather than the 2009-2015 period used in our actual analyses. We

                                                   20
then do the following 1,000 times: we randomly assign a pseudo-expansion status to 20 of the 41
states in our final study (that either fully expanded or did not expand Medicaid). Thus, in each
draw, 20 states are pseudo-treated and 21 are pseudo-control. In each case, we assume that the
expansion occurred in 2012, giving us two years of post-expansion data for each pseudo-treated
state.
         For each randomly drawn set of pseudo-treated states, we impose a pseudo treatment effect
of a reduction in amenable mortality (from 0% to 6%, in 0.25% increments) for all persons aged
55-64 living in a pseudo-treated state. We do this by randomly removing deaths from each pseudo-
treated county-year using draws from a binomial distribution. For example, if a county-year has
100 healthcare-amenable deaths and the imposed treatment effect is 0.5%, we remove each death
with probability 0.005. The expected number of remaining deaths is then 99.5, but the actual
number must be a whole number and could be 100, 99, 98, etc. Each imposed treatment effect is
randomly distributed across the pseudo-treated states and across counties in each state. Thus, as in
this example, it is unlikely that any pseudo-treated county will have its mortality rate decrease by
exactly 0.5%, but the pseudo-treated counties will still experience the imposed treatment effect on
average (subject to sample variation).
         Once we have introduced the artificial shocks, we run the DD model in eqn. (1) and save
the regression coefficient and standard error. The percentage of times a result is found to be
statistically significant for a given effect size and significance level is the power for that effect size
and significance level; a common threshold for a study to be deemed adequately powered is 80%
power at a 95% confidence level. We similarly assess power using the DDD model in eqn. (4). In
addition to statistical power, we also report three measures based upon Gelman and Carlin (2014)
that inform the plausibility of any significant results obtained, given the study’s underlying power:
the percentage of times a significant, estimated treatment effect has the wrong sign (opposite from
the imposed effect; that is, a higher mortality in expansion states); in the subset of cases where a
significant effect is found, the mean ratio of the estimated treatment effect to the true (imposed)
effect (the exaggeration ratio); and the percentage of significant treatment effect estimates that
have the correct sign and an exaggeration ratio below 2 (which we term a “believable” coefficient).

         VII.   Principal Results

         We present full-sample results in this section, principally for adults aged 55-64 some
limited results for adults in a broader 45-64 age group. We first present univariate results, and
                                                   21
then results from DD and triple difference models. See the Appendix for similar results for all
non-elderly adults. In the Appendix, we assess whether we could obtain a better match between
treated and control states, and thus tighter confidence bounds, using synthetic control methods.
We conclude that we cannot rely on these methods for inference due to poor pre-treatment fit.25

          A. Univariate Graphical Evidence

          In Figure 1, we display trends in amenable mortality for the four state groups, for the full
time period with available data (1999-2015). We aggregate data to the state-group level using
population weights, and show amenable mortality rates per 100,000 persons aged 55-64; Appendix
Figure A-1 shows data for persons aged 18-64. Several features of Figure 1 are important. First,
there are substantial differences in mortality rates across the state groups, although these are
smaller between our principal comparison groups—the Full-Expansion vs. Non-Expansion States.
          Second, Figure 1 shows clear evidence of non-parallel pre-treatment trends. Unless these
differences are absorbed by the regression covariates (for our data, we show below they are not)
or by our third difference (they partly are), any DD analysis is suspect. More specifically, over
2010-2016, mortality continues to decline in the Mild-Expansion and Substantial-Expansion
states, but levels off in the Full-Expansion States and rises in the Non-Expansion States. We also
find non-parallel univariate trends for all non-elderly adults (Appendix Figure A-1).
          If one simply compares the post-treatment average difference in mortality rates for Non-
Expansion versus Full-Expansion States to a similar post-treatment average difference—as a
simple DD regression does—it would appear that Medicaid expansion has a large, immediate
effect in reducing mortality. In fact, mortality rates for these two state groups diverge principally
during the pre-treatment period. There is little additional divergence during 2014-2016. The
simple DD coefficient is misleading, because it ignores the non-parallel pre-treatment trends. One
value of the power analysis presented below is to protect against finding spurious significance due
to non-parallel trends. The power simulation during the pre-treatment period treats pre-treatment
trends as a source of additional noise, which reduces power.26


25
     See Appendix Figures A-2 and A-3.
26
   A common robustness check, which provides some protection against DD results being driven by non-parallel, pre-
treatment trends, is to add linear unit-specific trends to a DD regression. This can be effective in some cases, but
requires a long pre-treatment period to estimate the linear trends and assumes a simple parametric (linear) form for
those “trends.”

                                                        22
       [FIGURE 1 about here]

       B. Covariate Balance

       Appendix Table A-2 provides a covariate balance table showing means, and the normalized
difference in means, between Full- and Non-Expansion states for the pre-expansion period of
2009-2013. There are meaningful differences between the two state groups on a number of
covariates, as well as on mortality (see Figure 1) and uninsurance rates. In light of these
differences, we reran the analyses reported below with ATT*population weights instead of
population weights. Results are similar to those we present; see the Appendix. We use the simpler,
population-weighted results as our main specification, as they are more transparent.

C. Leads-and-Lags Results

       We turn next to leads-and-lags graphs, using equation (3). Figure 2, Panel A, provides
annual point estimates and 95% CIs over 2004-2015, for amenable mortality among persons aged
55-64. There is, as expected, strong evidence for non-parallel pre-treatment trends, with relative
mortality improving in Full-Expansion States over 2007-2013. There is also no evidence of a
change in relative mortality in the first two expansion years. In Appendix Figures A-3 and A-4,
we provide leads-and-lags graphs for total mortality and non-amenable mortality, these also show
no evidence of a significant treatment effect.

       [FIGURE 2 around here]

       The likelihood of finding credible evidence of causal effects weakens further when we
compare the coefficient magnitudes in Figure 1 to plausible effect magnitudes for the full
populations of the treated states, given the small first stage shown in Table 1. Based on the prior
research discussed in Part II, even a 10% effect of health insurance on mortality within two years
would be large. Yet a 10% reduction in mortality for the treated (newly insured), with a roughly
1% first-stage (percent of the population treated), implies an average mortality reduction for all
persons aged 55-64, and thus a DD coefficient of 0.001 (0.1%). It is apparent from Figure 1 that
this reduction would be undetectable; it would be far lower than the annual 95% CIs, and far lower
than year-to-year relative changes in mortality in the pre-treatment period, which can be up to 20
times as large (0.02 from year -2 to year -1).




                                                 23
       If we take 0.02 as the minimum detectable effect with one year of data and 0.001 as a large
but perhaps plausible effect size coefficient, Figure 2 suggests that our study is underpowered by
a factor of 20 (equivalently, the ages 55-64 population needs to be 400 times larger). Adding one
or two more years of data (which should be possible in the near term) would help, but would not
be adequate to overcome this issue. We present a formal power assessment below, which is
consistent with this qualitative discussion.
       In Figure 2, Panel B, we present a similar figure for amenable death rates for those aged
65-74 to provide background for our triple-difference regression estimates. There is again evidence
of non-parallel trends, with mortality dropping in Full- versus Non-Expansion states in the pre-
treatment period. This suggests that the third difference (where we use 65-74 year olds as a within-
state control) can limit the non-parallel trends we saw in Figures 1 and 2A.
       Figure 2, Panel C provides triple-difference leads-and-lags results: annual point estimates
and CIs are for Full- versus Non-Expansion States and for the 55-64 versus 65-74 age groups.
Non-parallel trends are muted, but standard errors are larger than in Panel A. Moreover, there are
still large year-to-year swings in relative mortality in the pre-treatment period, with a jump of
around 0.02 from 2006 to 2007, and a similar jump from 2009-2010. Figure 2C shows dips in
relative mortality in Full-Expansion States in 2014 and 2015, but the magnitude is both much
larger than the plausible causal effect of around 0.001 and too small to be statistically convincing,
given the year-to-year variation we observe in the pre-treatment period.
       In Panel D, we present results from an age discontinuity specification that compares
persons aged 55-64 to those aged 65-74 in the same state. This specification exploits both sources
of ACA insurance expansion, leading to a stronger first stage, and can be applied in both Full- and
No-Expansion states. We find, however, strongly non-parallel pre-treatment trends (rising relative
mortality for those aged 55-64, compare Case and Deaton, 2015). These trends are similar in both
Full- and No-Expansion States (Appendix Figure A-4). There is no evidence of a post-ACA
change in this long-term trend.
       Our overall assessment is that the triple difference specification in Panel C is the best
available in limiting the extent of non-parallel pre-treatment trends. It remains suspect, however,
because it depends on non-parallel trends in the three relevant double differences tending to offset
each other in the pre-treatment period, with no basis for confidence that they would continue to do
so in the treatment period.

                                                 24
D. DD and Triple-Difference Regression Results

        We next turn to regression analysis. Table 2 shows results from DD regressions, following
eqn. [1], with county and year FE and county population weights, separately for our principal
treatment group (ages 55-64) and the placebo group (ages 65-74). It also shows triple-difference
results, following eqn. [4]. While both DD and triple-difference specifications are suspect because
of parallel trends problems, non-parallel pre-treatment trends are less severe for the triple
difference; thus our discussion focuses on those results. We show separate results for healthcare-
amenable mortality, non-amenable mortality, and total mortality.                   Even-numbered columns
include the covariates noted above. We present results for the 55-64 age group both because we
expect the effects of health insurance to be higher for this group than for younger persons, and
because we need to study a limited age band to pursue the triple-difference approach. In the
Appendix we estimate DD models that include younger ages for the treated population, with
similar results. We caution that these regressions assume flat pre-treatment trends, but we in fact
observe a declining trend. Given this trend, DD results will be biased toward finding a post-
expansion drop in mortality.
        In Table 2, in regressions with covariates, we find a statistically significant 2.1% post-
expansion fall in amenable mortality for those aged 55-64, with no significant change in non-
amenable mortality. However, in addition to assuming parallel trends, these results are fragile.
First, the coefficient on the Full-Expansion dummy is far too large to be credible. Given our
roughly 1.2% first stage, it implies an impossible 175% (2.1%/1.2%) reduction in amenable
mortality among those who gain health insurance. Second, for the placebo group (ages 65-74) and
the placebo-outcome (non-amenable mortality), we observe a large, statistically significant rise in
mortality. Third, the triple-difference decline in mortality is far smaller, at 0.7% (although still
implausibly large) and is not close to statistical significance. Note too that the standard errors for
amenable mortality are around 0.007 with covariates and rise to 0.009 in the triple-difference
specification. This implies a minimum detectable effect of around 0.014 to 0.018, which implies
a 120-150% drop in amenable mortality for compliers. This is further evidence the research design
is severely underpowered.27



27
    If we expand the age range for the treated group to 45-64 instead of 55-64, the insignificant negative triple-
difference point estimate in Table 2 switches sign; see Table 4. Moreover, by broadening the age range, we weaken

                                                       25
        [TABLE 2 around here]

E. Evidence on Heterogeneous Effects

        We conducted extensive additional analyses of the effects of ACA-induced insurance
variation on mortality, focusing on vulnerable subgroups or particular causes of death. These
subgroups can potentially provide a stronger first stage, a stronger second stage, or both. However,
moving to subgroup analysis also reduces sample size. We consider subgroups based on gender,
race/ethnicity, education level, specific cause of death, and county poverty and pre-ACA
uninsurance rates. We present and discuss these results in the Appendix.
        Our search for evidence of a significant effect of Medicaid expansion on mortality for
particular subgroups also proves to be underpowered. The discouraging conclusions we drew for
the general adult population—no evidence of a statistically significant effect, and far too little
power to detect effects of plausible magnitude—do not change. Reduced power due to a smaller
sample outweigh any gains from a larger first stage or a higher base mortality rate.
        Indeed, given the problems we found for the full sample, with both non-parallel trends and
low power, these analyses have the flavor of beating (or, perhaps, seeking to revive) a dead horse.
We find no success here. Most regression coefficients are insignificant. When significance is
found (for Non-Hispanic Blacks and for Hispanics, see Appendix Table A-3), there are other
factors that cut against a causal interpretation, including non-parallel pre-treatment trends and
coefficients of implausible magnitudes given the weak first stages.

VIII. Power Analysis

        We return to our conceptual framework of the chain of events by which insurance
expansions may affect mortality, and discuss the conditions under which studies of the ACA using
death certificate data could establish a connection between health insurance and mortality.

        A. An Illustrative Example

        Suppose first that out of 100,000 individuals aged 55-64, half became newly insured. By
how much would the likelihood of death within 2 years have to change for us to find that change
to be statistically significant? The annual amenable mortality rate in this group is around 600 per


the logic behind using mortality for persons aged 65-74 as a third difference, yet we need that third difference to
address non-parallel pre-treatment trends.

                                                        26
100,000 per year (Appendix Table App-2), if insurance were to reduce the probability of death by
25% among the newly insured, then insuring 50,000 individuals among 100,000 individuals would
reduce the expected number of annual deaths by 75 (0.5*0.25*600) to 525. In expectation, a DD
regression should show a 25% reduction in mortality rate.28 But there will also be random variation
in mortality.        If mortality events are independent, the expected standard deviation (σ) of
mortality/100,000 persons will be around 24,29 and the expected t-statistic will be 3.07.
           Now assume that there is random “external” variation in state-level mortality rates, with a
standard deviation of around 2% per year (±12 deaths per year. As we show below, this is a
reasonable level for our data. If this source of variance is independent of that due to health
insurance, expected total variance will be 596 (from random mortality events) + 144 (from external
variation) = 740, expected standard deviation will be around 28 and the expected t-statistic will be
2.76 – lower but not dramatically so.30 The large effect of health insurance swamps the additional
“noise” from other sources of variation in mortality.
           Now assume that the background noise remains the same, but only 5% of the population is
treated, and the mortality reduction for the newly insured is 10% instead of 25%. The expected
population average treatment effect is now a reduction in the mortality rate of 3 (0.05*0.1*600) to
597. The standard deviation in the number of expected deaths remains the same, so the expected
t-statistic will be only 3/28 = 0.11. To bring this t-statistic up by a factor of, say, 20 to 2.2, one
might initially imagine we would need a sample 400 times as large – 40 million people.
           However, as sample size increases, the variance in mortality rate due to independent
mortality events falls by the usual factor of n1/2. With a hypothetical sample of 40 million, the
variance in the mortality rate (per 100,000 persons) would be 594/20 ≈ 30. But the variance due
to external state-level mortality shocks will not fall and will dominate expected total variance,
which will be 30 + 144 = 174; implying expected (σ = 13.2; t = 0.23).
           This, in a nutshell, is the power problem we face. With a weak first stage, and a moderate
second stage, even a very large sample cannot overcome the confounding effect of external



28
   The expected coefficient in a regression, such as those we run, with ln(mortality rate +1) as the dependent variable
should be around -0.22
29
  This uses the standard formula for the variance of a binomial distribution with probability Var = n*p(1-p). For n
100,000 and p = .006, Var = 596 and σ = Var0.5 = 24.42.
30
     Variances due to independent sources add so Vartot = 596 + 124 = 740, and σtot = Vartot0.5 = 27.56.

                                                           27
variation in mortality rates. If that external variation is independent across states, then having
more treated and control states will help but only somewhat. For example, if we had 20 treated
states and 20 control states, all of equal size, the combined external variance for both groups would
be (144/20) + (144/20) = 14.4; expected total variance would be around 44, implying expected (σ
= 6.64, t = 0.45). If the treatment effect of health insurance on mortality were felt immediately
then more years of data would help, but only somewhat, given that state-level mortality shocks are
likely to persist over time. For example, 3 years of data, variance due to random arrival of deaths
would fall to 29.7/(31/2) = 17.1, but if state shocks are persistent, total expected variance will be
17.1 + 14.4 = 31.5; implying expected (σ = 5.62; t = 0.53). Having a first stage lower than 5% --
as we do -- will only exacerbate matters.
           Thus, this example illustrates that a full-sample effect size on the order of a 0.5% reduction
in mortality (hence an expected regression coefficient around - 0.005 in the log-linear specification
we use) will not be detectable. Our power analysis formalizes this intuition, and shows that for
plausible effect sizes, the effect of ACA Medicaid expansion on mortality is too small to be
captured using death certificate data, unless that data can be linked to income data and insurance
data, thus permitting a much larger first stage. We also show below that given lower power, one
should be cautious in interpreting any statistically significant results from studies such as ours,
even if parallel trends assumptions appear satisfied.

           B. Available First-Stages

           An initial question for our power analysis is what first stage one could realistically achieve
with better data. Our full-sample first stage is similar to that in other ACA Medicaid expansion
studies.31 From SAHIE data, the first stage for low-income, Medicaid-eligible adults (income <
138% of FPL, age 50-64) is around 5.3%. We also saw above that the first stage for low-educated
adults is around 4%.32 Thus, around 5% is likely as large a first stage as one can achieve without
linked individual data on some combination of income, family status (children at home), pre-
expansion insurance, and mortality.33 ACA-derived insurance gains were somewhat smaller

31
   Long et al (2014), using data from 2013-2014, find a 5.8% drop in uninsurance in expansion states vs 4.8% in non-
expansion states, between 2013 and 2014, implying a 1.0% first stage. Smith and Medalia (2015) find a 3.4% reduction
in uninsurance for all persons aged 0-64 in expansion states vs 2.3% in non-expansion states, hence a 1.1% first stage.
32
     Kaestner et al. (2015) estimate a similar 3% first-stage for low-educated adults, age 19-64.
33
   Wherry and Miller (2016), use income data from the National Health Interview Survey to isolate persons with
incomes < 138% of FPL and find a 7% relative increase in insurance rates from 2010 to 2H2014 low-income persons

                                                            28
among the near elderly (on whom we focus) than among younger adults, perhaps because the near-
elderly have greater healthcare needs and greater income, which led many to obtain insurance pre-
ACA.34
         We present power calculations below for the aged 55-64 population (around 29M persons,
14M in treated states), and also for our triple-difference specification. The first stage for the closest
population for which we have data, persons aged 50-64, is around 1.1% (see Appendix Table A2).
A 10% reduction in mortality for the newly insured, as large a near-term effect as we consider
plausible, thus corresponds to a 0.012% reduction in mortality for all persons in this age group.
The upper end of the 95% CIs from Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) and Card, Dobkin and
Maestas (2004) imply an even lower mortality decline, bounded at 0.004%.
         To put these numbers in context, Medicaid expansion led to around 170,000 more people
gaining health insurance in Full-Expansion States (0.0012 * 14.1M) relative to non expansion
states. If the mortality of the newly insured would have been similar to all persons in this age
range but for Medicaid expansion, about 0.6% would have died each year (about 1,000 persons),
and a 10% reduction in mortality would save around 100 lives annually. We cannot directly
measure the relative mortality of the uninsured with our mortality data, but Black et al. (2017)
provide evidence from the Health and Retirement Study that mortality for uninsured persons in the
HRS population (initial age 50-61, so similar to the group we study) was similar to mortality for
insured persons.35
         The power challenge is to find statistically significant evidence for a fall in mortality of
100 persons (or less), in a combined treated and control population of around 29M, with 170,000
annual deaths. As we show below, that challenge cannot be met without individual level data on


aged 19-64; compare the 5% increase from 2013 to 2014 we find using SAHIE data. Simon et al. (2017) combine
income data with childless status and find a 10% increase for childless adults age 19-64, with incomes < 100% of FPL
and no children at home in 2014-2015, relative to a 2010-2013 baseline.
34
   Appendix Figure A-25, reproduced from the American Community Survey (ACS), shows the ACA-related change
in uninsurance rates by age.
35
   Black et al. (2017), Table 2 calculates mortality differences in the manner most appropriate for these comparisons;
the uninsured (aged 50-61) have higher mortality than the privately insured, but lower mortality than the publicly
insured, leading to similar overall mortality between insured and uninsured over two- and four-year observation
periods. To put these estimates in the context of prior literature, Galea et al 2011 reports that mortality for poor non-
elderly adults is 75% higher than for the non-poor but does not report mortality differences for poor uninsured vs poor
insured, which is the relevant comparison for our study. Kronick (2009) finds a 1.20 mortality hazard ratio for the
uninsured versus the privately insured over a 14-year followup period after controlling for income (but does not
compare the uninsured to the publicly insured).

                                                           29
personal characteristics (income, family status, pre-ACA insurance and health status), sufficient
to greatly increase the first stage, linked to mortality data. Even with that data (not currently
available), one would need a very large sample of newly insured persons and similar controls.

       C. Full Sample Power Simulation Results

       To investigate the minimum effect that our main DD and triple-difference specifications
can detect, we perform the power exercise outlined in Section VI B. Figure 3 illustrates the results
from our power simulation, using the amenable mortality rate for all persons aged 55 to 64 as the
dependent variable. The simulation uses data from 2007-2013, and a pseudo-shock applied on
January 1, 2012, to states chosen at random from our actual treated and control states.
       Panel A shows DD results and Panel B shows triple-difference results, using the same
regression models as in Table 2. The DD results indicate that to achieve 80% statistical power
(finding a significant effect at least 80% of the time), the minimum detectable population average
treatment effect size at the 95% confidence level is a mortality reduction of 1.8% for the DD and
for the triple-difference simulation. Below, we focus on the triple-difference results, which we
prefer because they are less subject to concern with non-parallel trends. A 1.8% fall in overall
amenable mortality, given the roughly 1.1% first stage, implies that Medicaid expansion would
have to reduce the average amenable mortality rate of all newly insured persons by (.018)/(.011)
= 163%.     If we apply a stricter significance standard, to account for specification error,
specification searches, and file-drawer bias, the minimum detectable effect will be substantially
higher – Figure 3 also shows power curves for the 99% and 99.9% and confidence levels.
       The minimum detectable effect can also be framed in terms of lives saved. The 1.80%
reduction in mortality needed for 80% power and 95% confidence translates into about .0180 *
14.1M * .006 = 170,000 = 1,522 annual deaths – almost 20 times the maximum plausible effect.

[Figure 3 about here]

      The power analysis assumes that the underlying mortality rate of the newly Medicaid
insured is similar to other persons aged 55-64. The actual rate could be higher (the newly insured
tend to be low income, and thus higher mortality), or lower (the disabled are already insured, those
in poor health could be more likely to already have insurance, and the first stage is lower for men,
who have higher mortality rates than women), but is unlikely to be radically different. By
comparison, Finkelstein et al. (2012, Table IX) study a likely lower-income, less-healthy

                                                30
population (persons who applied for the Oregon Medicaid expansion lottery), and report annual
total mortality for the controls of 0.008, which is similar to the average total mortality rate we find
for persons aged 55-64 in both Full-Expansion and Non-Expansion States. Power is also similar
if we weight states equally, rather than by population; this increases the first stage to around 2%,
but increases noise by giving more weight to smaller states.
       “Power” also has peculiar properties, in the situation we face, where plausible effect sizes
are small relative to those one can reliably detect. This implies both that: (i) the estimated effect
is likely to greatly exceed the true effect; and (ii) there is an important risk that the estimated effect
has the wrong sign (opposite from truth). Gelman and Carlin (2014) therefore recommend
reporting two measures of plausibility in addition to power, the wrong-sign-likelihood and the
exaggeration-ratio. Ioannides et al. (2017) report evidence that much economics research and thus
prone to these concerns. We illustrate these problems in Figure 8.
       In Figure 4, Panel A, we show the ratio of the magnitude of the estimated effect (when found
to be statistically significant) to the “true” magnitude, imposed in the simulation. For population
effect sizes under 1% (recall that a 10% mortality reduction for the newly insured implies a
population effect around 0.1%) the exaggeration ratio is high – an effect which is large enough to
be statistically significant is likely to be far from truth. In Panel B we show the proportion of
statistically significant results that have the wrong sign. This proportion is also appreciable for the
smaller population effect sizes. As we increase the imposed population effect size, the wrong-sign
problem shrinks, and is negligible for effect sizes s above 1%; the exaggeration ratio also shrinks,
but more slowly.

[Figure 4 around here]

       As we discussed in Section A, one important source of “noise,” captured in the power
simulations but assumed away in DD regressions, is non-parallel mortality trends across states.
We illustrate that concern in Figure 5. For this figure, we use a DD model, continue to use data
from 2007-2013, apply a pseudo-shock to amenable mortality on January 1, 2012, but this time to
one state at a time, treating all others as controls. We show a scatter plot of the DD estimates for
each state of the change in amenable mortality, from regressions otherwise similar to those used
for Table 2, versus ln(state population in 2012). We also superimpose a regression line showing
the best linear fit between the point estimates and ln(population).


                                                   31
       It is apparent from Figure 5 that for single states, it is common to find pseudo-treatment
effects of 2% or more, with a fair number of states showing pseudo-effects of 4% or more, and
Montana and Mississippi showing pseudo-effects around 6%. There is also a tendency for larger
states to have better mortality trends than smaller states over 2012-2013, shown by the negative
slope of the best-fit line.
[Figure 5 around here]

D. Power for Vulnerable Subgroups

        We also conducted power analyses for the demographic, education, and cause of death
subsamples discussed above, and report results in the Appendix. Power is generally similar to, or
lower than, that shown in Figure 3. Smaller sample size, which reduces power, offsets the effect
of the modestly larger first stages, which are all we can achieve. And the effect of non-parallel
trends, in reducing power, remains.

E. What Data Would Be Needed for Reasonable Power?

       We turn in this section to a different question – what combination of a stronger first stage
and a reduction in amenable mortality for the newly insured would be detectable with reasonable
power, if we could use a richer dataset, with data on mortality linked to data on income and family
status (to determine eligibility for expanded Medicaid coverage) and pre-ACA insurance status (to
exclude the always-insured from the sample). This hypothetical data would improve the first stage
and bring it toward (or even above) the 5% one could obtain by studying only adults with incomes
< 138% of FPL, or the 10% in Simon et al. (2017) for childless adults with incomes < 100% of
FPLs. We consider the triple-difference design, which has similar power to DD and does a better,
although imperfect job, of addressing non-parallel trends.
       In this scenario, we imagine that we can identify in each county both a treated subsample
and a similar control subsample, both aged 55-64. For example, if the treated subsample is
childless adults with income < 138% of FPL, the within county control subsample could be
childless adults with incomes from 138% to 250% of FPL. We assume hypothetical first stages
varying from 1% to 15% and hypothetical second stages varying from 0% to 10%. For, say, a 5%
first stage and a 10% second stage, we assign “insurance due to Medicaid expansion” to 5% of the
persons in a “5% first stage” subsample of each expansion county, and then remove 10% of the
amenable mortality deaths from the treated persons in this subsample (thus applying an overall

                                                32
mortality reduction to the subsample of .005). We again use data from 2007-2013 and a pseudo-
treatment at Jan. 1, 2012, and assess whether we could detect this mortality effect if we did not
know which specific individuals within this subsample would have gained insurance due to this
pseudo-treatment. Since the treated and control samples are drawn at random from the same
county and age range, they have the same expected mortality rates, by construction.36
       We assume that with the hypothetical data, (i) researchers can identify the subsample
members, and (ii) all effects of Medicaid expansion on uninsurance rates are concentrated in the
subsample we consider. Thus, in our 5% first stage/10% second stage example, we assume that
the entire Medicaid-expansion-related relative drop in uninsurance –170,000 persons in Full-
Expansion States -- comes from this subsample. This defines the subsample size at 170,000/.05 =
3.4M treated persons, and a similar number of controls.
       In Figure 10, we show power curves only for the 95% significance level. We vary (i) the
assumed first stage (we show curves for 1%, 3%, 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% first stages) and (ii) the
imposed mortality reduction for the newly insured (from 0% to 10%) for the 5% significance level.
With this hypothetical richer data, we need a smaller number of avoided deaths to be able to
reliably detect a treatment effect. For example, with a 10% first stage, we could reliably detect
mortality reductions of 2.4% or more in this subsample, or around 1,563 annual deaths. This is
only slightly below the number of deaths we could detect in the full sample; thus, this hypothetical
study remains severely underpowered. Recall that with a 10% second stage, we expect around
100 fewer annual deaths among those who actually gain insurance.

F. Implications of Power Analysis for Other Studies

        While our exact simulation approach for understanding the minimum detectable effect is
specific to our dataset and research design, a similar approach can be used in many other studies.
We offer here four examples of why we believe power analyses such as ours, including an
assessment of the minimum detectable effect and whether that effect size is plausible, can be
broadly valuable in quasi-experimental research.



36
    For small subsamples, there are many county-years with zero deaths in smaller counties. The log transform we use
(yit = ln((deaths)/100,000 persons)+1) can produce substantial bias when there are many zero-death observations but
most non-zero death rates are large (because we multiply the fractional rate by 100,000), which can lead to
underestimating statistical power. We therefore use a linear model in conducting power analysis for specifications
that examine small sub-groups, and thus have many county-level observations with zero deaths.

                                                        33
          First, our power analysis can be usefully compared to the results in Finkelstein et al. (2012),
who study the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. With a sample of 75,000 people and a
roughly 25% first stage among people who signed up for the Oregon Medicaid lottery, who were
randomly offered Medicaid or assigned to control, the study reports a large point estimate for the
near-term effect of receiving Medicaid on mortality of around 13%, but a t-statistic only around
0.5. This implies that the sample was undersized, even for that large point estimate, by a factor of
around 16 –a sample of 1.2M people (with 300,000 newly insured) would be needed to reliably
find a 13% effect on mortality – and a sample of 8M people (with 2M newly insured) to find a 5%
effect.37 Yet, from SAHIE data, the number of people in Full-Expansion states aged 50-64, with
income < 138% of FPL is around 3.4M, and the first-stage for this group is around 5.3%, hence
around 180,000 newly insured due to Medicaid expansion relative to non expansion states. Thus,
even if we could link mortality and income data at the individual level, and focus on the income
range eligible for Medicaid (< 138% of FPL), power to detect mortality effects would be low.
          Second, our analysis of power to detect the effect of health insurance on non-elderly adult
mortality has direct implications for other DD studies of the effect of insurance expansions on
adult mortality. We provide a back of the envelope calculation here, for example for SLB (2014),
who report a statistically significant near-term decline in adult mortality following the
“Romneycare” health insurance expansion in Massachusetts in 2006.                            Massachusetts has a
moderate sized population (6.55M in 2017; 14th among all states). Kolstad and Kowalski (2012)
find a first stage insurance gain of 5.6%. The DD effect estimate in SLB – a 4.5% drop in amenable
mortality by two years after reform –implies an 80% drop in amenable mortality for compliers.
          To assess power, we build on Kaestner’s (2016) replication of SLB (2014), in which he
finds that their results are insignificant, using randomization inference to estimate confidence
intervals.38 We used Kaestner’s code to compute the minimum effect size in their analysis with p
< .05 (95% confidence). This minimum effect is 6.9%. The minimum detectable mortality decline
for the newly insured, implied by this minimum effect size, is 6.9%/5.6% = 123%.




37
   By comparison, the population in 2013 aged 50-64 with income < 138% of FPL was around 3.4M in Full-Expansion
states and 4.1M in No-Expansion states, but the first-stage for this group is around 5%, well below the 25% in the
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment.
38
     We thank Robert Kaestner for providing his Stata code, which we used in our analysis.

                                                         34
       In two more examples, we turn to recent work by two of us, in separate projects. Soni et
al. (2018a) report that Medicaid expansion predicts a 2.4% relative drop in the fraction of people
with cancer who are uninsured. They cannot measure the drop in uninsurance among those with
undiagnosed cancer, whose baseline uninisurance rate is likely higher. Soni et al. (2018b) report
a 6.4% increase in diagnoses of early-stage cancer, but do not discuss plausible effect sizes or
minimum detectable effects. What first stage would be needed among those with undiagnosed
cancer to make a 6.4% increase in early diagnoses plausible? A back of the envelope calculation
using their reported 95% CI suggests a standard error of around 2% and thus an MDE for early-
stage cancer diagnoses of around 4%.
       Pines et al. (2016) find no evidence that Medicaid expansion predicts a significant increase
in ED visits; their point estimate is a 0.6% drop in expansion states, relative to non-expansion
states. They do not discuss the first stage (the relative drop in ED visits by uninsured persons),
but from their Appendix, one can determine that the first stage is around 6.7%. Twice their
standard error is .018, and .018/.067 = 0.27. This implies that if the only reason for change in ED
visit rates were gaining insurance, the 95% CI around their point estimate implies a [-36%, +18%]
change in ED visits by the newly insured. There is still no evidence of a higher visit rate by the
newly insured, and the upper end of the 95% CI is still well below the +40% point estimate from
the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment, but it one cannot rule out a fairly large increase in ED
visits by the newly insured.

X. Discussion

       In this paper, we examine the relationship between mortality and health insurance,
principally using the DD research design used in many prior ACA studies. This design exploits
the natural experiment created by variation between those states that expanded Medicaid insurance
and those that did not. We also exploit variation that results from counties having varying
uninsurance or poverty levels prior to 2014. We focus on persons aged 55-64 years, whose
mortality rates are the most likely to be affected by health insurance. We study effects of the first
three years after expansion by type of mortality (healthcare amenable vs non amenable),
demographics (gender, race, and ethnicity), education level, cause of death, and residence in
counties most likely to gain from the ACA expansion).
       We find large confidence intervals with no statistically significant evidence of an ACA-
induced decline in mortality in Medicaid expansion states. Instead, there are important non-
                                                 35
parallel pre-treatment trends, and standard errors are far too large to allow detection of effects of
plausible sizes. We confirm lack of power through a formal, simulation-based power analysis.
       While it is possible that the mortality effect of the ACA health insurance expansion
variation we study may materialize with more time, other factors make it unlikely they too could
be statistically detected; lengthening the study period would increase likelihood that other sources
of variation, including cross-border moves, the instability of insurance status over time, and the
underlying causes of the non-parallel pre-treatment trends we observe, will pose challenges for
credible causal inference. Moreover, our power analysis implies that an extra few years would
still be insufficient to attain reasonable power, given plausible effect sizes.
       We end with a discussion of the data needed to push forward the literature on the health
outcome effects of health insurance. Large-scale data sets that include individual-level data on
income, insurance, baseline health status, and mortality are essential. Income and prior insurance
information would permit a substantially larger first stage. Baseline health data would provide a
more sensitive second stage, and might also permit analysis limited to health-vulnerable
subpopulations, provided that one still has reasonably sized samples. At the same time, given the
power concerns we identify, studies of the health effects of health insurance should include efforts
to assess the first stage, estimate reasonable magnitudes for treatment effects, and conduct a power
analysis.




                                                  36
References
Baicker, Katherine, Sarah Taubman, Heidi Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph Newhouse, Eric
    Schneider, Bill Wright, Alan Zaslavsky, and Amy Finkelstein, 2013. The Oregon Experiment – Effects
    of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes, 368 (18) New England Journal of Medicine 1713-1722.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman (2015) “Six Randomized Evaluations of
   Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol.
   7, No. 1, pp. 1–21.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004) “How Much Should We Trust
    Differences-In-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 1, pp. 249–275.
Black, Bernard, Jose Espin-Sanchez, Eric French, and Kate Litvak (2017). The Long-term Effect of Health
    Insurance on Near-Elderly Health and Mortality 3 American Journal of Health Economics 33-59
    (2017).
Borgschulte, Mark, and Jacob Vogler (2010), Did the ACA Medicaid Expansion Save Lives, working
   paper, University of Illinois.
Brook, Robert, John Ware, William Rogers, Emmett Keeler, Allyson Davies, Cathy Donald, George
   Goldberg, Kathleen Lohr, Patricia Masthay, and Joseph Newhouse., 1983. Does free care improve
   adults' health? Results from a randomized controlled trial. New England Journal of Medicine. 309(23):
   p. 1426-1434.
Brown, David, Amanda Kowalski and Ithai Lurie (2017). Long term impacts of childhood Medicaid
   expansions on outcomes in Adulthood. Working paper.
Burlig, Fiona, Louis Preonas, and Matt Woerman (2017), Panel Data and Experimental Design. Working
    paper University of California Berkeley.
Button, Katherine S., John P. A. Ioannidis, Claire Mokrysz, Brian A. Nosek, Jonathan Flint, Emma S. J.
    Robinson, and Marcus R. Munafo (2013) “Power failure: why small sample size under-mines the
    reliability of neuroscience,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, Vol. 14, No. 5, pp. 365– 376.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas 2004. The impact of nearly universal insurance coverage
   on health care utilization and health: evidence from Medicare. Natl. Bur. Econ. Res. Work. Pap. 10365.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas 2008. The impact of nearly universal insurance coverage
   on health care utilization: evidence from Medicare. Am Econ Rev; 98: 2242–2258.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas (2009), Does Medicare Save Lives? 124 Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 597-636.
Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata. 2017.
   Impacts of the Affordable Care Act on health insurance coverage in Medicaid expansion and non-
   expansion states. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 36, No. 1, 178–210
Croke, Kevin, Joan Hamory Hicks, Eric Hsu, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel (2016), “Does Mass
   Deworming Affect Child Nutrition? Meta-analysis, Cost-Effectiveness, and Statistical Power,
   ”Technical Report 22382, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a, Health insurance eligibility, utilization of medical care, and child
   health. 111(2) Quarterly Journal of Economics 431-466.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. Saving babies: The efficacy and cost of recent changes in the
   Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women. Journal of Political Economy, 104(6): p. 1263-1296.



                                                     37
Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton, 2015. Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife Among White, non-
   Hispanic        American          in       the       21st     Century,       PNAS,        at
   http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1518393112.
Doyle, Joseph, 2005. Health insurance, treatment and outcomes: using auto accidents as health shocks.
   Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2): p. 256-270.
Dunn, Abe and Adam Shapiro, forthcoming. Does Medicare Part D Save Lives? American Journal of
   Health Economics.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2007. The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction of
    Medicare, 122 Quarterly Journal of Economics 1-37.
Finkelstein, Amy and Robin McKnight. 2008. What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of Medicare on
    Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending, 92 Journal of Public Economics 1644-1668.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph Newhouse, Heidi
    Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. The Oregon Health Insurance
    Experiment: Evidence from the First Year, 127 Quarterly Journal of Economics 1057-1106.
Frean, Molly, Jonathan Gruber and Benjamin Sommers. 2017. Premium subsidies, the mandate, and
    Medicaid expansion: Coverage effects of the Affordable Care Act. 53 Journal of Health Economics 72-
    86.
Galea, Sandro, Melissa Tracy, Katherine J. Hoggatt, Charles Dimaggio, and Adam Karpati. 2011.
   Estimated Deaths Attributable to Social Factors in the United States. American Journal of Public
   Health 101 (8): 1456–65.
Gallet, Craig A. and Hristos Doucouliagos (2017) “The impact of healthcare spending on health
    outcomes: A meta-regression analysis,” Social Science & Medicine, Vol. 179, pp. 9–17.
Gaudette, E. G. Pauley and J. Zissimopoulos. 2016. Lifetime consequences of early and midlife access to
   health insurance: a review. Working paper.
Gelman and Carlin. 2014. Beyond Power Calculations. Perspectives on Psychological Science 2014, Vol.
   9(6) 641–651
Gelman, Andrew (2018) “Don’t Calculate Post-hoc Power Using Observed Estimate of Effect Size,”
   Annals of Surgery, Vol. XX, No. Xx, p. 1.
Gerin, William, Christine Kapelewski, and Niki L. Page (2017) Writing the NIH Grant Proposal: A Step-
   by-Step Guide, Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications, 3rd edition.
Goldman, Dana, Jayantha Bhattacharya, McCaffrey DF, Duan N, Arleen Leibowitz et al. 2001. The effect
   of insurance on mortality in an HIV+ population in care. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 96(455):883–894
Ghosh, Ausmita, Benjamin Sommers and Kosali Simon. 2017. The Effect of State Medicaid Expansions
   on Prescription Drug Use. NBER WP 23044 www.nber.org/papers/w23044
Hannon, Susan J., Kathy Martin, Len Thomas, and Jim Schieck (1993) “Investigator Disturbance and
   Clutch Predation in Willow Ptarmigan : Methods for Evaluating Impact,” Journal of Field
   Ornithology, Vol. 64, No. 4, pp. 575–586.
Hoenig, John M. and Dennis M. Heisey (2001) “The Abuse of Power: The Pervasive Fallacy of Power
   Calculations for Data Analysis,” The American Statistician, Vol. 55, No. 1, pp. 19–24.
Howell, Embry. et al. 2010, Declining child mortality and continuing racial disparities in the era of the
   Medicaid and SCHIP insurance coverage expansions. Am J Public Health, 2010. 100(12): p. 2500-6.



                                                   38
Hsiang, Solomon M, Marshall Burke, Edward Miguel, Kyle Meng, and Mark Cane (2015) “Anal ysis of
    statistical power reconciles drought-conflict results in Africa.”, Center for Effective Global Action
    working paper, at http://escholarship.org/uc/item/77s421cd.
Hu, L., Robert Kaestner, B. Mazumder, Sarah Miller, and A. Wong. 2016. The Effect of the Patient
   Protection and Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions on Financial Well-Being. NBER Working
   Paper No. 22170. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ioannidis, John, T.D. Stanley, and Hristos Doucouliagos (2017). The Power of Bias in Economics
    Research, Economics Journal 127: F236-F265.
IntHout, Joanna, John PA Ioannidis, and George F Borm (2016) “Obtaining evidence by a single well-
    powered trial or several modestly powered trials,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research, Vol. 25, No.
    2, pp. 538–552.
Ioannidis, John P A (2005) “Why Most Published Research Findings Are False,” PLoS Medicine, Vol. 2,
    No. 8, p. e124.
Ioannidis, John P. A., T. D. Stanley, and Hristos Doucouliagos (2017) “The Power of Bias in Economics
    Research,” The Economic Journal, Vol. 127, No. 605, pp. F236–F265.
Jayachandran, Seema, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Kimberly Smith., 2010. Modern Medicine and the
    Twentieth Century Decline in Mortality: Evidence on the Impact of Sulfa Drugs. American Economic
    Journal: Applied Economics 2 (April): 118–146.
Kaestner, Robert. 2016. Did Massachusetts Health Care Reform Lower Mortality? No According to
   Randomization Inference. Statistics and Public Policy, 3(1): 1-6.
Kaestner, Robert, Bowen Garrett, A. Gangopadhyaya, and C. Fleming. 2015. Effects of the ACA Medicaid
   Expansion on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Supply. NBER Working Paper No. 21836.
   Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2016. Medicaid and the uninsured: Where are states today? Medicaid and
   CHIP eligibility levels for children and non-disabled adults. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
Keeler E. 1985. How free care reduced hypertension in the health insurance experiment. Journal of the
   American Medical Association 254:1926–31.
Kenney, Genevieve, Victoria Lynch, Jennifer Haley, and Michael Huntress. 2012. Variation In Medicaid
   Eligibility and Participation among Adults: Implications for the Affordable Care Act. Inquiry 49:231–
   53.
Kolstad, Jonathan, and Amanda Kowalski 2012. The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital and
   Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts, 96 Journal of Public Economics 909-929.
Kowalski, Amanda. 2018. “Extrapolation using Selection and Moral Hazard Heterogeneity from within the
   Oregon Health Insurance Experiment”. NBER Working Paper 24647, May 2018.
Kronick, Richard. 2009. Health Insurance Coverage and Mortality Revisited. Health Services Research
   44 (4): 1211–31.
Levy, Helen, and David Meltzer. 2004. What do we really know about whether health insurance affects
   health? In Health Policy and the Uninsured: Setting the Agenda, ed. C. McLaughlin, pp. 179–
   204.Washington, DC: Urban Inst. Press
Levy, Helen, and David Meltzer, 2008. The impact of health insurance on health. Annu. Rev. Public
   Health, 2008. 29: p. 399-409.
Maxwell, Scott E. (2004). The Persistence of Underpowered Studies in Psychological Research: Causes,
   Consequences, and Remedies. Psychological Methods 9(2), pp. 147–163.

                                                     39
Mazurenko, Olena, Casey Balio, Rajender Agarwal, Aaron Carroll, and Nir Menachemi. 2018. The effects
   of Medicaid Expansion under the ACA: A systematic review. June. Health Affairs. Health Affairs 37,
   NO. 6 (2018): 944–950.
McCrary, Justin, Garret Christensen, and Daniele Fanelli (2016), Conservative Tests under Satisficing
  Models of Publication Bias, 11(2) PLOS One e0149590.
McClellan, Chandler, 2017. The Affordable Care Act’s Dependent Care Coverage and Mortality. Medical
  Care Volume 55, Number 5, May 2017.
McCloskey, D.R., 1985. The Loss Function Has Been Mislaid: The Rhetoric of Significance Tests,
  American Economic Review 75(2)(Papers and Proceedings) 201-205.
McCloskey, Deirdre N and Stephen T Ziliak (1996) “The Standard Error of Regressions,” Journal of
   Economic Literature, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 97–114.
Newhouse, Joseph, and Insurance Experiment Group. 1993. Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health
   Insurance Experiment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
NIH (2016) “Reviewer Guidance on Rigor and Transparency: Research Project Grant and Mentored Career
   Development Applications.”
Nolte E, McKee M. 2003. Measuring the health of nations: analysis of mortality amenable to health care.
   BMJ. 327:1129. [PMID: 14615335]
Pines Jesse, Mark Zocchi, Ali Moghtaderi, Bernard Black, Steven Farmer, Greg Hufstetler, Kevin Klauer,
    and Randy Pilgrim (2016), The Impact of the 2014 Medicaid Expansion on Hospital-Based Emergency
    Department Visits, 35 Health Affairs 1480-1486.
Polsky, Daniel., Ph.D., Michael Richards, M.D., Ph.D., Simon Basseyn, B.A., Douglas Wissoker, Ph.D.,
    Genevieve M. Kenney, Ph.D., Stephen Zuckerman, Ph.D., and Karin V. Rhodes, M.D. 2015.
    Appointment Availability after Increases in Medicaid Payments for Primary Care. February 5. N Engl
    J Med 2015; 372:537-545 DOI: 10.1056/NEJMsa1413299
Powell, David (2018), Imperfect Synthetic Controls: Did the Massachusetts Health Care Reform Save
   Lives? Working paper, at https://works.bepress.com/david_powell/24/.
Rubin, Donald B. (2008), For Objective Causal Inference, Design Trumps Analysis, 2 Annals of Applied
   Statistics 808-840.
Senn, S. J (2002) “Power is indeed irrelevant in interpreting completed studies,” BMJ, Vol. 325, No. 7375,
   pp. 1304–1304.
Simon, Kosali, A. Soni, and J. Cawley (2017). The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventive Care and
   Health Behaviors: Evidence from the First Two Years of the ACA Medicaid Expansions. Journal of
   Policy Analysis and Management, 36: 390-417.
Smith, J.C., and C. Medalia (2015) U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, P60-253, Health
   Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2014. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
   Available from: https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2015/demo/p60-
   253.pdf.
Sommers, B.D., K. Baicker, and A.M. Epstein, Mortality and access to care among adults after state
   Medicaid expansions. N Engl J Med, 2012. 367(11): p. 1025-34.
Sommers, Benjamin, Sharon Long, and Katherine Baicker. 2014. Changes in mortality after Massachusetts
   health care reform: a quasi-experimental study. Annals of Internal Medicine, 160(9):585-593.
Sommers, Benjamin. 2017. State Medicaid Expansions and Mortality, Revisited: A Cost-Benefit Analysis
   . American Journal of Health Economics. vol 3 issue 3 p.392-421.

                                                   40
Soni, Aparna, John Cawley, Lindsay Sabik, and Kosali Simon. 2018a. Effect of Medicaid Expansions of
   2014 on Overall and Early-Stage Cancer Diagnoses. American Journal of Public Health 108, no.2. Feb
   1) pp.216-218.
Soni, A., K. Simon, L. Sabik, and S. Sommers. 2018b Changes in Insurance Coverage Among Cancer
   Patients Under the Affordable Care Act . JAMA Oncology, Jan 2018 Vol 4 No 1 p.122.
Stigler, Stephen (1977) “Do robust estimators work with real data?,” Annals of Statistics, Vol. 5, No. 6,
    pp. 1055–1098.
Taubman SL, Allen HL, Wright BJ, Baicker K, Finkelstein AN. 2014 Medicaid increases emergency-
   department use: evidence from Oregon’s health insurance experiment. Science, 343:263-268
Thomasson, M. a., & Treber, J. (2008). From Home to Hospital: The Evolution of Childbirth in the
    United States, 1928–1940. Explorations in Economic History, 45(1), 76–99.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2007.07.001
Taylor-Robinson, David C., Nicola Maayan, Karla Soares-Weiser, Sarah Donegan, and Paul Gar- ner
   (2015) “Deworming drugs for soil-transmitted intestinal worms in children: effects on nu- tritional
   indicators, haemoglobin, and school performance,” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Vol.
   2015, No. 7.
Weathers, Robert and M. Stegman, 2012. The effect of expanding access to health insurance on the health
   and mortality of Social Security Disability Insurance beneficiaries. Journal of Health Economics.
   31(6): p. 863-75.
Wherry, Laura and Bruce Meyer, 2015. Saving Teens: Using a Policy Discontinuity to Estimate the Effects
  of Medicaid Eligibility. Journal of Human Resources, 51(3): 556-588.
Wherry, Laura and Sarah Miller. 2016. Early Coverage, Access, Utilization, and Health Effects Associated
  With the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions: A Quasi-experimental Study. Annals of Internal
  Medicine, 164 (12): 795-803.
Zhang, L., & Ortmann, A. (2013). Exploring the Meaning of Significance in Experimental Economics.
    Australian School of Business Working Paper. No. 2013 ECON 32.
    https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2356018
Ziliak, Stephen T. and Deirdre N. McCloskey (2004) “Size matters: the standard error of regressions in the
    American Economic Review,” The Journal of Socio-Economics, Vol. 33, No. 5, pp. 527–546.




                                                    41
Table 1. Full Expansion; Substantial Expansion; Mild Expansion, and No-Expansion
states, and % Uninsured for Selected Years
Table shows expansion status of each state (including D.C.). Treatment group is Full Expansion states and control
group is No-Expansion states, for these states, table shows expansion date if other than Jan. 1, 2014. For “substantial”
and “mild” expansion states, table shows year of significant prior Medicaid expansion. Summary rows give either
equal weight to all states in each expansion group, or population weight, as indicated. See Appendix Table A-1 for
additional details and sources for each state’s expansion status.

                 State               Expansion         % uninsured (age 50-64)          change in % unins.
                                       Date             2013     2014    2016              (2013-2016)
       Full Expansion                                    13.7        9.4         6.4              7.3
           Pop. weighted                                 13.4        9.4         6.3              7.1
       Alaska                         Sep 2015           19.1        17.2       13.8              5.3
       Arizona1                                          17.6        13.1       10.0              7.6
       Arkansas2                                         16.5        11.3        6.9              9.6
       Colorado3                                         13.6        9.2         6.7              6.9
       Illinois                                           14         9.8         6.3              7.7
       Indiana                        Feb 2015           12.9         11         7.5              5.4
       Iowa4                                             7.7         5.9         3.9              3.8
       Kentucky                                          14.4        7.5         4.8              9.6
       Maryland                                           10         7.2         5.2              4.8
       Michigan                       Apr 2014           11.4        8.2         5.1              6.3
       Montana                        Jan 2016            18         14.4        9.2              8.8
       Nevada                                            19.8        14.3       10.5              9.3
       New Hampshire                  Aug 2014           11.6        9.7         6.2              5.4
       New Jersey5                                       13.1        10.8        7.1              6.0
       New Mexico                                         19          15         9.8              9.2
       North Dakota                                      9.6         6.9         5.2              4.4
       Ohio                                              12.3        8.3         5.6              6.7
       Oregon6                                           15.3        9.6         6.4              8.9
       Pennsylvania                   Jan 2015           9.5         7.7         5.0              4.5
       Rhode Island                                      11.2        6.2         3.4              7.8
       Washington5                                       13.1        8.2         5.7              7.4
       West Virginia                                     14.5        8.9         5.9              8.6
       Substantial Expansion                             10.3        7.1         4.8              5.5
           Pop. weighted                                 15.0        10.3        6.4              8.6
       California5                       2010            18.1        12.3        7.4             10.7
       Connecticut5                      2010            9.7         6.2         4.4              5.3
       Hawaii7                           1994            7.3         5.5         4.1              3.2
       Minnesota5                        2010            7.3         5.1         3.6              3.7
       Wisconsin8                        2009            9.1         6.6         4.7              4.4
       Mild Expansion                                    7.6         5.7         4.0              3.6
           Pop. weighted                                 8.6         6.8         4.6              4.0
       Delaware9                         1996            9.5         7.2         5.2              4.3
       Dist. of Columbia5                2010            6.7         5.2         3.2              3.5
       Massachusetts10                   2006            3.5          3          2.5              1.0
       New York11                        2001            10.4        8.2         5.4              5.0
       Vermont12                         1996            7.9          5          3.7              4.2
       No Expansion                                      15.2        12.7       10.2              5.0
           Pop. weighted                                 16.5        13.7       11.0              5.4

                                                          42
        State      Expansion   % uninsured (age 50-64)   change in % unins.
                     Date       2013     2014    2016       (2013-2016)
Alabama                         13.4     11.6      9.5           3.9
Florida                          22      17.9     13.8           8.2
Georgia                         18.2     15.2     12.5           5.7
Idaho                           17.1     12.9     11.5           5.6
Kansas                          11.8      9.7      7.8           4.0
Louisiana           Jul 2016    17.8     15.6     10.8           7.0
Maine                           12.5      11       8.7           3.8
Mississippi                     18.8     15.4     13.1           5.7
Missouri                        13.3     10.3      8.9           4.4
Nebraska                        10.7      8.8      7.8           2.9
North Carolina                  15.8     12.6     10.5           5.3
Oklahoma                        18.1     15.6     13.9           4.2
South Carolina                  17.1     13.7     10.9           6.2
South Dakota                    11.3      9.3      8.8           2.5
Tennessee                        15      12.7      9.4           5.6
Texas                            21      17.4     15.5           5.5
Utah                             13      11.3      8.8           4.2
Virginia                        12.3     10.8      8.3           4.0
Wyoming                         13.3     12.7     11.5           1.8
National                        13.5     10.4      7.7           5.8
   Pop. weighted                14.6     11.2      8.3           6.3




                                 43
 Table 2: DD and Triple-Difference Estimates: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Mortality
 County-level regressions, with county and year FE and population weights, of ln((mortality/100,000 persons)+1) over
 2009-2016 on full-Expansion dummy (=1 for Full-Expansion States in expansion years; 0 otherwise), and covariates
 (same as in Figure 2, used in even-numbered regressions. Third difference (regressions (5)-(6)) is ages 55-64
 versus aged 65-74. Standard errors use state clusters. *.**, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
 1% levels, respectively; significant results at 5% level or better in boldface.

                                                        DD                       DD
                                                                                                      Triple diff.
                                                    55-64 years              65-74 years
                                                   (1)       (2)             (3)     (4)            (5)          (6)
Healthcare Amenable Mortality
                                                -0.018**     -0.018**     -0.013**    -0.008      -0.002       -0.004
Full Expansion Dummy
                                                 (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.009)      (0.008)
                                                                                                  -0.002       -0.004
Full Expansion Dummy x Age 55-64 Dummy
                                                                                                  (0.009)      (0.008)
Non-amenable Mortality
                                                  0.016          0.010    0.021**     0.020**     -0.002       -0.006
Full Expansion Dummy
                                                 (0.010)        (0.009)   (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.013)      (0.011)
                                                                                                  -0.002       -0.006
Full Expansion Dummy x Age 55-64 Dummy
                                                                                                  (0.013)      (0.011)
All Mortality
                                                 -0.006         -0.009     -0.003     -0.001       0.000       -0.003
Full Expansion Dummy
                                                 (0.008)        (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.008)      (0.007)
                                                                                                   0.000       -0.003
Full Expansion Dummy x Age 55-64 Dummy
                                                                                                  (0.008)      (0.007)
County Population Weights                          Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
Year and County FE                                 Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
Covariates                                         No            Yes         No         Yes         No           Yes
Observations                                     22,464         22,464     22,464     22,464      44,928       44,928




                                                           44
Figure 1. Time Trends in Amenable Mortality for Persons Aged 55-64
Figure shows amenable mortality rate for persons age 55-64 for Full-Expansion, Substantial Expansion, Mild
Expansion, and Non-Expansion States, over 1999-2016, using county population weights. State groups are defined
in Table 1. Vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.




                                                     45
Figure 2. Leads-and-Lags Results for Ages 55-64 and 65-74, Amenable Mortality
Graphs from leads and lags regressions of ln((amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1) for Full-Expansion States
versus control group of Non-Expansion States, over 2004-2016 are shown in panels A (age 55-64) and B (age 65-74).
Panel C shows triple difference results, with age 55-64 versus 65-64 as the third difference. Panel D shows age
discontinuity results, comparing age 55-64 to age 65-74 with state (both Full and No-Expansion States together.
Covariates are listed in paper. Regressions include county and year FE, and county-population weights. y-axis shows
coefficients on lead and lag dummies; vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals (CIs) around coefficients, using
standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year -3 is set to zero.
Panel A. Amenable Mortality for Ages 55-64




                                                        46
Panel B. Amenable Mortality for Ages 65-74




Panel C. Triple difference. Leads and lags graphs for amenable mortality for persons age 55-
64 in Full-Expansion States, relative to (i) persons age 65-74 in Full-Expansion States, and (ii)
persons age 55-64 in Non-Expansion States.




                                                47
Panel D. Age Discontinuity. Leads and lags graphs for amenable mortality among persons aged
55-64, versus those aged 65-74 old in Full and No-Expansion States.




                                            48
Figure 3: Simulation-Based Power Analysis
Power curves for simulated Medicaid expansion, as of January 1, 2012, applied to persons aged 55-64 during pre-
treatment period (2007-2013). Graphs show power (likelihood of detecting a statistically significant effect on
amenable mortality, at the indicated confidence levels, for two-tailed test), given imposed “true” population average
effect. Curves are based on 1,000 replications of the DD and triple difference regressions models used in Table 2. In
each draw, we select 20 pseudo-treated states at random from the combined set of 41 treated and control states, and
remove a fraction of the observed deaths at random from the treated states, where the fraction removed corresponds
to an assumed true treatment effect, and vary the imposed treatment effect from 0-5% in increments of 0.1%. Curves
for α = .10/.05/.01/.001 correspond to 90%/95%/99%/99.9% confidence levels, respectively. Dashed vertical line
shows MDE.
Panel A. DD Analysis
                                                                                MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10       α =.05       α =.01       α =.001


Panel B. Triple Difference Analysis
                                                                                MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10       α =.05       α =.01       α =.001



                                                                                                   49
Figure 4. Power Analysis Extensions: Exaggeration Ratio and Likelihood of Wrong Sign
We conduct the same power analyses as in Figure 3 and then plot, for the instances in which a statistically significant
effect is found at the indicated confidence levels, the ratio of |estimated effect|/imposed true effect (“exaggeration
ratio”) (Panel A), and the likelihood that the sign of the estimated effect is opposite from the imposed true effect.
Curves for α = .10/.05/.01/.001 correspond to 90%/95%/99%/99.9% confidence levels, respectively. Dashed vertical
line shows MDE.
Panel A. Exaggeration Ratio (Triple Difference)
                                                                  MDE
   Mean abs(sig coef/imposed effect)




                                       10

                                        8

                                        6

                                        4

                                        2

                                        0
                                         0%            1%            2%             3%            4%                5%
                                              Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                   α =.10          α =.05          α =.01          α =.001

Panel B. Probability that Estimated Effect, if Significant, Has Wrong Sign (Triple Difference)
                                                                     MDE


                                       20%
   Percent




                                       10%



                                        0%
                                          0%              1%            2%              3%          4%              5%
                                                Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                     α =.10          α =.05             α =.01        α =.001


                                                                                   50
Figure 5. Pseudo-Shocks to Individual States in 2012-2013
Scatter plot of pseudo-treatment effects for individual Full-Expansion and No-Expansion states, using a sample
period of 2007-2013 and a pseudo-shock to that state at Jan. 1, 2012, using the remaining Full- and No-Expansion
states as a control group. Treatment effects are estimated using the DiD model as in Table 2. Downward sloping
line is regression line for regression of pseudo-treatment effect on ln(state population in 2012) and constant term.

                                                                  MT
                                                      .06                 MS
    Placebo treatement effect for individual states




                                                      .04        AK
                                                                                KY
                                                                          AR
                                                                           IA  LA
                                                                             OR
                                                                      ID NM OK         AZ                                                     FL
                                                      .02                              MO
                                                                                        TN
                                                                          NV

                                                                                 SC                 GA
                                                                 WY
                                                                                 AL                      NC         OH
                                                        0
                                                                       WV                                                                            TX
                                                                      NE
                                                                       UTKS            IN
                                                                                      MD                            IL
                                                      -.02       SD
                                                                                  CO        WA VA
                                                                                                              MI
                                                                 ND
                                                                  RI
                                                                                                                         PA
                                                                    ME
                                                                    NH
                                                      -.04                                          NJ
                                                             0                               10                                 20                        30
                                                                                       State Population (Age 55-64) in 2012, 100k

                                                                            Full-Expansion State          Non-Expansion State        Best Fit Line




                                                                                                               51
Figure 6. Simulation Based Power Analysis with Known Mortality Status of Decedent
Power curves for simulated Medicaid expansion, as of January 1, 2012, applied to persons aged 55-64 during pre-
treatment period (2007-2013). Graphs show power (likelihood of detecting a statistically significant effect on
amenable mortality, at the indicated confidence levels, for two-tailed test), given imposed “true” population average
effect. Curves are based on 1,000 replications of a triple difference specification. In each draw, we select 20 pseudo-
treated states at random from the combined set of 41 treated and control states. We further break each county into a
treated and untreated population. We remove a fraction of the observed deaths at random from the treated states and
treated portions of each county, where the fraction removed corresponds to an assumed true treatment effect, and vary
the imposed treatment effect from 0-5% in increments of 0.1%. Curves for α = .10/.05/.01/.001 correspond to
90%/95%/99%/99.9% confidence levels, respectively. All control variables and standard errors are as in Table 2.

                                                            MDE with 10% First Stage
    Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                                100%

                                                80%

                                                60%

                                                40%

                                                20%

                                                 0%
                                                       0%              2.5%               5%             7.5%               10%
                                                              Imposed Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality for Treated

                                                            First Stage = 1%        First Stage = 3%        First Stage = 5%
                                                            First Stage = 10%       First Stage = 15%       First Stage = 20%




                                                                                    52
                                       Appendix for
The Effect of Health Insurance on Mortality: Power Analysis and What We Can
           Learn from the Affordable Care Act Coverage Expansions

                                        Bernard Black
      Northwestern University, Pritzker Law School and Kellogg School of Management

                                     Alex Hollingsworth
               Indiana University, School of Public and Environmental Affairs.

                                       Leticia Nunes
                     Fundação Getulio Vargas, Department of Economics

                                         Kosali Simon
          Indiana University, School of Public and Environmental Affairs, and NBER

                                   Draft February 2019


                                          Abstract
    This Appendix contains additional methods details and results for Black, Hollingsworth,
    Nunes, and Simon, The Effect of Health Insurance on Mortality: Power Analysis and
    What Can We Learn from the Affordable Care Act Coverage Expansions?
A1. Synthetic Control Results

           We sought to assess whether we could obtain a better match between treated and control states,
and thus tighter confidence bounds, using synthetic control methods. We used two approaches. In the
first, we combined the Full-Expansion States into a single treated unit and used usual synthetic control
methods (Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller, 2010)1 to construct a synthetic match using the Non-
Expansion States as donor states. We report results in Figure A-2, and report the weights on donor states
in Table A-12.
           The synthetic control approach minimizes the difference between the pre-treatment mortality
rates of the treated states and a weighted combination of the Non-Expansion States. However, the
maximum difference between the two series is still sizeable, at around 0.02 in 2007. Moreover, visually,
a large gap arises in 2013. Thus, this approach fails to create a close enough match in 2013 for this
method to produce a satisfying solution to our concern with non-parallel trends. We were not persuaded
that, for our data, the synthetic control approach is an improvement over the triple-difference design.2
           We also considered an extension of the synthetic control strategy, following Xu (2017). Xu’s
“generalized synthetic control (gsynth)” method generates a separate synthetic control for each full-
expansion state, drawn from the non-expansion states. One can then conduct DD analyses on the
resulting treated and control units, and obtain analytical standard errors (which the original method does
not provide). This procedure does not allow for weighting different units. We therefore only discuss
state-level results.3 While we cannot exactly replicate our triple difference models using the gsynth
method, we constructed an approximation, by using as the treated units each treated state’s 55 to 64 year
olds, and as the donor pool both every non-expansion state’s 55 to 64 year olds and every state’s
(expansion or not) 65 to 74 year olds. We present results in Appendix Figure A-3. Similar to the simpler
synthetic control method presented above, there is a large drop in amenable mortality in Full-Expansion
States in 2013; mortality in expansion states then rebounds in 2014. The poor pre-period fit is even more
pronounced with county-level data, and is driven by small counties, which have highly varying death

1
    We used code for this approach from Soni (2016).
2
  A further concern with the synthetic control approach is that it gives zero weight to most donor states and assigns positive
weights to several very-low-population states (Alaska, Maine, Wyoming) that do not otherwise seem good matches for the
Full-Expansion States. Appendix Table A-8 shows the weights on each donor state.
3
  Although we could not directly use population weights within Xu’s method, we simulate doing so by repeatedly running
his procedure on bootstrapped datasets with draws weighted by population. Results, with both state-level and county-level
data, were similar to those we discuss in the text.

                                                              2
rates and are hard to fit even with a large donor pool. We concluded that the gsynth approach cannot be
reliably applied to our data

A2. Results for Different Demographic Groups

        In this and the next two sections, we assess the effects of Medicaid expansion on mortality for
various subgroups. The demographic groups we consider are males, females, non-Hispanic blacks, non-
Hispanic whites, and Hispanics. We also consider subgroups based on education and mortality based
on cause of death. Our data has limitations for all subgroups except gender. For race and ethnicity, we
can obtain estimates of the first stage (change in uninsurance rates) only at the state level, not the county
level, due to limitations of the SAHIE data. The DD design does not explicitly use the first stage, but it
is central to assessing what coefficient magnitudes are reasonable. For education, population data is
available only for broad age groups (45-64 and 65+; 5-year average). For analysis by prior insurance
status and by income, we observe percent uninsured and percent below 138% of the FPL threshold for
full ACA expansion at the county*year level, but cannot directly study these subsamples because the
mortality data does not contain information on income or insurance.
        We begin our analysis of demographic subgroups in Figure A-5 with leads-and-lags graphs of
the triple differences in amenable mortality for samples subdivided on gender and on race/ethnicity.
Most post-expansion point estimates are insignificant. The exception is non-Hispanic Blacks, who show
a post-expansion drop in mortality. However, for this subgroup, we observe non-parallel pre-treatment
trends even with the triple-difference specification; the post-expansion drop in mortality could merely
reflect continuation of those trends. Also, the first stage for non-Hispanic Blacks is not greatly different
from that for the population as a whole (Table A-3). Thus, the point estimates in Figure A-5 (around -
0.05) are not possible as true effects of Medicaid expansion.
        We turn next to DD and triple-difference regression results for amenable mortality for these
subsamples, starting with demographic subsamples in Table A-3. The “all” row in Table A-3 is the same
as in text Table 2. The first column of Table A-3 shows the first-stage change in uninsurance rates for
Full- versus Non-Expansion States, in percent, for persons aged 50-64 (the closest available age match
to our main treatment sample). All first stages are small; the largest is for Hispanics at 1.5% (not
significant).
        In Table A-3, a number of the DD coefficients in column (2) are significant and negative, but
significance disappears in the triple-difference specification except for non-Hispanic Blacks. However,
as noted above, these estimates are suspect due to non-parallel pre-treatment trends and implausibly large

                                                     3
point estimates. We are also wary of assigning too much importance to statistically significant results
in particular specifications given the number of estimates we produced, although we did not conduct
formal Bonferroni type p-value adjustments.

A3 Variation Based on Education Level

       In Figure A-6, we show leads-and-lags graphs for the triple difference in amenable mortality for
subsamples stratified on education. Low education predicts poverty and hence eligibility for Medicaid
expansion; it may also affect the mortality response to the “treatment” of obtaining Medicaid. Recall
that for these subsamples, we study persons aged 45-64, and the triple difference compares these persons
to all persons age 65+. We present leads-and-lags graphs for elementary school only; partial high school
without graduating; high-school graduate; and some college. There is no evidence of a post-expansion
decline in mortality for any subgroup, including the less-than-high-school groups.
       In Table A-4, we show regression results by education level. The first row shows full sample
results. These differ from text Table 2 due to the broader age range that we use due to data limitations.
Note that in our preferred triple-difference specification, the point estimate for overall mortality is now
positive (higher mortality) and insignificant, and that Medicaid expansion predicts a significant drop in
mortality for the elderly (a placebo group). Both results cast further doubt on whether an effect of
Medicaid expansion on mortality can be reliably detected.
       The first column shows the relevant first stages. The first stage is close to 4% for persons without
a high school degree, but drops to 1.5% for high school graduates with no college, and to 1% for persons
with some college. However, the non-high-school graduates are only 12% of the 45-64 age group, so
the power gained from a stronger first stage is offset by smaller sample size.
       The first row shows full sample results. The second through fifth rows show effects for the four
education groups, starting with the lowest group, those with only elementary school completion, while
the other rows show successively higher education categories. All DD and triple-difference point
estimates are insignificant, consistent with the leads-and-lags graphs in Figure 5. The point estimate for
three of the four education groups, including the least educated, are positive (opposite from predicted).

A4. Variation by Primary Cause of Death

       In Table A-5, we present results by cause of death, for the top 4 causes of death: cancer, diabetes,
cardiovascular causes, and respiratory illnesses, and also for HIV.              Figure A-7 provides the
corresponding leads-and-lags graphs. All of these causes are within the broad category of amenable

                                                    4
mortality. First-stage estimates are not available with our data, because we lack data on Medicaid
insurance takeup among those with specific diseases. However, Soni et al. (2018a, 2018b) use a DiD
design based on Medicaid expansion and report a 2.4% first stage among persons with cancer diagnoses
and a 6.4% increase in early-stage cancer diagnoses. Diabetics could plausibly benefit more strongly
from Medicaid expansion given the negative correlation between income and diabetes prevalence and
evidence from the Oregon Medicaid Experiment that gaining Medicaid insurance predicts increased
diabetes diagnosis (Baicker et al., 2013). HIV is another specific condition, for which health insurance
has predicted lower mortality in previous studies (Goldman et al., 2001). However, both DD and triple-
difference coefficients are insignificant for all causes of death.

A5. Variation by Pre-ACA Uninsurance and Poverty Rates

       We turn next to an effort to exploit pre-AC`A uninsurance rates and poverty levels. We cannot
measure the second stage (mortality by individual income and insurance status) from the mortality data,
so we address this source of heterogeneity indirectly at the county level. The DD specification is the
same as above; the third difference for is high-versus-low pre-ACA uninsurance rates in counties. We
compare “treated” high-uninsurance counties (the counties with the highest pre-ACA uninsurance rates,
defined so that they together contain 20% of the U.S. population) to “control” counties with the lowest
pre-ACA uninsurance rates, also containing 20% of the U.S. population; we drop all other counties. This
is similar to the analysis in Finkelstein and McKnight (2008), exploiting pre-Medicare variation in
insurance levels, and Courtemanche et al. (2017) for the ACA. The third difference for high-vs-low
poverty counties is similar: high-poverty counties (the counties with the highest poverty rates, together
containing 20% of the US. population) versus low-poverty counties (counties with the lowest poverty
rates, also containing 20% of the U.S. population); we drop all other counties. These comparisons rely
on all ACA-induced sources of health insurance expansion, rather than Medicaid expansion alone.
       We present leads-and-lags graphs for amenable mortality in Figure A-8. Neither graph shows
evidence of a treatment effect. Both graphs show signs of a pre-treatment trend toward lower mortality
in the last few years prior to ACA expansion, in both high-uninsurance counties and high-poverty
counties, which does not continue in the post-expansion period and indeed reverses for the high-
uninsurance counties.
       We present regression estimates in Table A-6, for the full sample and for demographic
subsamples. Data are sufficient to let us compute first-stage estimates only for the full sample and for
male and female subsamples. The first stage remain quite small. There is no evidence of significant

                                                      5
effects of Medicaid expansion on mortality. For the full sample, the coefficients for both subsamples
are insignificant. For the comparison of high-vs-low uninsurance counties, the coefficient is positive
(opposite from predicted). For the demographic subsamples, five of the 14 coefficients are positive; and
the only significant coefficient is also positive.4
A6. Alternative Specifications: ATT Weights; All-Non-Elderly Adults; and Total Mortality
        In Tables A-7 through A-11, we present results using a number of different specifications. Table
A-7 is similar to text Table 2, but uses the following alternative specifications: (i) ATT * population
weights (we use population weights in the text); (ii) using linear state trends; (iii) running regressions
at the state instead of the county level, with population weights); and running state-level
regressions without population weights. All triple-difference coefficients are insignificant. Figure
A-9 provides leads-and-lags graphs for amenable mortality with ATT * population weights.
        To generate the ATT (average treatment effect on the treated) weights, we first average the
covariates over the pre-treatment period (2009-2013). We then run a logit regression, which predicts
whether a county is in a Full- or Non-Expansion State, using all variables in Table A-2 to generate the
fitted propensities p for each county. ATT weights are calculated as (p/(1-p)).
        Figure A-10 presents leads-and-lags graphs for DD and triple differences for total mortality,
instead of amenable mortality. Figure A-10 presents leads-and-lags graphs for DD and triple
differences for non-amenable mortality.
        In Table A-8, we present triple-difference results using these same alternative
specifications with each of the demographic subgroups. The significant, negative coefficient for
non-Hispanic Blacks survives in several of these specifications, but loses significance in state-
level regressions without population weights. All other coefficients are insignificant, except that
we find a significant negative coefficient for men in state-level regressions without population
weights. The sizeable differences, for several subgroups, between state-level regressions with and
without population weights confirm our initial concern that results from this specification are
sensitive to outlier results in a few low-population states. Figure A-12 provides leads-and-lags
graphs for amenable mortality for demographic subgroups, with ATT * population weights.
        In Table A-9, we present triple-difference results with these alternative specifications with
each of the education subgroups. All estimated effects are statistically insignificant. Figure A-13

4
  In Table A-6, we use all counties and estimate continuous versions of the comparisons in Table 6 between high and low
uninsurance (or poverty) counties, again with insignificant results.

                                                          6
provides leads-and-lags graphs for amenable mortality for education subgroups, with ATT *
population weights.
       In Table A-10, we present triple-difference results with these alternative specifications with
each cause of death. All estimated effects are statistically insignificant. Figure A-14 provides
leads-and-lags graphs for amenable mortality by cause of death, with ATT * population weights.
       Figure A-15 presents leads-and-lags graphs for the comparison of high-versus low poverty
and high-versus low-uninsurance counties, with ATT * population weights. Figure A-16 is similar,
but the sample is all non-elderly adults.
       In Table A-11, we present triple-difference results using two alternative specifications
(ATT * population weights, and comparing all non-elderly adults to all elderly adults), for each of
the demographic subgroups. There are some scattered significant coefficients, positive for women
and negative for men (with ATT * population weights) and for non-Hispanic Blacks (for the broad
age range), but no consistent results across specifications. Figure A-17 presents leads-and-lags
graphs for the comparison of amenable mortality for all non-elderly adults.


       Across all tables, the scattered significant coefficients that we find are far too large in
magnitude to be true causal effects. Indeed, given our standard errors, only implausibly large
coefficients would appear to be statistically significant.




                                                  7
Table A-1. Medicaid Expansion States (2014-2016)
This table includes Medicaid expansions through 2016. It is based on combining and reconciling the classification of states as “full expansion,” “None,” or in-
between (“mild” or “substantial” expansion), by Simon, Cawley and Soni (2017), Lou et al. (2018), and Kaiser Family Foundation (2015). Most states could be
classified based on their rules for when and to what level they expanded Medicaid for all adults. Arizona required special care; see detailed analysis below. Because
our mortality data are annual, we consider New Hampshire to be a 2015 expansion, Alaska to be a 2016 expansion, and Louisiana to be a 2017 expansion, hence
beyond our study period.
In the “expansion details” column, “ACA Expansion” means regular expansion to 138% of FPL, on the date stated in the “Effective Date” column. In the
“inclusion/exclusion column, C = control (non-expansion), T = treatment (full expansion); other states are excluded. Simon et al. (2017) classify early expansion
states as “mild” or “substantial” expansion, based on their assessment of the extent to which enrollment increase with full Affordable Care Act expansion in 2014.
This classification of states based on expansion status is also used in Black et al. (2018) (“BHNS”). % change in uninsured enrollees (2013-20156) come from
SAHIE estimates for ages 18-64 and considering all income groups.
State                Abbr. Expansion Details                   Effective      % change in uninsured    Inclusion/ Exclusion   Expansion type     Compare to BHNS
                                                               Date           enrollees (2013-2016)
Alabama             AL     None                                                         6.4           C [.]                   None             Consistent
Alaska              AK     Medicaid Expansion                  09/01/2015                             T [2016]                None             Consistent for 2014-
                                                                                                                                               2015 (expanded late
                                                                                        6.8                                                    2015)
Arizona5            AZ     § 1115 Waiver (100% FPL, but closed 2000                                   T[2014]                 Full             Consistent
                           to new enrollees in 2011)
                           ACA Expansion                       01/01/2014               9.6
Arkansas6           AR     § 1115 Waiver                       01/01/2014                             T [2014]                Full             Consistent
                                                                                       12.4           Private Option
California7         CA     § 1115 Waiver (LA county)           01/01/1995                             Excluded                Substantial      Consistent
                           § 1115 Waiver (200% FPL)            11/01/2010                             (Early expansion)
                           ACA Expansion                       01/01/2014              13.5
           8
Colorado            CO     § 1115 Waiver (to 10% of FPL)       04/01/2012               8.6           T [2016]                Full             Consistent

5
 Arizona used a § 1115 waiver to expand Medicaid coverage to childless adults up to 100% FPL during 2000-2011. In 2011, the state started to phase out that
program (transitioning into Medicaid expansion). Which category Arizona belongs in was unclear based on its rules, so we also examined the extent to which
Medicaid enrollment increased in 2014. See details below.
6
  Arkansas operated a limited-benefit premium-assistance program for childless adults who worked for small uninsured employers (ARHealthNetworks waiver)
prior to the ACA. Arkansas’s Medicaid expansion includes a “private option” under which Medicaid-eligible persons receive health insurance from the state
insurance exchange, with a small monthly premium.
7
    California expanded Medicaid in 2010-2011, in selected counties.
State                Abbr. Expansion Details                   Effective     % change in uninsured    Inclusion/ Exclusion   Expansion type    Compare to BHNS
                                                               Date          enrollees (2013-2016)
                            ACA Expansion                      01/01/2014                            T [2014]
                9
Connecticut         CT      State Plan Amendment (56% FPL)     04/01/2010                            Excluded                Substantial      Consistent
                            ACA Expansion                      01/01/2014             6.4            (Early Expansion)
Delaware10          DE      ACA Expansion                      01/01/1996                            Excluded                Mild             Consistent
                                                               01/01/2014             5.1            (Early Expansion)
District of         DC      State Plan Amendment (133% FPL)    07/01/2010                            Excluded                Mild             Consistent
Columbia11                  § 1115 Waiver                      12/01/2010                            (Early expansion)
                            ACA Expansion                      01/01/2014             4.2
Florida             FL      None                                                      10.4           C [.]                   None             Consistent
Georgia             GA      None                                                      7.6            C [.]                   None             Consistent
           12
Hawaii              HI      ACA Expansion                      08/01/1994                            Excluded                Substantial      Consistent
                                                               01/01/2014             4.6            (Early expansion)
Idaho               ID      None                                                       8.2           C [.]                   None             Consistent
Illinois            IL      ACA Expansion                      01/01/2014             9.2            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
Indiana             IN      § 1115 Waiver                      02/01/2015                            T [2015]                Full             Consistent
                                                                                      8.5
Iowa13              IA      § 1115 Waiver                      01/01/2014                            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
                                                                                      5.8
Kansas              KS      None                                                      5.2            C [.]                   None             Consistent
Kentucky            KY      ACA Expansion                      01/01/2014             13.7           T [2014]                Full             Consistent
Louisiana           LA      ACA Expansion                      07/01/2016             9.0            C [.]                   None             Consistent
Maine               ME      None                                                      4.2            C [.]                   None             Consistent
Maryland            MD      ACA Expansion                      01/01/2014             5.8            T [2014]                Full             Consistent

9
    Connecticut, elected to enact the Medicaid expansion in 2010 through a state amended plan at 56%. Connecticut expanded its Medicaid program fully in 2014.
10
     In Delaware, childless adults with incomes up to 100% FPL were eligible for Medicaid through the Diamond State Health Plan waiver, effective on 01/01/1996.
11
     DC expanded its Medicaid program at 133% of FPL in 2010.
12
     In Hawaii, childless adults with incomes up to 100% FPL were eligible for the state’s QUEST Medicaid managed care waiver program, effective on 08/01/1994.
13
  Under the IowaCare program, childless adults with income below 200% FPL were eligible for health insurance since 2005. However, IowaCare provided
limited services in a limited network, so low-income adults in Iowa received a substantial coverage expansion in 2014 (Damiano et al., 2013). During 2014-
2015, Iowa residents with income < 100% of FPL were enrolled in Medicaid managed care plans, while those with income of 100-138% of FPL received private
insurance obtained through the Iowa health exchange, with premiums waived (a partial “private option”). See https://www.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-
Program-Information/By-Topics/Waivers/1115/downloads/ia/Market-Place-Choice-Plan/ia-marketplace-choice-plan-state-term-app-
06012016.pdf...
                                                                                2
State                Abbr. Expansion Details                     Effective     % change in uninsured    Inclusion/ Exclusion   Expansion type     Compare to BHNS
                                                                 Date          enrollees (2013-2016)
Massachusetts14     MA      “Romneycare”                         04/12/2006                            Excluded                Mild             Consistent
                            ACA Expansion                        01/01/2014             1.7
Michigan            MI      ACA Expansion                        04/01/2014             8.5            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
Minnesota15         MN      State Plan Amendment (75% FPL)       03/01/2010                            Excluded                Substantial      Consistent
                            § 1115 Waiver (200% FPL)             08/01/2010                            (Early Expansion)
                            ACA Expansion                        01/01/2014             5.6
Mississippi         MS      None                                                        7.3            C [.]                   None             Consistent
Missouri            MO      § 1115 Waiver (St. Louis County Only) 07/01/2012                           C [.]                   None             Consistent
                            (200% FPL)
                            None                                                        5.7
Montana             MT      ACA Expansion                         01/01/2016                           T [2016]                None             Consistent for 2014-
                                                                                                                                                2015 (expanded in
                                                                                       11.5                                                     2016)
Nebraska            NE      None                                                        4.1            C [.]                   None             Consistent
Nevada              NV      ACA Expansion                        01/01/2014            11.2            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
New Hampshire16 NH          § 1115 Waiver                        08/15/2014                            T [2015]                Full             Consistent
                                                                                        7.0
New Jersey17        NJ      § 1115 Waiver (23% FPL)              04/01/2011                            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
                            ACA Expansion                        01/01/2014             7.4
New Mexico          NM      ACA Expansion                        01/01/2014            13.8            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
New York18          NY      § 1115 waiver                        10/01/2001                            Excluded                Mild             Consistent
                            ACA Expansion                        01/01/2014             6.7            (Early expansion)
North Carolina      NC      None                                                        7.4            C [.]                   None             Consistent



14
     Massachusetts implemented reforms to expand insurance coverage to low-income adults in 2006.
15
  Minnesota conducted early expansion in 2010 two ways. Persons with income ≤ 75%FPL were insured through Medical Assistance Medicaid, funded through
a State Plan Amendment, persons with income from 75~200% of FPL were insured through MinnesotaCare, funded through a § 1115 Waiver, which had limited
benefits and cost-sharing.
16
      New Hampshire implemented a “private option” (mandatory purchase of subsidized private insurance, instead traditional Medicaid, in 2016.                         See
https://www.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/By-Topics/Waivers/1115/downloads/nh/health-protection-program/nh-health-
protection-program-premium-assistance-appvl-amend-req-06232015.pdf.
17
     New Jersey’s expansion in 2011 only extended to 23% FPL; we therefore treated it as a full expansion state.
18
  In New York, childless adults up to 78% FPL were eligible for the Medicaid (Home Relief) waiver program and childless adults up to 100% FPL were eligible
for the Family Health Plus waiver program (Heberlein et al., 2011).
                                                                                  3
State                Abbr. Expansion Details                        Effective    % change in uninsured    Inclusion/ Exclusion   Expansion type    Compare to BHNS
                                                                    Date         enrollees (2013-2016)
North Dakota        ND        ACA Expansion                         01/01/2014            6.0            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
Ohio                OH        ACA Expansion                         01/01/2014            8.1            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
Oklahoma            OK        None                                                        5.3            C [.]                   None             Consistent
Oregon              OR19      ACA Expansion                         01/01/2014           12.2            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
Pennsylvania        PA        ACA Expansion                         01/01/2015            6.2            T [2015]                Full             Consistent
Rhode Island        RI        ACA Expansion                         01/01/2014           10.5            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
South Carolina      SC        None                                                        8.1            C [.]                   None             Consistent
South Dakota        SD        None                                                        2.9            C [.]                   None             Consistent
Tennessee           TN        None                                                        6.8            C [.]                   None             Consistent
Texas               TX        None                                                        7.5            C [.]                   None             Consistent
Utah                UT        None                                                        6.9            C [.]                   None             Consistent
                         20
Vermont             VT        § 1115 Waiver                         01/01/1996                           Excluded                Mild             Consistent
                              ACA Expansion                         01/01/2014            4.7            (Early expansion)
Virginia            VA        None                                                        5.3            C [.]                   None             Consistent
             21
Washington          WA        § 1115 Waiver (133% FPL)              01/03/2011                           T [2014]                Full             Consistent
                              ACA Expansion                         01/01/2014           11.1
West Virginia       WV        ACA Expansion                         01/01/2014           12.8            T [2014]                Full             Consistent
            22
Wisconsin           WI        New eligibility for BadgerCare but not 2009                                Excluded                Substantial      Consistent
                              ACA Expansion                                               5.5
Wyoming               WY      None                                                        3.6            C [.]                   None             Consistent




19
  In 2008, Oregon enacted a small Medicaid expansion for low-income adults through a lottery among applicants. However, less than one-third of the 90,000
people on the waitlist were selected to apply for Medicaid in 2008 (Baicker et al., 2013), some of the denied applicants were then enrolled in 2010. We treat
Oregon as full expansion due to the small size of this earlier expansion.
20
   In Vermont, childless adults up to 150% FPL were eligible for Medicaid equivalent coverage through the Vermont Health Access Plan waiver program (Heberlein
et al., 2011). Vermont Health Access Plan (Sec. 1115 waiver) was approved in 1995 and effective in 1996.
21
     Washington’s early expansion was limited to prior state plan enrollees (Sommers et al., 2013).
22
  Wisconsin received federal approval to offer Medicaid to childless adults below 100% FPL through the BadgerCare program as of 2009 (Gates & Rudowitz,
2014); it did not formally adopt ACA expansion in 2014 and kept the income threshold at 100% FPL.


                                                                                    4
Arizona Details for Table A-1
Arizona had a S.1931 program providing Medicaid up to 106% FPL for parents. It also had a limited program for
childless adults, under a § 1115 waiver, starting in 2001, which was closed to new entrants since 2011.23 Whether to
treat Arizona as a full expansion state or an early expansion state turns on how many childless adults were still covered
at the ACA onset in 2014, given churn in eligibility. The tail off in hospital admissions with Medicaid payment, and
jump at the start of 2014 (with uninsured admissions showing the opposite pattern), persuades us that Arizona should
be treated as a regular expansion state.




Source: Author reproduction of HCUP figure                    using    HCUP      Fast   Stats   at   https://www.hcup-
us.ahrq.gov/faststats/StatePayerServlet?state1=AZ.




23
     Source: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/fact-sheet/proposed-changes-to-medicaid-expansion-in-arizona/.
References for Table A-1
Black, B., Hollingsworth, A., Nunes L., & Simon, K., The Effect of Health Insurance on Mortality: What
        Can We Learn from the Affordable Care Act Coverage Expansions (working paper 2018).
Damiano, P., Bentler, S.E., Momany, E.T., Park, K.H., & Robinson, E. (2013). Evaluation of the
      IowaCare program: Information about the medical home expansion. The University of Iowa
      Public Policy Center, at:
      https://ir.uiowa.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1074&context=ppc_health
Gates, A., & Rudowitz, R. (2014). Wisconsin’s BadgerCare program and the ACA. Kaiser Family
        Foundation. At: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/fact-sheet/wisconsins-badgercare-program-and-
        the-aca/.
Heberlein, M., Brooks, T., Guyer, J., Artiga, S., & Stephens, J. (2011). Holding steady, looking ahead:
       Annual findings of a 50-state survey of eligibility rules, enrollment and renewal procedures, and
       cost-sharing practices in Medicaid and CHIP, 2010–2011. Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and
       the Uninsured.
Sommers, B. D., Buchmueller, T., Decker, S. L., Carey, C., & Kronick, R. (2013). The Affordable Care
      Act has led to significant gains in health insurance and access to care for young adults. Health
      Affairs 32: 165-174.
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2018). Status of State Action on the Medicaid Expansion Decision, at
        https://www.kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-activity-around-expanding-medicaid-
        under-the-affordable-care
        act/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22as
        c%22%7D.
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2012). Status of State Action on the Medicaid Expansion Decision. How is
        the Affordable Care Act Leading to Changes in Medicaid Today? State Adoption of Five New
        Options, at https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/8312.pdf.
Lou, Q., Moghtaderi, A., Markus, A., Dor, A. (2018), Impact of Medicaid Expansion on Total Revenue of
        Community Health Centers by Funding Sources. Working paper.
Simon, Kosali, Aparna Soni and John Cawley (2017), The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventive Care
       and Health Behaviors: Evidence from the First Two Years of the ACA Medicaid Expansions,
       Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36: 390-417.
Wishner, JB., Holohan, J., Upadhyay, D., McGrath, M. (2015). Medicaid Expansion, the Private Option,
       and Personal Responsibility Requirements: The Use of § 1115 Waivers to Implement Medicaid
       Expansion Under the ACA. Urban Institute, at
       https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/53236/2000235-Medicaid-Expansion-The-
       Private-Option-and-Personal-Responsibility-Requirements.pdf.




                                                    2
Table A-2. Covariate Balance for Full-Expansion and Non-Expansion States
Table shows summary statistics for county-level covariates and mortality for Full-Expansion and Non-Expansion
states during pre-expansion period (means over 2009-2013), using county population weights. t-statistics use two-
sample t-test for difference and robust standard errors with state clusters. Normalized difference is a sample-size
independent measure of the difference between two means, scaled by standard deviation):
ND j = ( x jt - x jc ) / [(s 2jt + s 2jc ) / 2]1/2 .   State groups are defined in Table A-1. Mortality rates are per 100,000
persons. Dollar amounts are in 2010 $.
                                                       Full-Expansion     Non-Expansion Difference t-          Normalized
                                                            States            States         stat              Difference
                                                              (1)               (2)          (3)                   (4)
% age 0-19                                                  23.36             24.35         1.11                  -0.30
% age 18-34                                                 22.74             23.42         1.40                  -0.15
% age 35-44                                                 12.94             13.11         0.71                  -0.11
% age 45-54                                                 14.53             13.98         2.32                  0.40
% age 55-64                                                 12.56             11.81         2.05                  0.36
% age 65-74                                                  7.56              7.48         0.16                  0.04
% age 75-84                                                  4.38              4.19         0.52                  0.13
% age 85+                                                    1.94              1.66         1.53                  0.32
% Male                                                      49.21             49.13         0.47                  0.04
% White                                                     82.91             77.43         2.19                  0.36
% Black                                                     11.42             18.16         2.61                  -0.49
% Other Races                                                5.67              4.41         1.35                  0.15
% Hispanic                                                  11.44             16.33         0.87                  -0.38
% In Poverty                                                14.67             16.89         2.75                  -0.36
% Managed Care Penetration                                  24.55             22.99         0.42                  0.15
% Disabled (ages 18-64)                                     16.31             17.57         1.29                  -0.20
Mean Per Capita Income                                      40,208           37,537         1.72                  0.31
Median Household Income                                     51,691           47,122         1.81                  0.44
Unemployment Rate, 16+                                       8.84              8.28         1.12                  0.20
% with Diabetes                                              8.85              9.72         2.45                  -0.46
% Physically Inactive                                       22.89             24.70         1.85                  -0.40
% Obese                                                     27.95             29.11         1.16                  -0.28
% Smoker                                                    21.96             21.71         0.27                  0.06
Physicians/1,000 people                                      3.10              2.65         2.88                  0.27
% Uninsured (ages 18-64)                                    18.68             24.96         3.36                  -1.09
Amenable Mortality (all ages)                               510.52           481.21         0.90                  0.18
Amenable Mortality (ages 55-64)                             575.22           623.78         1.86                  -0.24
Non-amenable Mortality (all ages)                           345.28           341.33         0.20                  0.04
Non-amenable Mortality (ages 55-64)                         278.85           309.76         2.50                  -0.30




                                                                     3
Table A-3: DD and Triple-Difference Estimates: Different Demographic Groups (ages 55-64)
First column shows annual averages over 2009-2016 for number of deaths and population in millions. Of the full
sample (28.8M people), 14.5M were in expansion states. Second column shows mortality rate for persons aged 55-
64 for indicated groups. Third column shows first-stage DD estimates of change in uninsurance rates (in percent)
from 2013 to 2016 for indicated demographic subsamples, for persons aged 50-64, from regression of percent
uninsurance on Full Expansion dummy, with state and year FE and state population weights, using state-level SAHIE
data (best available), and same covariates as the DD and triple difference regressions. Remaining columns show
coefficients from DD or triple difference regressions on Full-Expansion dummy or, for triple difference column, full-
expansion dummy * age 55-64 dummy, from county-level regressions with county-and year FE and population
weights, similar to Table 2, for ln((amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1) over 2009-2015. Standard errors use state
clusters. *.**, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively; significant results at
5% level or better in boldface.
Demographic                 Ann. Deaths       Mortality     First stage (%)     DiD      DiD
                                                                                                          Triple diff.
Subsamples                  (Pop. in M)         rate           50-64 yrs    55-64 yrs 65-74 yrs
                                 (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)      (5)                  (6)
                              174,379          605.3            1.113**      -0.018**   -0.008               -0.004
All Amenable
                               (28.8)                           (0.452)       (0.008)  (0.006)               (0.008)
                              105,465            759.8           0.692        -0.018*   -0.004               -0.004
Male
                               (13.9)                           (0.747)       (0.010)  (0.008)               (0.010)
                               68,914            461.7           0.936       -0.020**  -0.016*                0.004
Female
                               (14.9)                           (0.705)       (0.009)  (0.009)               (0.012)
                              129,542            589.8          1.130**       -0.015*  -0.011*               -0.003
White (Not Hispanic)
                               (22.0)                           (0.490)       (0.008)  (0.007)               (0.009)
                               32,217            917.0           0.994        -0.031*   0.020              -0.055***
Black (Not Hispanic)
                                (3.5)                           (0.852)       (0.016)  (0.015)               (0.017)
                                3,619            321.6              -          -0.050   -0.039               -0.035
Other
                                (1.1)                               -         (0.060)  (0.052)               (0.078)
                                9,086            398.2           1.484      -0.161***   -0.092              -0.055*
Hispanic
                                (2.3)                           (1.228)       (0.057)  (0.057)               (0.029)
                              165,293            623.1              -        -0.018**   -0.008               -0.005
Not Hispanic
                               (26.5)                               -         (0.008)  (0.006)               (0.007)
Pop. Weights                                                      Yes           Yes      Yes                   Yes
Covariates                                                        Yes           Yes      Yes                   Yes




                                                            4
Table A-4: DD and Triple-Difference Estimates: by Educational Attainment (ages 45-64)
First column shows annual averages over 2009-2016 for number of deaths and population in millions. Second column
shows mortality rate for persons aged 55-64 for indicated groups. Third column shows first-stage DD estimates of
change in uninsurance rates (in percent) from 2013 to 2016 for indicated education-levels, for persons aged 45-64,
from regression of percent uninsurance on Full Expansion dummy, with state and year FE and state population
weights. Remaining columns show coefficients from DD or triple difference regressions on Full-Expansion dummy
or, for triple difference column, full-expansion dummy * age 45-64 dummy, from county-level regressions with county
and year FE and population weights, similar to Table 2, for ln((amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1) among
persons with indicated education levels, over 2009-2015. Standard errors use state clusters. *.**, *** indicates
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively; significant results at 5% level or better in boldface.
Education              Ann. Deaths            Mortality      First stage (%)         DiD            DiD
                                                                                                           Triple diff.
Subsample               (Pop. in M)            Rate             45-64 yrs         45-64 yrs      65+ yrs
                             (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)            (5)       (6)
                          252,285              422.1              1.048             -0.012       -0.020***    0.014
All Amenable
                          (59.77)                                (0.738)            (0.008)        (0.006)   (0.009)
                           14,776                565.4            3.747              0.047          0.014     0.066
Elementary School
                           (2.61)                                (2.530)            (0.046)        (0.058)   (0.048)
                           33,698                768.6          3.912***            -0.009         -0.003    -0.011
High School Incomplete
                           (4.38)                                (1.449)            (0.061)        (0.064)   (0.036)
                          110,019                607.2            1.533             -0.021         -0.032     0.010
High School Complete
                          (18.12)                                (0.939)            (0.040)        (0.037)   (0.014)
                           86,793                250.5            0.468             -0.015         -0.026     0.013
Some College
                          (34.65)                                (0.572)            (0.035)        (0.031)   (0.011)
Population Weights                                                 Yes                Yes            Yes       Yes
Covariates                                                         Yes                Yes            Yes       Yes




                                                             5
Table A-5: DD and Triple-Difference Estimates: by Cause of Death (age 55-64)
First column shows annual averages over 2009-2016 for number of deaths and population in millions. Second column
shows mortality rate for persons aged 55-64 for indicated groups. Remaining columns show coefficients from DD or
triple difference regressions on Full-Expansion dummy or, for triple difference column, full-expansion dummy * age
45-64 dummy, from county-level regressions with county and year FE and population weights, similar to Table 2, for
ln((amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1) among persons with indicated primary cause of death, over 2009-2016.
Standard errors use state clusters. *.**, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively; significant results at 5% level or better in boldface.
                                           deaths              DiD           DiD
       By Cause of Death                                                                   Triple diff.
                                         (pop. In M)        55-64 yrs     65-74 yrs
                                              (1)               (2)           (3)              (4)
                                            174,379          -0.018**         -0.008         -0.004
       All Amenable
                                             (28.81)           (0.008)       (0.006)         (0.008)
                                              87,170            -0.003         0.003         -0.004
       Cancer
                                             (28.81)           (0.006)       (0.006)         (0.009)
                                              14,394            -0.024         0.001         -0.007
       Diabetes
                                             (28.81)           (0.019)       (0.025)         (0.020)
                                              70,677            -0.010        -0.009          0.006
       Cardiovascular
                                             (28.81)           (0.010)       (0.010)         (0.010)
                                              16,442            -0.030        -0.017         -0.010
       Respiratory
                                             (28.81)           (0.020)       (0.013)         (0.023)
                                            1,282            -0.058         0.005            -0.051
       HIV
                                           (28.81)           (0.037)       (0.038)           (0.060)
       Pop. Weights                                            Yes           Yes               Yes
       Covariates                                              Yes           Yes               Yes




                                                        6
Table A-6: Triple Difference Estimates: Separating Counties by Baseline Health Uninsurance or
Poverty Levels (age 55-64)
First column shows annual averages over 2009-2016 for number of deaths and population aged 55-64 in millions, for
sample of high-versus low- uninsurance counties. Second and fourth columns column shows full-sample and by
gender first stages; we lack the data to compute first stages for the other subsamples. Remaining columns show
coefficients from triple difference, county-level regressions with county and year FE and population weights, similar
to Table 2, over 2009-2016, for amenable mortality for full sample and indicated subsamples. Third difference in
column (3) is between the counties with the highest uninsurance rate in 2013, containing 20% of the U.S. population,
and the counties with the lowest uninsurance rate in 2013, containing 20% of the U.S. population. Third difference
in column (5) is similar but is between the counties with lowest versus highest poverty rates in 2013. Standard errors
use state clusters. *.**, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively; significant
results at 5% level or better in boldface.

                                     Deaths          First Stage        Triple diff.      First Stage        Triple diff.
 Sample                            (pop. in M)      (%) 50-64 yrs      Uninsurance       (%) 50-64 yrs        Poverty
                                        (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)                 (5)
                                     66,329             1.221              0.003             0.720               0.000
 All
                                      (11.9)           (0.653)           (0.020)            (0.789)            (0.013)
                                     40,750             0.593             -0.020             0.408              -0.024
 Male
                                       (5.8)           (0.657)           (0.028)            (0.721)            (0.018)
                                     26,103           1.829***            0.050*             0.912            0.037***
 Female
                                       (6.1)           (0.679)           (0.028)            (0.791)            (0.014)
                                     51,198                               -0.017                                -0.015
 White (Not Hispanic)
                                       (9.1)                             (0.018)                               (0.010)
                                     11,970                               -0.001                               -0.073*
 Black (Not Hispanic)
                                       (1.4)                             (0.059)                               (0.040)
                                      1,496                               -0.083                                -0.005
 Other
                                       (0.4)                             (0.137)                               (0.107)
                                      3,421                                0.279                                 0.082
 Hispanic
                                       (0.9)                             (0.267)                               (0.103)
                                     60,879                                0.003                                -0.005
 Not Hispanic
                                      (10.4)                             (0.021)                               (0.015)
 Pop. Weights                                            Yes                Yes               Yes                 Yes
 Covariates                                              Yes                Yes               Yes                 Yes




                                                           7
Table A-7. Estimated Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Amenable Mortality: Different
Specifications
Table 2 in the text shows DD and triple-difference estimates for county-level regressions, with county and year FE
and population weights, of ln[(amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1] over 2009-2016 on full-expansion dummy
(=1 for Full-Expansion States in expansion years; 0 otherwise), and covariates. Third difference is ages 55-64
versus ages 65-74. This table provides results for principal coefficients of interest, from regressions in which
we vary this specification as follows: Panel A reproduces our results from text Table 2; Panel B uses
ATT*population weights instead of only population weights; Panel C adds linear state trends; Panel D reports
results from regressions at state- instead of county-level (with population weights); and Panel E reports results
from state-level regressions without weights. Standard errors use state clusters. *, **, *** indicates statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively; significant results at 5% level or better in boldface.
                                                               DiD 55-64 years                Triple diff.
                                                               (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)
Panel A. Main Specification (from text Table 2)
                                                             -0.018*       -0.018**
Full Expansion Dummy
                                                             (0.010)        (0.008)
                                                                                         -0.002        -0.004
Full Expansion Dummy x Age 55-64 Dummy
                                                                                         (0.009)       (0.008)
Panel B. With ATT x Population Weights
                                                             -0.014        -0.015*
Full Expansion Dummy
                                                             (0.013)       (0.009)
                                                                                         -0.014        -0.013
Full Expansion Dummy x Age 55-64 Dummy
                                                                                         (0.009)       (0.012)
Panel C. With Linear State Trends
                                                             -0.006        -0.009
Full Expansion Dummy
                                                             (0.008)       (0.008)
                                                                                         -0.001        -0.003
Full Expansion Dummy x Age 55-64 Dummy
                                                                                         (0.009)       (0.008)
Panel D. State-Level (with Pop Weights)
                                                            -0.020**       -0.011*
Full Expansion Dummy
                                                             (0.009)       (0.007)
                                                                                         -0.006        -0.009
Full Expansion Dummy x Age 55-64 Dummy
                                                                                         (0.008)       (0.010)
Panel E. State-Level (No Weights) Specification
                                                            -0.018**       -0.009
Full Expansion Dummy
                                                             (0.009)       (0.009)
                                                                                         -0.009        -0.015
Full Expansion Dummy x Age 55-64 Dummy
                                                                                         (0.010)       (0.011)
Covariates                                                     No            Yes           No            Yes




                                                        8
Table A-8: Triple-Difference Estimates by Demographic Group: Different Specifications
Table 3 in the text shows DD and triple-difference estimates for different demographic groups, from county-level
regressions, with county and year FE and population weights, of ln[(amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1] over
2009-2016 on full-expansion dummy (=1 for Full-Expansion States in expansion years; 0 otherwise), and covariates.
Third difference is ages 55-64 versus ages 65-74. This table provides triple difference results for principal
coefficients of interest, from regressions in which we vary this specification as follows: using
ATT*population weights; adding linear state trends; and running regressions at state- instead of county-level,
with and without population weights. Standard errors use state clusters. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively; significant results at 5% level or better in boldface.
                                                              Triple Difference Results
                                   Main         ATT x Pop        with Linear State State-Level w.       State-Level
Subsamples
                               Specification      weights             Trends          pop. weights      unweighted
                                    (1)             (2)                  (3)                (4)             (5)
                                  -0.004          -0.013               -0.003             -0.009          -0.015
All Amenable
                                  (0.008)         (0.012)              (0.008)            (0.010)         (0.011)
                                  -0.004          -0.003               -0.003             -0.015         -0.034**
Male
                                  (0.010)         (0.022)              (0.010)            (0.012)         (0.014)
                                   0.004          -0.022                0.005              0.006          -0.003
Female
                                  (0.012)         (0.015)              (0.011)            (0.013)         (0.014)
                                  -0.003          -0.010               -0.002             -0.015          -0.002
White (Not Hispanic)
                                  (0.009)         (0.010)              (0.009)            (0.011)         (0.011)
                                -0.055***        -0.345**            -0.055***          -0.040***          0.010
Black (Not Hispanic)
                                  (0.017)         (0.172)              (0.017)            (0.014)         (0.124)
                                  -0.035           0.168               -0.036             -0.056          -0.038
Other
                                  (0.078)         (0.269)              (0.078)            (0.036)         (0.059)
                                 -0.055*          -0.153              -0.050*             -0.016           0.054
Hispanic
                                  (0.029)         (0.153)              (0.027)            (0.023)         (0.156)
                                  -0.005          -0.013               -0.004             -0.010          -0.012
Not Hispanic
                                  (0.007)         (0.012)              (0.007)            (0.008)         (0.011)
Weights                             Pop         ATT x Pop                Pop                Pop             No
Covariates                          Yes             Yes                Yes                 Yes              Yes




                                                          9
Table A-9: Triple-Difference Estimates by Educational Attainment (ages 45-64) - Different
Specifications
Table 4 in the text shows DD and triple-difference estimates for groups with different education levels, from county-
level regressions, with county and year FE and population weights, of ln[(amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1]
over 2009-2016 on full-expansion dummy (=1 for Full-Expansion States in expansion years; 0 otherwise), and
covariates. Third difference is ages 55-64 versus ages 65-74. This table provides triple difference results for
principal coefficients of interest, from regressions in which we vary this specification as follows: using
ATT*population weights; adding linear state trends; and running regressions at state- instead of county-level,
with and without population weights. Standard errors use state clusters. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively; significant results at 5% level or better in boldface.
                                                           Triple Difference Results
                                Main          ATT x Pop     with Linear State State-Level w.          State-Level
Education Subsamples
                             Specification     weights            Trends         pop. weights         unweighted
                                  (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)
                                0.014           -0.001             0.014              0.007              0.007
All Amenable
                               (0.009)         (0.011)            (0.009)            (0.009)            (0.010)
                                0.066          0.129*              0.045              0.045              0.062
Elementary School
                               (0.048)         (0.068)            (0.046)            (0.031)            (0.040)
                                -0.011          -0.015             0.004             -0.023             -0.039
High School Incomplete
                               (0.036)         (0.031)            (0.036)            (0.031)            (0.035)
                                0.010           -0.001             0.023              0.005             -0.017
High School Complete
                               (0.014)         (0.021)            (0.019)            (0.013)            (0.023)
                                0.013            0.011            0.031*              0.011              0.005
Some College
                               (0.011)         (0.018)            (0.017)            (0.013)            (0.023)
Weights                          Pop          ATT x Pop             Pop                Pop                No
Covariates                        Yes             Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes




                                                         10
Table A-10: Triple-Difference Estimates by Cause of Death (ages 55-64): Different
Specifications
Table 5 in the text shows DD and triple-difference estimates for different causes of death, from county-level
regressions, with county and year FE and population weights, of ln[(amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1] over
2009-2016 on full-expansion dummy (=1 for Full-Expansion States in expansion years; 0 otherwise), and covariates.
Third difference is ages 55-64 versus ages 65-74. This table provides triple difference results for principal
coefficients of interest, from regressions in which we vary this specification as follows: using
ATT*population weights; adding linear state trends; and running regressions at state- instead of county-level,
with and without population weights. Standard errors use state clusters. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively; significant results at 5% level or better in boldface.
                                                        Triple Difference Results
                           Main            ATT x Pop       with Linear State    State-Level w.        State-Level
Cause of Death
                        Specification       weights             Trends            pop. weights        unweighted
                             (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)                (5)
                           -0.004            -0.013              -0.003              -0.009             -0.015
Amenable
                          (0.008)            (0.012)            (0.008)             (0.010)             (0.011)
                           -0.006            -0.008              -0.006              -0.006             -0.005
Non-Amenable
                          (0.012)            (0.017)            (0.012)             (0.012)             (0.012)
                           -0.004            -0.017              -0.004              -0.006             -0.001
Cancer
                          (0.009)            (0.011)            (0.008)             (0.010)             (0.011)
                           -0.007            -0.034              -0.005              -0.016              0.018
Diabetes
                          (0.020)            (0.025)            (0.020)             (0.016)             (0.030)
                            0.006            -0.005              0.007               -0.002             -0.022
Cardiovascular
                          (0.010)            (0.016)            (0.010)             (0.011)             (0.016)
                           -0.010             0.003              -0.009              -0.013             -0.023
Respiratory
                          (0.023)            (0.035)            (0.022)             (0.016)             (0.026)
                           -0.051            -0.022              -0.051              -0.030              0.112
HIV
                          (0.060)            (0.078)            (0.060)             (0.058)             (0.112)
Weights                      Pop            Att x Pop             Pop                 Pop                 No
Covariates                   Yes               Yes                 Yes                  Yes               Yes




                                                         11
Table A-11: Triple Difference Estimates: Counties with high-vs-low Baseline Health
Uninsurance and Poverty Levels: Different Specifications
Table 6 in the text shows DD and triple-difference estimates for high-vs-low pre-ACA uninsurance and high-vs-low
poverty counties, from county-level regressions, with county and year FE and population weights, of ln[(amenable
mortality/100,000 persons)+1] over 2009-2016 on full-expansion dummy (=1 for Full-Expansion States in expansion
years; 0 otherwise), and covariates. Third difference is ages 55-64 versus ages 65-74. This table provides triple
difference results for principal coefficients of interest, from regressions in which we vary this specification
as follows: using ATT*population weights; and comparing all non-elderly adults (ages 18-64) to all elderly
(age 65+). Standard errors use state clusters. *, **, *** indicates statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively; significant results at 5% level or better in boldface.

                                                        Triple Difference Results
                               Main Specification           ATT x Pop Weights             Age 18-64 vs. 65+
 Subsamples                 Unins.      Poverty           Unins.       Poverty          Unins.       Poverty
                              (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)          (6)
                             0.003         0.000          -0.023        -0.018           0.004         0.012
 All Amenable
                            (0.020)      (0.013)          (0.025)       (0.016)         (0.014)       (0.012)
                            -0.020        -0.024          -0.045       -0.046**          -0.025       -0.004
 Male
                            (0.028)      (0.018)          (0.038)       (0.020)         (0.017)       (0.016)
                            0.050*      0.037***           0.024         0.025         0.054***      0.034**
 Female
                            (0.028)      (0.014)          (0.036)       (0.039)         (0.020)       (0.013)
                            -0.017        -0.015         -0.053**     -0.030***         -0.027*        0.002
 White (Not Hispanic)
                            (0.018)      (0.010)          (0.024)       (0.010)         (0.014)       (0.011)
                            -0.001       -0.073*           0.393        -0.303           -0.004     -0.083***
 Black (Not Hispanic)
                            (0.059)      (0.040)          (0.365)       (0.385)         (0.038)       (0.032)
                            -0.083        -0.005          -0.354        -0.614           -0.057        0.060
 Other
                            (0.137)      (0.107)          (0.411)       (0.512)         (0.079)       (0.074)
                             0.279         0.082           0.369        -0.004           0.056        -0.002
 Hispanic
                            (0.267)      (0.103)          (0.286)       (0.175)         (0.068)       (0.044)
                             0.003        -0.005          -0.028        -0.019           0.005         0.010
 Not Hispanic
                            (0.021)      (0.015)          (0.030)       (0.017)         (0.018)       (0.013)
 Weights                      Pop           Pop         Att x Pop     Att x Pop           Pop           Pop
 Covariates                   Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes




                                                       12
Table A-12: Synthetic Control Method: Weights on Donor States
Table shows the weights assigned to the Non-Expansion States (donor states)by the regular synthetic control method,
used in text Figure 3.
                      Non-Expansion States                  Synthetic Control Weights
                      Alabama                                           0
                      Florida                                         0.123
                      Georgia                                           0
                      Idaho                                             0
                      Kansas                                            0
                      Louisiana                                         0
                      Maine                                           0.038
                      Mississippi                                       0
                      Missouri                                        0.411
                      Nebraska                                          0
                      North Carolina                                    0
                      Oklahoma                                          0
                      South Carolina                                    0
                      South Dakota                                      0
                      Tennessee                                         0
                      Texas                                           0.023
                      Utah                                            0.041
                      Virginia                                        0.272
                      Wyoming                                         0.091




                                                       13
Figure A-1. Time Trends in Amenable Mortality for Persons Aged 18-64
Figure shows amenable mortality rate for persons age 18-64 for Full-Expansion, Substantial Expansion, Mild
Expansion, and Non-Expansion States, over 1999-2016, using county population weights. State groups are defined
in Table 1. Dashed vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.




                                                     14
Figure A-2. Synthetic Control Results for Near-Elderly Amenable Mortality
Synthetic control results for ln((amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1) for Full-Expansion States (treated as a single
treated unit) versus synthetic control drawn from Non-Expansion States, over 1999-2016. Covariates for constructing
donor pool are same as in Figure 2, plus uninsurance rate in 2013. The y-axis shows ln((amenable mortality/100,000
persons)+1) for Full-Expansion States, combined into single treated unit (using population weights), and their
synthetic control. Vertical dotted line separates pre-expansion from expansion period.


                                               DD Synthetic Controls Method
                                  Amenable Death Rate for indiviuals between 55 and 64 years old
        6.6




       6.55




        6.5




       6.45




        6.4




       6.35

              1999   2000   2001 2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008 2009   2010   2011   2012   2013    2014   2015   2016
                                                                         Year

                                        Treated Unit (Full Expansion)           Synthetic Control (Non-expansion)




                                                                    15
Figure A-3. Generalized Synthetic Control Method (gsynth)
Synthetic control results, using Xu’s (2017) generalized synthetic control (gsynth) method, for ln(amenable
mortality/100,000 + 1) for Full-Expansion States versus synthetic control for each state over 1999-2015. The donor
pool consists of every non-expansion state’s 55 to 64 year-old death rate as well as every state’s untreated 65 to 74
year old population. This design is intended to crudely approximate triple-difference results. States are equally
weighted. Covariates for constructing synthetic control are same as in the specifications with covariates in Table 2 of
the text. The y-axis shows coefficient on Full-Expansion dummy. Vertical bars around point estimates show 95%
CIs. Dashed vertical line separates pre-expansion from expansion period.




                                                         16
Figure A-4. Age Discontinuity Leads-and-Lags Results, Separately for Full-Expansion and
No-Expansion States
Graphs from leads-and-lags regressions of ln((amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1) for 55-64 versus 65-74 age
groups in Full-Expansion (Panel A) and No-Expansion States (Panel B), over 2004-2016. Covariates are listed in
paper. Regressions include county and year FE, and county-population weights. y-axis shows coefficients on lead
and lag dummies; vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals (CIs) around coefficients, using standard errors
clustered on state. Coefficient for year -3 is set to zero.
Panel B. Amenable Mortality in Full-Expansion-States




Panel B. Amenable Mortality in No Expansion-States
Figure A-5. Triple Difference Leads-and-Lags Graphs: Demographic Groups
Graphs from leads and lags regressions of triple differences for indicated subsamples, of ln((amenable
mortality/100,000 persons)+1) for persons aged 55-74, in Full-Expansion States versus No-Expansion States, over
2004-2016; the third difference is age 55-64 versus age 65-74. Covariates are same as in Figure 2. Regressions
include county and year FE, and county-population weights. y-axis shows coefficients on lead and lag dummies;
vertical bars show 95% CIs around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year -3 is set
to zero.




                                                          18
Figure A-6. Triple Difference Leads-and-Lags Graphs: By Education Level
Graphs show leads and lags regressions of triple differences for indicated subsamples, of ln((amenable
mortality/100,000 persons)+1) for persons aged 45+, in Full-Expansion States versus No-Expansion States, over 2004-
2016; the third difference is age 45-64 versus age 65+. Covariates are same as in Figure 2. Regressions include
county and year FE, and county-population weights. y-axis shows coefficients on lead and lag dummies; vertical bars
show 95% CIs around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year -3 is set to zero.
Figure A-7. Triple Difference Leads-and-Lags Graphs: By Causes of Death
Graphs show triple difference leads and lags regressions of ln[(mortality/100,000 persons)+1] among persons with
indicated primary cause of death, aged 55-74, in Full-Expansion States versus No-Expansion States, over 2004-2016;
the third difference is age 55-64 versus age 65-74. Covariates are listed in the paper. Regressions include county and
year FE, and county population weights. Y-axis shows coefficients on leads and lags dummies; vertical bars show
95% CIs around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year -3 is set to zero. Dashed
vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.




                                                         20
Figure A-8: Leads and Lags Graphs for High-vs-Low Uninsurance and Poverty
Graphs show leads and lags regressions of triple differences for high versus low uninsurance and high vs. low poverty
counties, of ln((amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1+ for persons aged 55-64, in Full-Expansion States versus No-
Expansion States, over 2004-2016. High (low) uninsurance counties are those with highest (lowest) uninsurance rates
in 2013 containing 20% of U.S. population, and similarly for high (low) poverty counties. Covariates are same as in
Figure 2. Regressions include county and year FE, and county-population weights. y-axis shows coefficients on lead
and lag dummies; vertical bars show 95% CIs around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient
for year -3 is set to zero.
Panel A. High-Uninsurance vs. Low-Uninsurance Counties




                             Panel B. High-Poverty vs. Low-Poverty Counties




                                                         21
Figure A-9. DiD and Triple Difference Leads-and-Lags Results: Amenable Mortality, with
ATT x Population Weights
Graphs from leads and lags regressions of ln[(amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1] for Full-Expansion States
versus control group of Non-Expansion States, over 2004-2016. Covariates are listed in paper. Regressions include
county and year FE, and ATT x Population weights. Y-axis shows coefficients on lead and lag dummies; vertical bars
show 95% confidence intervals (CIs) around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year
-3 is set to zero. Dashed vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.
Panel A. Amenable Mortality for Ages 55-64




Panel B. Amenable Mortality for Ages 65-74




                                                         22
Panel C. Triple difference. Leads and lags graphs for amenable mortality for persons age 55-64 in Full-
Expansion States, relative to (i) persons age 65-74 in Full-Expansion States, and (ii) persons age 55-64 in
Non-Expansion States.




                                                    23
Figure A-10. DiD and Triple Difference Leads-and-Lags Results for Total Mortality
Graphs from leads and lags regressions of ln[(all mortality/100,000 persons)+1] for Full-Expansion States versus
control group of Non-Expansion States, over 2004-2016. Covariates are listed in paper. Regressions include county
and year FE, and county-population weights. Y-axis shows coefficients on lead and lag dummies; vertical bars show
95% confidence intervals (CIs) around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year -3
is set to zero. Dashed vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.
Panel A. All Mortality for Ages 55-64




Panel B. All Mortality for Ages 65-74




                                                        24
Panel C. Triple difference. Leads and lags graphs for all mortality for persons age 55-64 in Full-
Expansion States, relative to (i) persons age 65-74 in Full-Expansion States, and (ii) persons age 55-64 in
Non-Expansion States.




                                                    25
Figure A-11. DiD and Triple Difference Leads-and-Lags Results for Non-Amenable
Mortality
Graphs from leads and lags regressions of ln[(non-amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1] for Full-Expansion States
versus control group of Non-Expansion States, over 2004-2016. Covariates are listed in paper. Regressions include
county and year FE, and county-population weights. Y-axis shows coefficients on lead and lag dummies; vertical bars
show 95% confidence intervals (CIs) around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year
-3 is set to zero. Dashed vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.
Panel A. Non-Amenable Mortality for Ages 55-64




Panel B. Non-Amenable Mortality for Ages 65-74




                                                         26
Panel C. Triple difference. Leads and lags graphs for non-amenable mortality for persons age 55-64 in
Full-Expansion States, relative to (i) persons age 65-74 in Full-Expansion States, and (ii) persons age 55-
64 in Non-Expansion States.




                                                    27
Figure A-12. Triple Difference Leads-and-Lags Graphs: Demographic Groups, with ATT
x Population Weights
Graphs from leads and lags regressions of triple differences for indicated subsamples, of ln[(amenable
mortality/100,000 persons)+1] for persons aged 55-74, in Full-Expansion States versus No-Expansion States, over
2004-2016; the third difference is age 55-64 versus age 65-74. Covariates are listed in the paper. Regressions include
county and year FE, and Att x Pop weights. Y-axis shows coefficients on lead and lag dummies; vertical bars show
95% CIs around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year -3 is set to zero. Dashed
vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.




                                                         28
Figure A-13. Triple Difference Leads-and-Lags Graphs: By Education Level, with ATT x
Population Weights
Graphs show leads and lags regressions of triple differences for indicated subsamples, of ln[(amenable
mortality/100,000 persons)+1] for persons aged 45+, in Full-Expansion States versus No-Expansion States, over 2004-
2016; the third difference is age 45-64 versus age 65+. Covariates are listed in the paper. Regressions include county
and year FE, and ATT x Population weights. y-axis shows coefficients on lead and lag dummies; vertical bars show
95% CIs around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year -3 is set to zero. Dashed
vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.




                                                         29
Figure A-14. Triple Difference Leads-and-Lags Graphs: By Causes of Death, ATT x
Population Weights
Graphs show triple difference leads and lags regressions of ln[(mortality/100,000 persons)+1] among persons with
indicated primary cause of death, aged 55-74, in Full-Expansion States versus No-Expansion States, over 2004-2016;
the third difference is age 55-64 versus age 65-74. Covariates are listed in the paper. Regressions include county and
year FE, and ATT x population weights. Y-axis shows coefficients on leads and lags dummies; vertical bars show
95% CIs around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year -3 is set to zero. Dashed
vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.




                                                         30
Figure A-15: Leads and Lags Graphs for High-vs-Low Uninsurance and Poverty, ATT x
Pop weights
Graphs show leads and lags regressions of triple differences for high versus low uninsurance and high vs. low poverty
counties, of ln[(amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1] for persons aged 55-64, in Full-Expansion States versus No-
Expansion States, over 2004-2016. High (low) uninsurance counties are those with highest (lowest) uninsurance rates
in 2013 containing 20% of U.S. population, and similarly for high (low) poverty counties. Covariates are listed in the
paper. Regressions include county and year FE, and ATT x Pop weights. Y-axis shows coefficients on lead and lag
dummies; vertical bars show 95% CIs around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for
year -3 is set to zero. Dashed vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.
Panel A. High-Uninsurance vs. Low-Uninsurance Counties




Panel B. High-Poverty vs. Low-Poverty Counties




                                                         31
Figure A-16: Leads and Lags Graphs for High-vs-Low Uninsurance and Poverty, 18-64
years
Graphs show leads and lags regressions of triple differences for high versus low uninsurance and high vs. low poverty
counties, of ln[(amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1] for persons aged 18-64, in Full-Expansion States versus No-
Expansion States, over 2004-2016. High (low) uninsurance counties are those with highest (lowest) uninsurance rates
in 2013 containing 20% of U.S. population, and similarly for high (low) poverty counties. Covariates are listed in the
paper. Regressions include county and year FE, and county population weights. Y-axis shows coefficients on lead
and lag dummies; vertical bars show 95% CIs around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient
for year -3 is set to zero. Dashed vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.
Panel A. High-Uninsurance vs. Low-Uninsurance Counties




Panel B. High-Poverty vs. Low-Poverty Counties




                                                         32
Figure A-17. DiD Leads-and-Lags Results for Ages 18-64, Amenable Mortality
Graphs from DiD leads and lags regressions of ln[(amenable mortality/100,000 persons)+1] for Full-Expansion States
versus control group of Non-Expansion States, over 2004-2016. Covariates are listed in paper. Regressions include
county and year FE, and county population weights. Y-axis shows coefficients on lead and lag dummies; vertical bars
show 95% confidence intervals (CIs) around coefficients, using standard errors clustered on state. Coefficient for year
-3 is set to zero. Dashed vertical line separate pre-expansion from expansion period.




                                                         33
Figure A-18. Power Analyses for Full Sample: State Level DD and Triple Differences
Power curves for simulated Medicaid expansion as of January 1, 2012, applied to persons aged 55-64 during pre-
treatment period (2007-2013). Graphs show power (likelihood of detecting a statistically significant effect on
amenable mortality, at the indicated confidence levels, for two-tailed test), given imposed “true” population average
effect. Curves are based on 1,000 replications of the DD (top graph) and triple difference (bottom graph) regression
models used in Table 2, with covariates. In each draw, we select 20 pseudo-treated states at random from the combined
set of 41 treated and control states, and remove a fraction of the observed deaths at random from the treated states,
where the fraction reflects an imposed treatment effect (for the entire population), and we vary the imposed treatment
effect from 0-5% in increments of 0.1%. Curves for α = .10/.05/.01/.001 correspond to 90%/95%/99%/99.9%
confidence levels, respectively. Dashed vertical line indicates minimum detectable effect at 95% confidence level,
with 80% power, for full sample (Full MDE).
                                                                                Full MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10        α =.05        α =.01     α =.001


                                                                                       Full MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                       α =.10       α =.05        α =.01     α =.001




                                                                                                   34
Figure A-19. Power Analysis for Women: DD and Triple Differences
Power curves for simulated Medicaid expansion as of January 1, 2012, applied to females aged 55-64 during pre-
treatment period (2007-2013). Graphs show power (likelihood of detecting a statistically significant effect on
amenable mortality, at the indicated confidence levels, for two-tailed test), given imposed “true” population average
effect. Curves are based on 1,000 replications of the DD (top graph) and triple difference (bottom graph) regression
models used in Table 2, with covariates. In each draw, we select 20 pseudo-treated states at random from the combined
set of 41 treated and control states, and remove a fraction of the observed deaths at random from the treated states,
where the fraction reflects an imposed treatment effect (for the entire population), and we vary the imposed treatment
effect from 0-5% in increments of 0.1%. Curves for α = .10/.05/.01/.001 correspond to 90%/95%/99%/99.9%
confidence levels, respectively. Dashed vertical lines indicate minimum detectable effects at 95% confidence level,
with 80% power, for full sample (Full MDE) and for women (Fem MDE).

                                                                          Full MDE             Fem MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                       α =.10        α =.05       α =.01      α =.001


                                                                         Full MDE       Fem MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10         α =.05       α =.01     α =.001



                                                                                                  35
Figure A-20. Power Analysis for Non-Hispanic Whites: DD and Triple Differences
Power curves for simulated Medicaid expansion as of January 1, 2012, applied to non-Hispanic whites aged 55-64
during pre-treatment period (2007-2013). Graphs show power (likelihood of detecting a statistically significant effect
on amenable mortality, at the indicated confidence levels, for two-tailed test), given imposed “true” population average
effect. Curves are based on 1,000 replications of the DD (top graph) and triple difference (bottom graph) regression
models used in Table 2, with covariates. In each draw, we select 20 pseudo-treated states at random from the combined
set of 41 treated and control states, and remove a fraction of the observed deaths at random from the treated states,
where the fraction reflects an imposed treatment effect (for the entire population), and we vary the imposed treatment
effect from 0-5% in increments of 0.1%. Curves for α = .10/.05/.01/.001 correspond to 90%/95%/99%/99.9%
confidence levels, respectively. Dashed vertical lines indicate minimum detectable effects at 95% confidence level,
with 80% power, for full sample (Full MDE) and for non-Hispanic whites (White MDE).

                                                                         Full MDE             White MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10         α =.05        α =.01    α =.001


                                                                          Full MDE            White MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                       α =.10        α =.05         α =.01    α =.001


                                                                                                   36
Figure A-21. Power Analysis for Non-Hispanic Blacks: DD and Triple Differences
Power curves for simulated Medicaid expansion as of January 1, 2012, applied to non-Hispanic blacks aged 55-64
during pre-treatment period (2007-2013). Graphs show power (likelihood of detecting a statistically significant effect
on amenable mortality, at the indicated confidence levels, for two-tailed test), given imposed “true” population average
effect. Curves are based on 1,000 replications of the DD (top graph) and triple difference (bottom graph) regression
models used in Table 2, with covariates. In each draw, we select 20 pseudo-treated states at random from the combined
set of 41 treated and control states, and remove a fraction of the observed deaths at random from the treated states,
where the fraction reflects an imposed treatment effect (for the entire population), and we vary the imposed treatment
effect from 0-5% in increments of 0.1%. Curves for α = .10/.05/.01/.001 correspond to 90%/95%/99%/99.9%
confidence levels, respectively. Dashed vertical lines indicate minimum detectable effects at 95% confidence level,
with 80% power, for full sample (Full MDE) and for non-Hispanic blacks (Black MDE).
                                                                               Full MDE                         Black MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10        α =.05      α =.01       α =.001


                                                                               Full MDE                      Black MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             1%            2%             3%           4%              5%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10        α =.05      α =.01       α =.001




                                                                                                  37
Figure A-22. Power Analysis for Hispanics: DD and Triple Differences
Power curves for simulated Medicaid expansion as of January 1, 2012, applied to non-white, non-black Hispanics
aged 55-64 during pre-treatment period (2007-2013). Graphs show power (likelihood of detecting a statistically
significant effect on amenable mortality, at the indicated confidence levels, for two-tailed test), given imposed “true”
population average effect. Curves are based on 1,000 replications of the DD (top graph) and triple difference (bottom
graph) regression models used in Table 2, with covariates. In each draw, we select 20 pseudo-treated states at random
from the combined set of 41 treated and control states, and remove a fraction of the observed deaths at random from
the treated states, where the fraction reflects an imposed treatment effect (for the entire population), and we vary the
imposed treatment effect from 0-5% in increments of 0.1%. Curves for α = .10/.05/.01/.001 correspond to
90%/95%/99%/99.9% confidence levels, respectively. Dashed vertical line indicates minimum detectable effect at
95% confidence level, with 80% power for full sample (Full MDE) and for Hispanics (Hispanic MDE).


                                                               Full MDE                     Hispanic MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%                3%                 6%                9%               12%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10       α =.05       α =.01       α =.001


                                                               Full MDE                                    Hispanic MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%                3%                 6%                9%               12%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10       α =.05       α =.01       α =.001




                                                                                                    38
Figure A-23. Power Analysis for Low Education Subsample: DD Design
Power curves for simulated Medicaid expansion as of January 1, 2012, applied to those without a high school
education aged 45-64 during pre-treatment period (2007-2013). Demographic data on education is available only for
broad age groups (the best available was ages 45-64) so we present only DD and not triple difference results. Graphs
show power (likelihood of detecting a statistically significant effect on amenable mortality, at the indicated confidence
levels, for two-tailed test), given imposed “true” population average effect. Curves are based on 1,000 replications of
the DD regression model used in Table 2, with covariates. In each draw, we select 20 pseudo-treated states at random
from the combined set of 41 treated and control states, and remove a fraction of the observed deaths at random from
the treated states, where the fraction reflects an imposed treatment effect (for the entire population), and we vary the
imposed treatment effect from 0-5% in increments of 0.1%. Curves for α = .10/.05/.01/.001 correspond to
90%/95%/99%/99.9% confidence levels, respectively. Dashed vertical lines indicates minimum detectable effect at
95% confidence level, with 80% power for full sample (Full MDE) and for low-education subsample (Low Educ.
MDE).


                                                      Full MDE                                                Low Educ. MDE
   Percent with Significant Treatment Effect




                                               100%


                                               80%


                                               60%


                                               40%


                                               20%


                                                0%
                                                      0%             3%            6%             9%           12%            15%
                                                           Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Amenable Mortality)

                                                                      α =.10       α =.05       α =.01       α =.001




                                                                                         39
Figure A-24. Uninsurance Rate by Single Year of Age
Source: Authors’ calculations from American Community Survey 2009, 2013 and 2015




                                                   40
Figure A-25. Difference in Uninsurance Rate from 2012 to 2016 by Expansion Status

          Histogram of Difference in County % Insured from 2012 to 2016 by Expansion Status
         Density

    .2




   .15




    .1




   .05




    0
         -10                       0                            10                    20

                                       Expansion        Non-Expansion




                                                   41
Figure A-26. Changes in mortality by single year of age
Mean health care amenable death rate per 100,000 by single year of age are reported for both expansion and non-
expansion states before and after expansion. Difference across time (pre-2014 to post-2014 for non-expansion states;
and pre-expansion to post-expansion in expansion states) illustrate that the death rate of each single year of age in
expansion states have reduced relative to each analogous group in non-expansion states. The differences across age
groups (55-64 v 65-74) illustrate that this improvement was not limited to those eligible for Medicaid. That is, the
improvement occurred for Medicare enrollees as well. Thus even with disaggregated data by age, we do not find
conclusive evidence of a Medicaid expansion impact on the mortality rate for the near elderly (55-64).
Source: Author calculations from restricted access mortality files.



            Mean healthcare amenable death rate per 100k
    2000




    1500




    1000




      500




        0
            55                       60                        65                        70                      75
                                                               Age

                                   Non-expansion, pre-2014            Non-expansion, post-2014
                                   Expansion, pre-expansion           Expansion, post-expansion




                                                          42
Appendix References
Abadie, Alberto, Diamond, Alexis and Hainmueller, Jens. 2010. Synthetic control methods for
      comparative case studies: estimating the effect of California’s tobacco control program.
      Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105 (490): 493-505.
Baicker, Katherine, Sarah Taubman, Heidi Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph
       Newhouse, Eric Schneider, Bill Wright, Alan Zaslavsky, and Amy Finkelstein, 2013. The
       Oregon Experiment – Effects of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes, 368 (18) New England
       Journal of Medicine 1713-1722.
Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata.
      2017. Impacts of the Affordable Care Act on health insurance coverage in Medicaid
      expansion and non-expansion states. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 36,
      No. 1, 178–210
Goldman, Dana, Jayantha Bhattacharya, McCaffrey DF, Duan N, Arleen Leibowitz et al. 2001.
      The effect of insurance on mortality in an HIV+ population in care. J. Am. Stat. Assoc.
      96(455):883–894
Finkelstein, Amy and Robin McKnight. 2008. What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of
       Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending, 92 Journal of Public
       Economics 1644-1668.
Soni, Aparna, 2016. Synthetic Control Method with Multiple Treatment Units , unpublished
       research note.
Soni, Aparna, John Cawley, Lindsay Sabik, and Kosali Simon. 2018a. Effect of Medicaid
       Expansions of 2014 on Overall and Early-Stage Cancer Diagnoses. American Journal of
       Public Health 108, no.2. Feb 1) pp.216-218.
Soni, A., K. Simon, L. Sabik, and S. Sommers. 2018b Changes in Insurance Coverage Among
       Cancer Patients Under the Affordable Care Act . JAMA Oncology, Jan 2018 Vol 4 No 1
       p.122.
Xu, Y., 2017. Generalized Synthetic Control Method: Causal Inference with Interactive Fixed
       Effects, Political Analysis 25: 57-76.




                                             43
   Example Simulated Power Analysis from Black,
      Hollingsworth, Nunes, and Simon (2019)
                                          Alex Hollingsworth
                                           3 January 2019

This is an example of the type of simulated power analysis done in Black et al. (2019). This example
is done with publicly available data. You can find the code, data, and output for this example hosted
on Alex’s GitHub page https://github.com/hollina/health_insurance_and_mortality.

This set-up is designed to mimic a typical DiD setting. Here we will compare 23 randomly chosen
treated states to 18 randomly chosen control states. We will impose a series of treatment effects that
gradually increase in magnitude and report whether or not these imposed treatment effects are
detectable. We will vary the set of randomly chosen treated states. We will calculate the minimum
detectable effect size at various power and significance levels. We will also explore a measure of
believability, which is based upon Gelman and Carlin (2014) measures of sign and magnitude error.

In this simple design we used 5 years of pre-expansion data and 3 years of post-expansion data.
Both state and year fixed-effects are included. Regressions are weighted by state-population and
standard errors will be clustered at the state-level. The dependent variable will be the natural log of
the all-cause non-elderly mortality rate per 100,000.

This code is simply an example of our simulated power analysis and is not an attempt to identify the
impact of Medicaid expansion on mortality. Importantly, changing the research design (e.g. adding
control variables, shifting to the county-level, changing the cause of death, using propensity score
weights, or using a synthetic control estimator) will impact power. Our approach could be easily
modified to accommodate any of these alternative research designs. Any improvements to the
research design will very likely increase power and decrease the minimum detectable effect size.


Initial Set-up
Here we will set-up the power analysis and choose various required parameters/options.

First we clear the memory

. clear all


Choose the number of datasets we want to compose each estimate. For example, if we choose 2,
then two sets of psuedo-treated states will be drawn and the power analysis will be conducted twice
for each effect size; once for each set of pseudo-treated states and effect size pair.

. local max_dataset_number           = 1000


Pick the number of psuedo-post-expansion years
. local number_post_years = 3
. local last_year = 2013-`number_post_years'+1


Set number of psuedo-pre-expansion years

. local number_pre_years = 5
. local first_year = `last_year'-`number_pre_years'


Set effect size step and max value in percent terms (0-1)

. local step_size = .0025 // Quarter of a percent
. local end_value = .05 // End at 5%


Create a local macro from the choices above

. local step_macro
. forvalues x = 0(`step_size')`end_value' {
  2.     local step_macro `step_macro' `x'
  3. }


Determine the length of the macro above, so percent complete can be displayed later

. local num :       word count `step_macro'
. local num = `num'


Calculate the max number of rows so percent complete can be displayed later

. local max_row = `max_dataset_number'*`num'


Create excel sheet to store results from simulation. Note: I have $dropbox set via my profile.do to
point to my Dropbox folder.

. putexcel set
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public_dat
> a_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx", replace


Initialize cells names in excel sheet

. putexcel A1 = ("dependent_variable")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved
. putexcel B1 = ("controls")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved
. putexcel C1 = ("weight")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved
. putexcel D1 = ("treated_states")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved
. putexcel E1 = ("effect_size")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved
. putexcel F1 = ("deaths_reduced_per_year")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved
. putexcel G1 = ("total_deaths_reduced")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved
. putexcel H1 = ("coef")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved
. putexcel I1 = ("se")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved
. putexcel J1 = ("df")
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx saved



Import and clean mortality data
Import data extracted from CDC wonder. All cause mortality 0-64 by state and year. The data were
gathered on 1 January 2019.

. import delimited
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/data/Multiple Cause of Death, 1999-2017.txt"
(8 vars, 1,077 obs)


Drop total variables
. drop if missing(year)
(108 observations deleted)


Drop unneeded variables from CDC Wonder

. drop notes


Drop years after expansion

. drop if year>=2014
(204 observations deleted)


Drop if year before first desired year

. drop if year<`first_year'
(357 observations deleted)


Change state name to be state postal code

. replace state ="AL" if state=="Alabama"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="AK" if state=="Alaska"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="AZ" if state=="Arizona"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="AR" if state=="Arkansas"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="CA" if state=="California"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="CO" if state=="Colorado"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="CT" if state=="Connecticu "
(0 real changes made)
. replace state ="DE" if state=="Delaware"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="DC" if state=="District of Columbia"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="FL" if state=="Florida"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="GA" if state=="Georgia"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="HI" if state=="Hawaii"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="ID" if state=="Idaho"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="IL" if state=="Illinois"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="IN" if state=="Indiana"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="IA" if state=="Iowa"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="KS" if state=="Kansas"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="KY" if state=="Kentucky"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="LA" if state=="Louisiana"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="ME" if state=="Maine"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="MD" if state=="Maryland"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="MA" if state=="Massachusetts"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="MI" if state=="Michigan"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="MN" if state=="Minnesota"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="MS" if state=="Mississippi"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="MO" if state=="Missouri"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="MT" if state=="Montana"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="NE" if state=="Nebraska"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="NV" if state=="Nevada"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="NH" if state=="New Hampshire"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="NJ" if state=="New Jersey"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="NM" if state=="New Mexico"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="NY" if state=="New York"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="NC" if state=="North Carolina"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="ND" if state=="North Dakota"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="OH" if state=="Ohio"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="OK" if state=="Oklahoma"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="OR" if state=="Oregon"
(8 real changes made)
. replace state ="PA" if state=="Pennsylvania"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="RI" if state=="Rhode Island"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="SC" if state=="South Carolina"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="SD" if state=="South Dakota"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="TN" if state=="Tennessee"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="TX" if state=="Texas"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="UT" if state=="Utah"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="VT" if state=="Vermont"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="VA" if state=="Virginia"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="WA" if state=="Washington"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="WV" if state=="West Virginia"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="WI" if state=="Wisconsin"
(8 real changes made)

. replace state ="WY" if state=="Wyoming"
(8 real changes made)


Add expansion status to each state

. gen expansion4=0
. label define expansion4 0 "0. Non-expansion" 1 "1. Full expansion" ///
>     2 "2. Mild expansion" 3 "3. Substantial expansion"
. label values expansion4 expansion4
. local full AZ AR CO IL IA KY MD NV NM NJ ND OH OR RI WV   WA
. foreach x in `full' {
  2.     replace expansion4=1 if state=="`x'"
  3. }
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
. local mild DE DC MA NY VT

. foreach x in `mild' {
  2.     replace expansion4=2 if state=="`x'"
  3. }
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)

. local medium CA CT HI MN WI
. foreach x in `medium' {
  2.     replace expansion4=3 if state=="`x'"
  3. }
(8 real changes made)
(0 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)
(8 real changes made)


Account for mid-year expansions

. replace expansion4=1 if state=="MI"   //MI expanded in April 2014
(8 real changes made)
. replace expansion4=1 if state=="NH"   //NH expanded in August 2014
(8 real changes made)
. replace expansion4=1 if state=="PA"   //PA expanded in Jan 2015
(8 real changes made)
. replace expansion4=1 if state=="IN"   //IN expanded in Feb 2015
(8 real changes made)
. replace expansion4=1 if state=="AK"   //AK expanded in Sept 2015
(8 real changes made)
. replace expansion4=1 if state=="MT"   //MT expanded in Jan 2016
(8 real changes made)
. replace expansion4=1 if state=="LA"          //LA expanded in July 2016
(8 real changes made)


Keep only full or non-expansion states

. drop if expansion4==2 | expansion4==3
(72 observations deleted)


Store number of expansion states

. distinct statecode        if expansion4==1
           │        Observations
           │      total   distinct
───────────┼──────────────────────
 statecode │        184         23

. scalar number_expand = r(ndistinct)



Save data to be called in power analysis
Save temporary dataset to be called

. compress
  variable expansion4 was float now byte
  variable population was double now long
  variable state was str20 now str11
  (5,376 bytes saved)
. save
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public_data_exampl
> e/temp/temp_data.dta", replace
(note: file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level
> _public_data_example/temp/temp_data.dta not found)
file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/temp/temp_data.dta saved



Run simulated power analysis
Start a timer to show how long this takes

. timer on 1


Set row number for excel sheet
. local row =2


Run a loop. Performing the power analysis once for each of the desired number of datasets. The
following output is supressed for the html document even though it runs. This is to ensure the
document is not too long.

. forvalues dataset_number = 1(1)`max_dataset_number'    {
  2.     // Display the dataset number
.     qui di "`dataset_number'"
.     // Open main dataset for analysis
.     qui use
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public_data
> _example/temp/temp_data.dta", clear
.     // Set seed for reproducibility. We want the seed to be the same within
> a dataset.
.     qui local rand_seed = 1234 + `dataset_number'
  5.     qui set seed   `rand_seed'
.
////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
> ///////
>     // Generate a random variable for each state, then the first N in rank
w
> ill be
.     // considered expansion states. Where N is # of expansion states
.     qui bysort statecode: gen random_variable = runiform() if _n==1
  7.     qui bysort statecode: carryforward random_variable, replace
.     // Rank the states
.     qui egen rank = group(random_variable)
.     // Given this random ordering of states, assign expansion status to the
> # set above
.     qui gen expansion = 0
 10.     qui replace expansion=1 if rank <=number_expand
.     // Do this same thing for the treatment variable
.     qui gen treatment = 0
 12.     qui replace treatment = 1 if expansion==1 & year>=`last_year'
.     // Create Post variable
.     qui gen post = 0
 14.     qui replace post =1 if year>=`last_year'
.     // Store basic data from regression in excel sheet
.     qui putexcel A`row' = ("all_deaths")
 16.     qui putexcel B`row' = ("no controls")
 17.     qui putexcel C`row' = ("population")
.     // Add list of states to excel sheet
.     qui capture drop test
 19.     qui gen test = ""
.     qui levelsof state if treatment ==1, local(treated_states)
 21.     foreach x in `treated_states' {
 22.         qui replace test = test + ", " + "`x'"
 23.     }
.     qui local state_list `=test[1]'
 25.     qui putexcel D`row' = ("`state_list'")
.     // Generate a death rate with no effect
.     qui gen death_rate = (deaths/population)*100000
.     // Gen order variable
.     qui gen order = _n
.
////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
> /////
>     // Create a reduced deaths variable by a given percentage using the
bino
> mial for each effect size
.     qui local counter = 1
.     foreach x in `step_macro' {
 30.         qui gen reduced_deaths_`counter' = 0
 31.         qui replace reduced_deaths_`counter' = rbinomial(deaths,`x') if
t
> reatment==1
 32.         qui replace reduced_deaths_`counter'=0 if
missing(reduced_deaths_
> `counter')
.         qui gen deaths_`counter' = deaths - reduced_deaths_`counter'
 34.         qui replace deaths_`counter'=0 if missing(deaths_`counter')
.         qui gen death_rate_`counter'=
ln((deaths_`counter'/population)*10000
> 0+1)
.         // Store the effect size in excel sheet
.         qui putexcel E`row' = (`x')
.         // Store the number of reduced deaths in excel sheet
.         qui sum reduced_deaths_`counter' if year>=`last_year'
 38.         qui putexcel F`row' = (`r(sum)'/`number_post_years')
 39.         qui putexcel G`row' = (`r(sum)')
.         // Move the row and counter one forward
.         qui local counter = `counter' + 1
 41.         qui local row = `row' + 1
 42.     }
.     // Move the row counter back to the top
.     qui local row = `row' - `num'
.
////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
> /////
>     // Run regression of treatment on reduced deaths variable for each
effec
> t size
.     // Reset the counter
.     qui local counter = 1
.     forvalues counter = 1(1)`num' {
.         qui reghdfe death_rate_`counter' ///
>             treatment ///
>             i.post i.expansion ///
>             [aweight=population] ///
>             , absorb(statecode year) vce(cluster statecode)
.         // Store results
.         qui putexcel H`row' =(_b[treatment])
 48.         qui putexcel I`row' = (_se[treatment])
 49.         qui putexcel J`row' =(`e(df_r)')
.         // Display Percent Complete
.         qui di
"////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
> ///////////"
 51.         qui di "///////////////////////////Percent
Complete//////////////
> /////////////"
 52.         qui di ((`row'-1)/`max_row')*100
 53.         qui di
"/////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
> //////////////"
.         qui local row = `row' + 1
 55.         qui local counter = `counter' + 1
 56.     }
 57. }


Stop timer
. timer off 1
. timer list
   1: 79905.50 /                  1 =   79905.5020


Erase temporary dataset used for analysis

. erase
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public_data_examp
> le/temp/temp_data.dta"



Import and clean results from simulated power
analysis
Import simulation results

. import excel
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public_dat
> a_example/output/power_simulation_results.xlsx", sheet("Sheet1") firstrow
cl
> ear


Calculate z-scores and p-values

. gen z_score = abs(((coef - 0)/se))
. gen p_value =       2*ttail(df,z_score)


Calculate indicator for power threshold for each observation

. gen power_10 = 0
. gen power_05 = 0
. gen power_01 = 0
. gen power_001 = 0
. replace power_10 = 1 if p_value<= .1
(12,536 real changes made)
. replace power_05 = 1 if p_value<= .05
(11,065 real changes made)
. replace power_01 = 1 if p_value<= .01
(8,209 real changes made)
. replace power_001 = 1 if p_value<= .001
(4,872 real changes made)
Calculate a count variable

. gen count = 1


Make sign error

. gen s_error_10 = 0
. replace s_error_10 =1 if power_10==1 & coef>=0
(174 real changes made)
. gen s_error_05 = 0
. replace s_error_05 =1 if power_05==1 & coef>=0
(85 real changes made)
. gen s_error_01 = 0

. replace s_error_01 =1 if power_01==1 & coef>=0
(17 real changes made)

. gen s_error_001 = 0
. replace s_error_001 =1 if power_001==1 & coef>=0
(0 real changes made)
. replace s_error_10 =. if effect_size==0
(1,000 real changes made, 1,000 to missing)
. replace s_error_05 =. if effect_size==0
(1,000 real changes made, 1,000 to missing)
. replace s_error_01 =. if effect_size==0
(1,000 real changes made, 1,000 to missing)
. replace s_error_001 =. if effect_size==0
(1,000 real changes made, 1,000 to missing)


Make magnitude error

. gen m_error = abs(coef/effect_size)
(1,000 missing values generated)
. gen m_error_10 = m_error
(1,000 missing values generated)
. replace m_error_10 = . if power_10==0
(6,628 real changes made, 6,628 to missing)
. gen m_error_05 = m_error
(1,000 missing values generated)
. replace m_error_05 = . if power_05==0
(8,030 real changes made, 8,030 to missing)
. gen m_error_01 = m_error
(1,000 missing values generated)
. replace m_error_01 = . if power_01==0
(10,820 real changes made, 10,820 to missing)
. gen m_error_001 = m_error
(1,000 missing values generated)
. replace m_error_001 = . if power_001==0
(14,130 real changes made, 14,130 to missing)


Generate Beliveabilitiy

. gen believe_10 = 0
. replace believe_10 = 1 if power_10 ==1 & s_error_10==0 & m_error_10<=2
(11,081 real changes made)
. gen believe_05 = 0
. replace believe_05 = 1 if power_05 ==1 & s_error_05==0 & m_error_05<=2
(9,934 real changes made)
. gen believe_01 = 0
. replace believe_01 = 1 if power_01 ==1 & s_error_01==0 & m_error_01<=2
(7,502 real changes made)
. gen believe_001 = 0
. replace believe_001 = 1 if power_001 ==1 & s_error_001==0 & m_error_001<=2
(4,519 real changes made)


Collapse by effect size to calculate power, % sign error, average magnitude error and % believable

. collapse (sum) count *power_* *s_error_* *believe_* (mean) *m_error_*,
by(ef
> fect_size)


Generate sign error ratio, rather than raw count

. replace s_error_10 = (s_error_10/power_10)*100
(5 real changes made)
. replace s_error_05 = (s_error_05/power_05)*100
(4 real changes made)
. replace s_error_01 = (s_error_01/power_01)*100
(2 real changes made)
. replace s_error_001 = (s_error_001/power_001)*100
(0 real changes made)
. replace s_error_10 = . if effect_size==0
(1 real change made, 1 to missing)
. replace s_error_05 = . if effect_size==0
(1 real change made, 1 to missing)
. replace s_error_01 = . if effect_size==0
(1 real change made, 1 to missing)
. replace s_error_001 = . if effect_size==0
(1 real change made, 1 to missing)


Make power and believability out of 100

. ds *power* *believe_*
power_10     power_01              believe_10    believe_01
power_05     power_001             believe_05    believe_001
. foreach x in `r(varlist)' {
  2.     replace `x' = (`x'/count)*100
  3. }
(20 real changes made)
(20 real changes made)
(20 real changes made)
(20 real changes made)
(16 real changes made)
(15 real changes made)
(14 real changes made)
(13 real changes made)


Make effect size 0-100

. replace effect_size=effect_size*100
(19 real changes made)



Plot power curves
First determine closest point where the power_05 hits 80%

. gen distance_from_80 = (power_05-80)^2
. sort distance_from_80
. sum effect_size in 1
    Variable │        Obs        Mean    Std. Dev.       Min        Max
─────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 effect_size │          1           3           .          3          3
. local mde=`r(mean)'


Add label to graph with this MDE

. capture drop mde_label
. gen mde_label = ""
(20 missing values generated)
. set obs `=_N+1'
number of observations (_N) was 20, now 21
. replace mde_label = "MDE" in `=_N'
variable mde_label was str1 now str3
(1 real change made)
. replace effect_size = `mde' in `=_N'
(1 real change made)
. capture drop full_power
. gen full_power = 102.5


Plot power curve

. sort effect_size
. twoway connected power_10 effect_size , lpattern("l") color(sea)
msymbol(no
> ne) mlabcolor(sea) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(11) ///
>     || connected power_05 effect_size , lpattern(".._") color(turquoise)
m
> symbol(none) mlabcolor(turquoise) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || connected power_01 effect_size , lpattern("_") color(vermillion)
msy
> mbol(none) mlabcolor(vermillion) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || connected power_001 effect_size , lpattern("l") color(black)
msymb
> ol(none) mlabcolor(black) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || scatter full_power effect_size , mlabel(mde_label) msymbol(none)
mlab
> pos(12) mlabsize(3.5) ///
>         xline(`mde', lpattern(dash) lcolor(gs3) lwidth(.5) noextend) ///
>         ytitle("Percent with Significant Treatment Effect", size(4)) ///
>         xtitle("Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Non-Elderly
> Mortality)", size(4) ) ///
>         xscale(r(0 5)) ///
>         xlabel(, nogrid labsize(4)) ///
>         ylabel(0 "0%" 20 "20%" 40 "40%" 60 "60%" 80 "80%" 100 "100%",gmax
n
> oticks labsize(4)) ///
>         legend(order( 1 2 3 4) pos(6) col(4) ///
>             label(1 "{&alpha} =.10") label(2 "{&alpha} =.05") ///
>             label(3 "{&alpha} =.01") label(4 "{&alpha} =.001") size(4)) ///
>             title("Simulated Power Analysis; DD, 0-64, All Cause Mortality"
> " ", size(4))
.     graph export
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/scripts/markdown/simulated_power_analysis.png", replace
width
> (800)
(file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_publi
> c_data_example/scripts/markdown/simulated_power_analysis.png written in PNG
> format)
Simulated Power Analysis; DD, 0-64, All Cause Mortality

Plot sign error

. sum s_error_10
    Variable │        Obs        Mean    Std. Dev.       Min        Max
─────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
  s_error_10 │         19     2.88117    7.122931          0   27.21893

. gen    s_error_label= 62.5
. twoway connected s_error_10 effect_size , lpattern("l") color(sea)
msymbol(
> none) mlabcolor(sea) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(11) ///
>     || connected s_error_05 effect_size , lpattern(".._")
color(turquoise)
> msymbol(none) mlabcolor(turquoise) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || connected s_error_01 effect_size , lpattern("_") color(vermillion)
m
> symbol(none) mlabcolor(vermillion) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || connected s_error_001 effect_size , lpattern("l") color(black)
msy
> mbol(none) mlabcolor(black) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || scatter s_error_label effect_size , mlabel(mde_label) msymbol(none)
> mlabpos(12) mlabsize(4) ///
>     ytitle("Percent", size(4)) ///
>         xtitle("Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Non-Elderly
> Mortality)", size(4)) ///
>         legend(size(4) order(1 2 3 4) pos(6) col(4) label(1 "{&alpha}
=.10")
> label(2 "{&alpha} =.05") label(3 "{&alpha} =.01") label(4 "{&alpha}
=.001")
> ) ///
>         xscale(r(0 5)) ///
>         xline(`mde', lpattern(dash) lcolor(grey) noextend) ///
>         xlabel( , nogrid labsize(4)) ///
>         ylabel(0 "0%" 20 "20%" 40 "40%" 60 "60%",gmax noticks labsize(4))
/
> //
>         title("Likelihood of Significant Coefficient Having Wrong Sign"
"DD,
> 0-64, All Cause Mortality" " ", size(4))
(note: named style grey not found in class color, default attributes used)
.     graph export
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_public
> _data_example/scripts/markdown/s_error.png", replace width(800)
(file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_publi
> c_data_example/scripts/markdown/s_error.png written in PNG format)




Likelihood of Significant Coefficient Having Wrong Sign DD, 0-64, All Cause Mortality

Plot magnitude error

. sum m_error_001
    Variable │        Obs        Mean    Std. Dev.       Min        Max
─────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 m_error_001 │         19    2.851967    2.875496   1.114921   13.03762
. gen    height= `r(max)'*1.05
. twoway connected m_error_10 effect_size , lpattern("l") color(sea)
msymbol(
> none) mlabcolor(sea) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(11) ///
>     || connected m_error_05 effect_size , lpattern(".._") color(turquoise)
> msymbol(none) mlabcolor(turquoise) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || connected m_error_01 effect_size , lpattern("_") color(vermillion)
ms
> ymbol(none) mlabcolor(vermillion) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || connected m_error_001 effect_size , lpattern("l") color(black)
msym
> bol(none) mlabcolor(black) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || scatter height effect_size , mlabel(mde_label) msymbol(none)
mlabpos
> (12) mlabsize(4) ///
>     ytitle("Mean abs(sig coef/imposed effect)", size(4)) ///
>         xtitle("Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Non-Elderly
> Mortality)", size(4)) ///
>         legend(size(4) order(1 2 3 4) pos(6) col(4) label(1 "{&alpha}
=.10")
> label(2 "{&alpha} =.05") label(3 "{&alpha} =.01") label(4 "{&alpha}
=.001")
> ) ///
>         xscale(r(0 5)) ///
>         xline(`mde', lpattern(dash) lcolor(grey) noextend) ///
>         xlabel(, nogrid labsize(4)) ///
>         ylabel(, gmax noticks labsize(4)) ///
>         title("Exaggeration Ratio; DD, 0-64, All Cause Mortality" " ",
size
> (4))
(note: named style grey not found in class color, default attributes used)
.         graph export
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_pu
> blic_data_example/scripts/markdown/m_error.png", replace width(800)
(file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_publi
> c_data_example/scripts/markdown/m_error.png written in PNG format)
Exaggeration Ratio; DD, 0-64, All Cause Mortality

Plot believability

. twoway connected believe_10 effect_size , lpattern("l") color(sea)
msymbol(
> none) mlabcolor(sea) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(11) ///
>     || connected believe_05 effect_size , lpattern(".._") color(turquoise)
> msymbol(none) mlabcolor(turquoise) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || connected believe_01 effect_size , lpattern("_") color(vermillion)
ms
> ymbol(none) mlabcolor(vermillion) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || connected believe_001 effect_size , lpattern("l") color(black)
msym
> bol(none) mlabcolor(black) mlabel("") mlabsize(3) mlabpos(3) ///
>     || scatter full_power effect_size , mlabel(mde_label) msymbol(none)
mlab
> pos(12) mlabsize(4) ///
>     xtitle("Imposed Population Effect (Percent Reduction in Non-Elderly
Mort
> ality)", size(4)) ///
>         legend(size(4) order(1 2 3 4) pos(6) col(4) label(1 "{&alpha}
=.10")
> label(2 "{&alpha} =.05") label(3 "{&alpha} =.01") label(4 "{&alpha}
=.001")
> ) ///
>                 ytitle("Probability", size(4)) ///
>         xscale(r(0 5)) ///
>         xline(`mde', lpattern(dash) lcolor(grey) noextend) ///
>         xlabel(, nogrid labsize(4)) ///
>         ylabel(0 "0%" 20 "20%" 40 "40%" 60 "60%" 80 "80%" 100 "100%",gmax
n
> oticks labsize(4)) ///
>         title("Likelihood of believable coefficient; DD, 0-64, All Cause
Mor
> tality" " ", size(4))
(note: named style grey not found in class color, default attributes used)
.     graph export
"$dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_publi
> c_data_example/scripts/markdown/believable.png", replace width(800)
(file
/Users/hollinal/Dropbox/health_insurance_and_mortality/state_level_publi
> c_data_example/scripts/markdown/believable.png written in PNG format)




Likelihood of believable coefficient; DD, 0-64, All Cause Mortality


Conclusion
Using this simple example, we can see that for this simple research design the minimum mortality
reduction that is believable, well-powered, and significant at the 5% level is around 3%. Changing
the research design (e.g. adding control variables, shifting to the county-level, changing the cause of
death) would certainly impact power.

This simple research design is a DiD comparing 23 random treated states to 18 random control
states. In this simple design we used 5 years of pre-expansion data and 3 years of post-expansion
data. Both state and year fixed-effects were included. Regressions were weighted by state-
population and standard errors were clustered at the state-level. The dependent variable was the
natural log of the all-cause non-elderly mortality rate per 100,000.
