NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NORMS, ENFORCEMENT, AND TAX EVASION
Timothy Besley
Anders Jensen
Torsten Persson
Working Paper 25575
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25575

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

We are grateful to Juan Pablo Atal, Pierre Bachas, Richard Blundell, Tom Cunningham, Gabriel
Zucman, and a number of seminar participants for helpful comments, to Dave Donaldson, Greg
Kullman and Gordon Ferrier for help with data, and to the ERC, the ESRC, Martin Newson and
the Torsten and Ragnar Söderberg Foundations for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Timothy Besley, Anders Jensen, and Torsten Persson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Norms, Enforcement, and Tax Evasion
Timothy Besley, Anders Jensen, and Torsten Persson
NBER Working Paper No. 25575
February 2019
JEL No. H26,H3
ABSTRACT
This paper studies individual and social motives in tax evasion. We build a simple dynamic
model that incorporates these motives and their interaction. The social motives underpin the role
of norms and is the source of the dynamics that we study. Our empirical analysis exploits the
adoption in 1990 of a poll tax to fund local government in the UK, which led to widespread
evasion. The evidence is consistent with the model's main predictions on the dynamics of evasion.

Timothy Besley
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE ENGLAND
T.Besley@lse.ac.uk
Anders Jensen
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
anders_jensen@hks.harvard.edu

Torsten Persson
Torsten and Ragnar Soderberg Chair in Economic Sci
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and NBER
Torsten.Persson@iies.su.se

“A widespread view among tax scholars holds that law enforcement does not
explain why people pay taxes. ... Yet large numbers of Americans pay ... Some
scholars therefore conclude that the explanation for the tendency to pay taxes
must be that people are obeying a norm ...”Posner (2000, p. 1782)

1

Introduction

The size of government in today’s advanced economies could not be sustained without high
…scal capacity. This capacity is built not just on material motives (detection and punishment), but on intrinsic motives that curb the desire to cheat. When compliance is a norm,
taxpayers may also worry about the reputational cost among peers of being caught evading.
But the interactions between material, intrinsic and social drivers of tax compliance remain
poorly understood. Policy-makers need to know the robustness of tax-compliance norms and
whether such social motives erode or persist in the wake of compliance shocks. This paper
looks as this question, theoretically and empirically.
Theoretically, we propose a model where peoples’s tax-compliance motives re‡ect public
enforcement (detection and …nes), intrinsic motivation, and how compliance a¤ects their
reputation among peers. The third motive means that interactions across taxpayers can
micro-found social motives in tax compliance. We use this model to study the equilibrium
dynamics of social motives and tax evasion. With our empirical application in mind, we
predict the impulse responses of tax compliance to a temporary intrinsic-motivation shock.
Empirically, we exploit the poll tax introduced by Margaret Thatcher’s government in
the early 1990s, which shocked compliance in a low-evasion society. The poll tax was levied
equally on all voting-age citizens in each local jurisdiction (council) of the U.K. Deemed
unfair by many, it triggered mass evasion, which provoked restoration of a property-based
tax system after only three years. Because compliance broke down heterogeneously across
councils, the poll-tax reform can be thought of as an array of (council-speci…c) temporary
shocks to the intrinsic motive to pay. The evasion patterns observed after this episode gives
persuasive evidence on the predictions of our model.
Theory Section II formulates our model that builds on insights from three strands of
research. The traditional economic literature starts with Allingham and Sandmo (1972),
who examine the gamble of citizens who cheat on their taxes, given existing audit-detection
probabilities and legal penalties. Slemrod (2007) provides a useful overview of the issues
and research on tax compliance. In the work on intrinsic motives for tax compliance, Gordon
(1989) refers to “individual morality”, Cowell (1990) to “stigma”, Erard and Feinstein (1994)
to feelings of “guilt and shame”, and Torgler (2007) to “tax morale”. Luttmer and Singhal

2

(2014) reviews this literature.
Compliance may also re‡ect social interactions, as in Posner’s opening quote. Although
concrete applications to tax compliance are few, social scientists have developed general
approaches to social norms. Research in social psychology –started by experiments in Asch
(1955) –suggests a clear desire to conform with others.1 Some scholars put those desires
directly into preferences – e.g., Akerlof and Yellen’s (1990) model of e¢ ciency wages as a
reciprocal norm of fair e¤ort for a fair wage.2 That social images and peer pressures do
in‡uence behavior is con…rmed in a range of …eld experiments reviewed in Burzstyn and
Jensen (2017).
In our simple tax-compliance model, individuals are motivated to pay by the threat of
punishment, intrinsic motivation, and adherence to a social norm. Compliance depends on
the lagged population fraction of evaders, because evasion rates are plausibly observed only
with a lag. Evasion follows a simple dynamic process, which converges to a steady state
under natural conditions.
We propose a speci…c micro-foundation based on Benabou and Tirole’s (2011) model of
laws and norms.3 Two extensions of their model …t our context: lagged and imperfect observability of evasion. Norms matter because tax payers care about their reputation should
evasion be seen by others.4 The resulting framework does not have to assume a priori whether
social motives crowd in (complement) or crowd out (substitute) individual motives. But if
paying taxes is the modal act –as in our data –we get crowding in, and the di¤erence equation characterizing the time-path of evasion has a positive root. It thus predicts monotone
convergence after a shock to the intrinsic motivation to pay, which is how we interpret the
introduction of the poll tax.5
Data Section III applies the model to new data for tax evasion in the 346 councils of
England and Wales for 30 years (1980-2009). This panel data shows that average tax evasion
across councils before the poll tax was below 3 percent with little cross-sectional variance.
The poll-tax period 1990-92 saw average evasion rise abruptly to between 10 and 15
percent with large dispersion across councils. This dispersion can only partly be attributed
to di¤erent demographic, economic and political compositions of councils. We interpret the
1

For further work in psychology, see e.g., Wenzel (2004) and Ho¤man et al (2008).
Another approach to micro-founding norms, as in Kotliko¤, Persson and Svensson (1988) or Kandori
(1992), is to embed behavior in a repeated game where the threat of dynamic punishments for norm-violation
play a key role.
3
Jia and Persson (2018) provide another empirical application of Benabou and Tirole’s model (to ethnicidentity choices in China).
4
A somewhat di¤erent signalling approach is taken in Posner (2000).
5
The dynamic model we formulate has some similarities with Lindbeck, Nyberg and Weibull’s (2009)
model of individual incentives and social norms in unemployment insurance.
2

3

conditional hikes in tax evasion as proxying for shocks to the intrinsic motives to pay.
After the return to property-based taxes in 1993, average evasion returned only gradually
towards pre-poll-tax levels. This time pattern squares well with persistent e¤ects of temporary shocks to the intrinsic motives to pay, due to dynamically evolving social motives.6
Moreover, non-parametric estimates after the poll-tax period show clearly that evasion falls
more slowly in councils with high evasion during the poll-tax period –exactly as the theory
in Section II predicts.
This result does not re‡ect pre-trends in the data. We also discuss, and rule out, alternative explanations for the observed time patterns of evasion, including di¤erences or dynamics
in the …scal capacities of high-evasion and low-evasion councils.
Section IV concludes the paper. Details on institutions, data construction, and auxiliary
empirical …ndings are relegated to an Online Appendix.

2

Theory

We …rst formulate a dynamic model with the three motives for tax compliance discussed
above (Subsection A). We then micro-found it by extending Benabou and Tirole’s (2011)
model of laws and norms to …t our context (Subsection B). Finally, we derive the predicted
impulse responses, following a temporary shock to the intrinsic motives to pay (Subsection
C).

2.1

Basic Model

Consider a council (peer group) with a continuum of agents of size (measure) one. Time is
denoted by t. In each period, taxpayers must decide whether to comply or evade their taxes:
et 2 f0; 1g with et = 1 denoting evasion.7 All taxpayers have the same exogenous constant
income y and tax liability x: As in the Allingham-Sandmo framework, the material motive
to pay m, is the expected cost of getting caught (probability times punishment), determined
by the council. The net material motive for evasion is thus x m:
Taxpayers may also comply because of an intrinsic cost from evasion, with average level
it . However, this cost varies across individuals, with a higher vt denoting a greater proclivity
to pay taxes. Idiosyncratic parameter v is thus positive or negative and we assume that
it is drawn from a symmetric, unimodal distribution with unbounded support.8 By de…ni6

This persistence is consistent with the evidence presented in Helliwell, Wang and Xu (2013).
A binary evasion decision …ts our context, as nobody partially avoids their council tax.
8
For example Helliwell (2003) reports a positive correlation between subjective levels of well-being and
desires never to evade taxes.
7

4

tion, E(v) = 0; and we denote the p.d.f. and c.d.f. of the distribution by g (v) and G (v)
respectively. We think about v as the taxpayer’s type.
In general, we write the social component of individual preferences as S (et ; t 1 ) where
1:This assumes that average
t 1 is the share of individuals who evade their taxes at t
tax evasion is only observed with a lag, a plausible assumption as it takes time to audit
tax payers, and take any tax evaders to court. In contrast to frameworks where individuals
instantaneously …nd the long-run equilibrium, lagged observability induces the kind of adaptive behavior typical of evolutionary models, which is also typically found in lab experiments.
The adaptive dynamics are crucial as they imply that social motives in‡uence compliance
with a lag.
Individual preferences Summarizing, the preferences of a type v taxpayer are:
u(v; e; ) = y

[x + S (0; )] (1

e)

[m + i + v + S (1; )] e,

(1)

where weight parametrizes the importance of the social motive. This motive amounts to
comparing the social-utility components S (0; t 1 ) and S (1; t 1 ) –evasion is thus in‡uenced
by the relative social payo¤ :
( ) = S (0; )

S (1; ) .

How evasion a¤ects the social motive hinges on whether ( ) increases or decreases in .
Before elaborating on this micro-foundation, however, we consider how equilibrium evasion
evolves over time.
Equilibrium evasion Suppose currently observed evasion is t 1 and all other motives for
evasion are constant over time. Then, an individual with intrinsic motivation v evades her
tax i¤
x + S (0; t 1 ) i + m + v + S (1; t 1 ) :
Individuals with v lower than the threshold de…ned by this expression will thus evade. Using the c.d.f. G; the equilibrium date t share of evaders follows the non-linear, …rst-order
di¤erence equation:
( t 1 )) ;
(2)
t = G (M
where M x m i.
As in a standard model, higher material incentives to pay, such as greater enforcement
m; reduces evasion, while a higher tax liability x increases it. Higher (average) intrinsic
motivation to pay taxes i reduces evasion.

5

Equilibrium dynamics To explore the dynamics, consider a steady state de…ned by
^=G M

(^)

(3)

and a linear approximation around it
t

'^+

h

t 1

i
^ :

Here, = g M +
(^)
( ^ ) is like a social multiplier, when evasion deviates from
its steady-state value.
The sign of can be positive or negative depending on whether individual evasion rates
are strategic complements or substitutes, which correspond to
R 0. In either case, we
assume that j j < 1 so the steady-state is stable and a shock is “self-correcting” over time.
Then, the di¤erence equation has the standard solution
t

=

0

( )t + ^ 1

( )t :

(4)

Hence, from any initial value 0 ; the rate of evasion, t , converges to the steady state ^ . If
< 0, convergence is oscillating, whereas it is monotonic if > 0. While we could specify the
sign of
and a priori, we will instead rely on a micro-founded model, based on Benabou
and Tirole (2011).

2.2

Micro-founded Social Motives

Benabou and Tirole’s (2011) model incorporates individual and social motives, where people
care about their reputation for being pro-social. Suppose the prevailing social norm dictates
that it is honorable to pay your taxes – i.e., to set e = 0: Because individuals with high
v more likely pay their taxes, people get positive (negative) reputational utility from being
perceived as a high-v (low-v) type.
Imperfect observability. Invoking lagged observability of average compliance, we turn
Benabou and Tirole’s static model into a simple dynamic model. Given our application,
we also relax perfect observability: it is plausible that a tax evader, e = 1; is imperfectly
observed by the tax authorities and her peers. We capture this by a binary signal 2 f1; g ;
where 1 means being observed evading, while means not being observed. Let 2 [0; 1] be
the conditional probability of observing = 1 when e = 1. In general, we expect to depend
positively on m –as more resources raise the likelihood to observe and punishes evaders, and
thus to publicly observe their evasion.
6

Thus there are no false positives: individuals can only be observed evading if they do
evade. But there are false negatives: some individuals with low v-values are not observed to
evade even though they do. Citizens take this imperfect observability into account in their
inference about types.
Relative social payo¤s To explore the micro-foundations further, de…ne
E (0; ) =

Z

1

G

1(

dG (v)
v
and E (1; ) =
1
)

Z

G

1(

)

v

dG (v)

1

as the conditional (truncated) means above and below the evasion cuto¤ de…ned by a particular fraction of evaders. Using Bayes’rule, let
Q ( )=
be the probability that an individual has v
= : Finally, let

(1
1
G

1

)

( ) conditional on not observing evasion

V ( ) = Q ( ) E (1; ) + 1

Q ( ) E (0; )

be the expected value of v conditional on not observing evasion.
Given these preliminaries, the social payo¤ associated with the two actions is:
S (e; ) =

E (1; ) + (1
V ( )

) V ( ) if e = 1
if e = 0.

The relative social payo¤ de…ned in Subsection II.A becomes
( )=

1

Q ( )

( ):

In the language of Benabou and Tirole (2011), ( ) = [E (0; ) E (1; )] > 0 is “the honor
of the pro-social choice less the stigma of the antisocial choice”. This expression must be
positive by de…nition of the truncated means of a mean-zero variable. But here, ( ) is
“adjusted”for imperfect observability when e = 1.
Strategic complements or substitutes? To understand the sign and size of
( ) ; we
inspect the sign of ( ) : As increases, both truncated means in the de…nition of ( ) go
up, so the e¤ect on the reputational term ( ) is generally ambiguous. To sign it we draw
on the results in Jewitt (2004). Single-peakedness and symmetry of density g ( ) imply that
7

( ) = E (0; ) E (1; ) > 0 has a unique minimum at = 1=2: In our data, < 1=2
always: no council-year has evasion above 50 percent. In this region, ( ) < 0: Intuitively,
when compliance is the modal choice, a higher number of evaders cuts the stigma of evading
by more than it raises the honor of complying.
We can now sign the e¤ect of an higher on the relative social payo¤:
( )=

@Q ( )
[E (0; )
@

E (1; )] + 1

Q ( )

( ) :

(5)

Since Q ( ) is a fraction, the second term in this expression is negative as long as ( ) is
negative. Because E (0; ) > E (1; ), the sign of the …rst informational-e¤ect term depends
on:
@Q ( )
(1
)
=
0.
@
(1
)2
In words, higher average evasion raises the probability that an individual not observed to
cheat is an evader (the expression is zero with perfect observability, = 1). Thus the …rst
term in (5) is also negative.
To summarize,
( ) < 0 when non-evasion is the modal choice. A higher population of
evaders reduces the reputational utility from paying taxes – i.e., evading in‡icts a negative
externality on others. Therefore, individual evasion decisions become strategic complements.
As a result, shifting individual motives that raise evasion – weaker intrinsic motives i or
material enforcement m –are crowded in by social motives.9
Back to the general framework We can map these results into the equilibrium framework of Subsection II.A. In particular, the root of di¤erence equation (4) becomes:
=

( ^ )g M

(^) :

(6)

As we have seen,
> 0 if the steady state ^ = G M
( ^ ) < 1=2. Moreover, the
root of the di¤erence equation that governs the equilibrium evasion dynamics depends on the
detection probability conditional on non-compliance and the signalling e¤ect from taking the
honorable compliance act.
9

When a majority of people evade their taxes, we could instead get crowding out via a strategic-substitutes
e¤ect.

8

2.3

Predictions

We apply the model to the council-speci…c evasion shifts triggered by the U.K. poll tax, introduced by the 1988 Local Government Act and implemented in 1990 (see further discussion in
the Online Appendix). Many taxpayers saw this tax as unfair, which reduced their intrinsic
motives to pay.10 But the poll tax was temporary: it was abolished in 1993 and replaced by
a property-value based system akin to the one before 1990. Hence, the treatment period is
1990-1992. In what follows, we treat these years as a single period.
The poll-tax shock Let c = 1; :::; C index local councils that each begin in a steady state
at ^ c : At t = 0; each council experiences a negative poll-tax shock of size c and we order
the councils such that 1 < ::: < C . The shock is reversed at t = 1 and all parameters
revert back to their initial steady-state values. In the model, these shocks correspond to a
negative downward shift of ic;t ; the average intrinsic motive to pay taxes, due to the perceived
unfairness of the tax.11 Formally,
ic;t =

i0c < ic for t = 0.
ic otherwise.

(7)

We can de…ne the t = 0 shock by
c

= G xc

mc

0

ic;0

(^c)

G xc

mc

ic;0

(^c) ;

the period-0 hike in the fraction of evaders. Thus, observed average evasion at t = 1 including
this impact e¤ect becomes
^
c;0 = c + c :
Predicted impulse response From (4), the time path following the shock at t = 0 is
given by
t
^
c;t = c + c ( c ) ;
where c and c govern the dynamics in council c. The social motive to comply is important
in mediating the shock, unless = 0: In that case, c = 0 and we would see a downward jump
at t = 0 when ic falls, followed by a reverse upward jump, returning to previous compliance
10

This is consistent with the ideas in Cummings et al (2009), who show a link between willingness to pay
taxes and perceptions of governemnt quality. Evidence discussed in Ho¤man et al. (2008) supports the idea
that perceptions of tax fairness shape attitudes towards tax compliance.
11
A largely equivalent formulation would be to suppose that the shock to motives during the poll tax period
results form a temporary change in the parameter as evasion becomes a virtuous act.

9

already at t = 1. However, as > 0 and c > 0, the equilibrium dynamic adjustment is
gradual.
Because the variation in tax evasion prior to the introduction of the poll-tax experiment
was small (see Figure 1 below), we impose an approximate common starting value ^ for tax
evasion: Then, de…nition (6) implies that c is the same across councils.
We can summarize this discussion as follows:
Prediction The impulse-response function for the share of tax evaders takes an upward jump
to ^ c + c at t = 0 and falls monotonically back to ^ c for t > 0: Councils with higher
c will have higher evasion than those with lower
c throughout the adjustment.
This prediction serves as a useful guide for the empirical measurement and analysis in
the next section. It attributes any di¤erences in initial evasion after the shock to di¤erent
0
values of c ; which in turn re‡ect di¤erent values of ic;0 ic;0 . In reality, di¤erent initial
responses could also re‡ect di¤erent economic, demographic, political, and social factors. It
will therefore be important to control directly for these factors in the empirical speci…cation.

3

Evidence

This section discusses our data, core empirical analysis, and a discussion of alternative explanations for the …ndings.

3.1

Data

We assembled new panel data (from existing, previously unexploited, sources) for tax evasion
over 30 years (1980-2009) in the 346 councils of England and Wales. These data does not
have individual-level evasion, and hence focus on average council-level evasion as predicted by
the model. Speci…cally, we construct a measure of tax evasion across three tax regimes: the
1980-89 (property-based) domestic rates, the 1990-92 (person-based) poll-tax, and the 19932009 (property-based) council-tax. The Online Appendix describes our data construction in
detail.
A short primer on local U.K. taxation Throughout our sample period, the local council
had responsibility for collecting local taxes from households and businesses.12 Prior to the poll
12
Councils directly collected the revenue from business-property taxes only up until 1989. Under the
’national non-domestic rates’from 1990, the business-property tax was still enforced by the council, but the
revenue was transfered to central government, and then partially redistributed back, according to a centrally
set formula.

10

tax, local taxes known as “rates”were levied on owners of domestic and business properties.
In a system that went back to 1601, these rates were determined by the rental value of a
property. In 1990, the rates were abolished and replaced by poll tax, formally known as
the “community charge”. This was a ‡at-rate, per-head tax levied on any resident in a
given council, regardless of their dwelling size, wealth and income, with very few exemptions
and deductions. The poll tax caused extreme controversy and was abolished in 1993. A
new system (which still remains in place) charged occupants –whether renters or owners –
“council taxes”for domestic properties and “business rates”for non-domestic properties. It
re-established the link between the tax liability and the property values that was present in
the pre-1990 system but absent in the poll tax.13 n
Tax evasion across councils and time Yearly average tax evasion ( c;t in the model)
is constructed as the di¤erence between net collected tax revenue and net tax liability in
council c and year t, expressed as a percentage of net liability in t. Figure 1 illustrates the
distribution of tax evasion across time and councils, according to this measure. The left
panel shows average tax evasion across councils for each sample year. Before the poll tax,
average evasion was just below 3 percent on a declining trend. The poll-tax period saw an
abrupt upward shift, with average evasion reaching 10-15 percent. After the restoration of
the property-based tax in 1993, evasion returned gradually towards pre-poll-tax levels. This
pattern squares well with the idea that temporary shocks to intrinsic motives have persistent
e¤ects attributable to dynamics in social motives.
The right panel shows the density distribution across councils for selected sub-periods.
The pre-1990 rates system saw relatively little dispersion around its 2.8 percent mean. In the
poll-tax years, the large average evasion hike is accompanied by a huge increase in dispersion.
As we will see in Subsection B, large di¤erences remain even as we adjust for a host of
economic, social, and political variables. Even though we have no direct way of measuring the
intrinsic motives to pay, it is natural to interpret the mounting evasion dispersion as a set of
heterogenous shifts in such motives. Subsection C discusses some alternative interpretations.
[Figure 1 about here]
In 1993-94 –right after the reintroduction of the council tax –the evasion distribution shifts
left with a signi…cantly smaller spread. However, average evasion in these transition years is
still 6.3 percent, more than double average pre-poll-tax evasion. During the remaining sample
(1995-2009), the evasion distribution more closely resembles the pre-poll-tax distribution,
but a higher mean as well as a larger spread suggest persistent evasion e¤ects of the poll-tax
shock.14
13
14

The Online Appendix gives more detail on the di¤erent tax regimes.
Another di¤erence between the poll tax and the council tax is that the former was levied on individuals

11

3.2

Empirical Analysis

The prediction at the end of Section II says that councils with larger poll-tax evasion hikes
should return more slowly towards pre-poll-tax evasion levels. Moreover, their evasion rate
should stay above that in councils with smaller evasion hikes throughout the adjustment to
the steady state. Empirically, we calculate the initial shock to intrinsic motives by the rise
in (average) poll-tax evasion relative to (average) evasion in the previous regime:
c

=

c;90 93

c;80 89 :

We split the councils into two bins. Let c^ be the median-shock council, L the average of c
for c < c^; H the average of c for c c^; and Jt average evasion rate for group, J = H; L.
In this notation, the dynamic model for the post-poll-tax years implies:
H
t

L
t

=(

H

L

) ( )t .

(8)

The model predicts an initial di¤erence between the two groups that decays over time. In
principle, we could use the …rst year of the data to estimate ( H
L ) and then estimate
L
the social-multiplier, , from the pattern of decay over time. However, if we …nd H
t
t =
t
H
L
(
) ( ) > 0 for all t > 0 until some convergence year T; this is also evidence for > 0:
Heterogeneous evasion shifts Using (8), we confront the data with the key prediction
L
from the model: H
t
t is positive, but monotonically declining, from t = 1993 until some
year T:
L
The left part of Figure 2 plots the raw data for H
t in red and t in blue. The graph is
striking. No systematic di¤erences in tax evasion are visible in the decade before the poll-tax
experiment. But after the poll-tax episode, the share of non-tax compliers in the high polltax-evading councils lies everywhere above that in the low poll-tax-evading councils, with a
monotonically declining di¤erence. Evidently, something slows down the adjustment process
–in our model, that something are the gradually adjusting social motives.
[Figure 2 about here]
Conditional poll-tax evasion A legitimate concern is that council-speci…c shifts in polltax evasion need not only re‡ect variation in intrinsic compliance motives. For example,
during the poll tax, tax-payers included renters, students and the unemployed, who were
only to pay 20% of the poll tax, and local inequality in property values may have a¤ected the
rather than properties. It is di¢ cult to directly translate our evasion measures to per-capita …gures. But
when trying to measure evasion on a per-capita basis, we get similar results.

12

sense of unfairness. We therefore condition on a number of local demographic and economic
variables which may in‡uence poll-tax evasion rates.
Anger against the poll tax had a signi…cant political component. Although some opposition was spontaneous, the Labour Party organized protests. Moreover, councils ruled by
Labour rather than Conservatives may have been more reluctant to aggressively enforce the
“Thatcher” poll tax. While weaker enforcement would correspond to a lower value of m in
our model, a clear confounder, politically grounded anger could arguably correspond to a
higher value of i: To mitigate such concerns, we condition on Labour and Conservative vote
shares, as well as dummies for Labour and Conservative control.
Speci…cally, let yc;t be a vector of economic, demographic, and political council characteristics, and estimate f ; g using OLS from the regression:
c;t

=

+ yc;t + "c;t .

We then estimate (8), replacing c;t by ~ c;t = c;t ( + yc;t ) – i.e., poll-tax evasion,
conditional on observables. In terms of conditional tax evasion, (8) becomes
~H
t

~L = ( ~ H
t

~ L ) ( )t ;

J
where ~ is calculated from: ~ c = ~ c;90 93 ~ c;80 89 .
Table 1 reports estimates from a cross-council regression for poll-tax evasion on a range
of variables: the size of the poll-tax liability, the share of renters broken down by private
and council landlords (a measure of new tax payers in the poll-tax regime), the proportion of
houses in the top-council tax band compared to the bottom band (a measure of housing-value
inequality), (log) per-capita income, (log) population, the seat shares of the Conservative and
Labour parties, dummies for Conservative and Labour majority control in the council, and
region …xed e¤ects.

[Table 1 about here]
The correlations in Table 1 make sense. Poll-tax evasion is positively correlated with a
higher poll-tax liability and negatively correlated with higher income. Further, evasion is
negatively correlated with greater inequality in housing values and positively correlated with
the share of private renters (who were not paying tax directly in the prior regime). The
political variables are insigni…cantly correlated with evasion, except for Labour control.
We rely on the regression in the …nal column of Table 1 to construct a conditional polltax evasion measure which adjusts for observable sources of heterogeneity across councils.
Using it makes more plausible our interpretation of the poll-tax evasion hike as a downward
shift in the intrinsic motive for tax compliance. Splitting the sample by the (median of
13

the) conditional-evasion measure, we obtain the right panel of Figure 2. The patterns of
conditional evasion are comparable to those for unconditional tax evasion. We focus our
estimates below on the sample split by conditional poll-tax evasion.
Non-parametric estimates We examine the persistence of evasion in the poll-tax era by
within-council non-parametric estimation. Speci…cally, we regress evasion in the council-tax
period on an indicator for high (above-median) conditional poll-tax evasion interacted with
a full set of year dummies from 1993 to 2008 (2009 is the left-out indicator). In e¤ect, we
estimate separate year e¤ects for the two sub-groups in the right panel of Figure 2. Since we
include council …xed e¤ects, year …xed e¤ects, and region-by-year …xed e¤ects, we capture
a plethora of …xed socio-demographic factors and general trends, which are likely to a¤ect
evasion and thereby capture the ‘normal’value of ic;t .
All year dummies for high conditional poll-tax evasion councils are signi…cantly di¤erent
from zero between 1993 and 2002. This suggests a persistent e¤ect up to ten years after the
poll tax is abolished. To illustrate this, the estimated coe¢ cients are plotted in Figure 3
together with their 95% con…dence intervals.
[Figure 3 about here]

3.3

Alternative Explanations

The results in Figures 2 and 3 are consistent with the model predictions, which re‡ect a
gradual adjustment over time of the social motives for tax compliance. But, the results could
also re‡ect other factors not captured by our model and we now discuss some alternative
explanations for the observed patterns.
Endogenous di¤erential enforcement Our empirical explanation relies on there being
no systematic (non-political) response of tax enforcement to the poll-tax; formally our model
prediction assumes a constant exogenous level of tax enforcement m, despite an increase
in evasion. In the Online Appendix, we construct a measure of local tax enforcement and
show that its within-council correlation with evasion is signi…cantly negative (at 0:61). This
suggest that the declining di¤erence between evasion in high poll-tax-evasion councils and low
poll-tax-evasion councils in Figure 3 is not driven by gradually higher levels of enforcement
in high poll-tax-evasion councils (as this would imply a positive within-council correlation).
Political confounders We have already emphasized the importance of political motives,
and adjusted our measure of conditional poll-tax evasion for relative Conservative-Labour
strength and for ruling party. The results in Table 1 show that councils controlled by Labour
14

had signi…cantly higher tax evasion during poll-tax years. If this re‡ects a lower willingness
to enforce the poll tax, the results in Figure 3 might capture a gradual increase of enforcement
in those councils.15
To assess this possibility, we include a poll-tax-Labour-control dummy interacted with
year e¤ects in the earlier speci…cation. If initially low and gradually increasing enforcement
in Labour-controlled councils were the explanation for the results in Figure 3, then the new
variable should weaken or kill the results. The left panel of Figure 4 shows that this is not
the case.
[Figure 4 about here]
Enforcement and …scal-capacity confounders Another alternative explanation for the
results in Figure 3 is that high versus low poll-tax evasion re‡ected a low versus high capacity
to enforce the new tax system, rather than a larger drop in the intrinsic motives to comply.
Moreover, learning about enforcement over time may gradually have eliminated those capacity di¤erences. Local councils also have responsibility for collecting business taxes. Hence,
if that were the case, then we should see a similar evolution of evasion in the part of local
taxes levied on businesses rather than households.
The right panel of Figure 4 plots the year coe¢ cients on high vs. low poll-tax evasion
councils in the same speci…cation as in Figure 3, but replaces evasion of personal taxes with
evasion of local business taxes.16 There is no evidence of similar evasion dynamics on this
tax base. This speci…cation also provides reassurance that Figure 3 does not just capture an
initial lack of enforcement capacity in some councils which is eliminated over time.

3.4

Bottom Line

The empirical results that we present are consistent with the prediction of our model. The
poll tax shifted the intrinsic motive to pay tax, these shifts spilled over into social motives,
which then exerted a signi…cant but declining e¤ect on tax evasion for around a decade after
the poll tax was abolished. Speci…cally, councils with high poll-tax evasion had signi…cantly
higher tax evasion throughout this decade compared to councils with low poll-tax evasion.
However, the same councils have similar levels of evasion before the poll tax was introduced.
To quantify the amount of evasion triggered by the poll-tax experiment, we use the average
tax evasion over councils and years in the domestic-rate period as a counterfactual evasion
rate. We then apply this evasion rate to all councils from 1990 onwards and compute actual
15

The Online Appedix shows that the qualitative results of our model would still hold up in an extension
where enforcement m is endogenous rather than exogenous.
16
See the Online Appendix for details about this tax system.

15

evasion less counterfactual evasion rate multiplied by each council’s tax liability. To get an
aggregate measure, we sum over councils and years. This way, we estimate the cumulative tax
foregone due to the poll-tax experiment at 4,990,350,000 in 2009 pounds, about 26 percent
of the aggregate 2009 council-tax liability. Half of this 5-billion tax loss is due to the poll-tax
period itself, and the other half is due to period after abolition when the council-tax was
in place, a weighty “echo e¤ect” from the poll tax on subsequent tax revenue. While the
context is speci…c, this reinforces the idea that social motives can be an important part of
state capacity, facilitating tax raising.

4

Conclusion

We have studied the persistence of social motives in tax evasion and their interaction with
individual motives linked to enforcement. Our theoretical framework of evasion dynamics
extends the model in Benabou and Tirole (2011) to imperfect observability and adaptive
dynamics. This motivates our empirical speci…cation and o¤ers a sharp interpretation of the
results.
Our empirical analysis exploits a unique policy episode: the early 1990s introduction and
abolition of the poll tax in English and Welsh councils. This natural experiment reduced tax
compliance in an otherwise law-abiding environment, with higher levels of evasion than in
any feasible …eld experiment. Although we do not have a direct empirical measure of intrinsic
motives, the poll-tax shock is plausibly interpretable as a shock to the intrinsic compliance
motive due to the perceived unfairness of the new tax base. Non-parametric estimates suggest
that the compliance shock induced higher tax evasion for about a decade after the abolition of
the poll tax. Speci…cally, councils with high poll-tax evasion had higher evasion throughout
this decade then councils with low poll-tax evasion. This is in line with the impulse-response
function predicted by our theory for a temporary shock to intrinsic compliance motives.
Our …ndings fuel debates about the importance of social norms in sustaining …scal capac17
ity. The UK system proved robust to the short-lived poll-tax episode. But as emphasized
by Levi (1988), and many other commentators, norms are built over long periods and policymakers violate them at their peril.

17

Besley (2018) ties such norms to debates about the political motives to build state capacity and the
importance of institutions in supporting voluntary compliance.

16

References
[1] Akerlof, George and Janet Yellen [1990], “The Fair Wage-E¤ort Hypothesis and Unemployment,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 255-283.
[2] Allingham, Michael and Agnar Sandmo [1972], “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical
Analysis,”Journal of Public Economics 1, 323–338.
[3] Asch, Solomon E. [1955], “Opinions and Social Pressure,” Scienti…c American 193, 3135.
[4] Benabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole [2011], “Laws and Norms,” NBER Working Paper,
No 17579.
[5] Besley, Timothy, Ian Preston, and Michael Ridge [1997], “Fiscal Anarchy in the UK:
Modelling Poll Tax Noncompliance,”Journal of Public Economics 64, 137-152.
[6] Besley, Timothy [2018], “State Capacity, Reciprocity and the Social Contract,” Presidential Address to the Econometric Society.
[7] Bursztyn, Leonardo and Robert Jensen [2017], “Social Image and Economic Behavior
in the Field: Identifying, Understanding, and Shaping Social Pressure,”Annual Review
of Economics, 9,131-153.
[8] Butler, David, Andrew Adonis and Tony Travers [1994], Failure in British Government:
Politics of the Poll Tax, Oxford: Oxford Paperbacks.
[9] Chartered Institute for Public Finance and Accountancy [1993], Council Tax Demands
and Precepts 1993-4, London, CIPFA.
[10] Communities and Local Government [2011], “Statistical Release - Collection Rates and
Receipts of Council Tax and Non-Domestic Rates in England 2006-2011”, accessed at
www.gov.uk/government/publications.
[11] Cowell, Frank [1990], Cheating the Government, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[12] Erard, Brian and Jonathan Feinstein [1994], “The Role of Moral Sentiments and Audit
Perceptions on Tax Compliance,”Public Finance (Special Issue on Public Finance and
Irregular Activities) 49, 70–89.
[13] Gordon, James P.F. [1989], “Individual Morality and Reputation Costs as Deterrents to
Tax Evasion,”European Economic Review 33, 797-804.
17

[14] Helliwell, John [2003], “How’s Life? Combining Individual and National Variables to
Explain Subjective Well-being,”Economic Modelling, 20, 331-60.
[15] Helliwell, John, Shun Wang and Jinwen Xu [2013], “How Durable are Social Norms?
Immigrant Trust and Generosity in 132 Countries,”NBER Working Paper No. 19855.
[16] Hofmann, Eva, Erik Hoelzl, and Erich Kirchler [2008], “Preconditions of Voluntary Tax
Compliance: Knowledge and Evaluation of Taxation, Norms, Fairness, and Motivation
to Cooperate,”Journal of Psychology 216, 209-217.
[17] Jewitt, Ian [2004], “Notes on the Shape of Distributions,”mimeo, Oxford.
[18] Jia, Ruixue and Torsten Persson [2018], “Individual and Social Motives in Identity
Choice: Theory and Evidence from China,”mimo, IIES and UCSD.
[19] Kandori, Michihiro [1992], “Social Norms and Community Enforcement,”Review of Economic Studies 59, 63-80.
[20] Kotliko¤, Laurence J, Torsten Persson, and Lars E.O. Svensson [1988], “Social Contracts
as Assets: A Possible Solution to the Time–Consistency Problem,”American Economic
Review 78, 662-677.
[21] Levi, Margaret [1988], Of Rule and Revenue, Berkeley: University of California Press.
[22] Lindbeck, Assar, Sten Nyberg, and Jörgen Weibull [2003], “Social Norms and Welfare
State Dynamics,”Journal of the European Economic Association 1, 533-542.
[23] Luttmer, Erzo F.P. and Monica Singhal [2014], “Tax Morale,” NBER Working Paper
No.20458.
[24] Posner, Eric [2000], “Law and Social Norms: The Case of Tax Compliance,”Virginia
Law Review, (Symposium on The Legal Construction of Norms) 86, 1781-1819.
[25] Slemrod, Joel [2007], “Cheating Ourselves: The Economics of Tax Evasion,”Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 21(1), 25-48.
[26] Torgler, Benno [2007], Tax Morale and Tax Compliance: A Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis, Cheltenham U.K.: Edward Elgar.
[27] Wenzel, Michael [2004], “An Analysis of Norm Processes in Tax Compliance,”Journal
of Economic Psychology 25, 213-228.

18

Marginal Density
.2
.3

10

.4

15

.5

Figure 1

0

0

.1

5

Percent

1990-1992: Poll Tax base

1980

1985

1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

0

10
1980-89

Tax Evasion %
1990-92

20
1993-94

30
1995-09

Notes: In the left graph, each observation is a yearly average across all councils of our tax evasion measure, the difference between net collected
tax revenue and net tax liability on the local tax base. During 1990‐1992, a property tax was replaced by the poll tax, which was levied at a flat rate
per head. The right graph plots the marginal density distribution of tax evasion across four time‐periods: 1980‐1989 (Domestic Rates tax base);
1990‐1992 (Poll Tax base); 1993‐1994 (first 2 years of Council Tax base); 1995‐2009 (remaining years of Council Tax base). Tax evasion is truncated
at 30%, which equals the 99th percentile for all time‐periods (for 1995‐2009, it equals the 99.99th percentile).

20

20

Figure 2

1990-1992: Poll Tax base
15

0

0

5

5

Percent
10

Percent
10

15

1990-92: Poll Tax base

1980

1990
PT Evasion<Median

Year

2000
PT Evasion>=Median

2010

1980

1990

Year

PT Conditional Evasion<Median

2000

2010

PT Conditional Evasion>=Median

Notes: Each yearly observation in the left (right) graph is an average of tax evasion across all councils in one of two subsamples: the blue line
refers to councils where average tax evasion (average conditional tax evasion) in the poll‐tax period was below the median; the red line refers to
councils where average tax evasion (average conditional tax evasion) was above the median. Section 3.2 and Table 1 give more details on the
construction of conditional poll tax evasion.

0

1

Percent
2
3

4

5

Figure 3

1993

1996

1999

Year

2002

1(High Conditional PT Evasion)*1(Year)

2005

2008
95% CI

Notes: This graph plots the 1(Year)*1(High Conditional PT Evasion) coefficients from a regression of council‐tax evasion on a set of year dummies,
year‐dummies interacted with a dummy for conditional poll‐tax evasion above the median, council fixed effects, and region‐by‐year fixed effects.
The sample period is 1993‐2009, which corresponds to the Council‐Tax period. The omitted year is 2009. Dashed lines denote 95% confidence
interval on the interaction term, where standard errors are clustered at the council level. Section 3.2 and Table 1 give more details on the
construction of conditional poll‐tax evasion.

-3

0

-2

1

-1

Percent
0

Percent
2
3

1

4

2

5

3

Figure 4

1993

1996

1999

Year

2002

1(High Conditional PT Evasion)*1(Year)

2005

2008
95% CI

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000
Year

2002

2004

1(High Conditional PT Evasion)*1(Year)

2006

2008

95% CI

Notes: The left graph is based on the same specification as Figure 3, but additionally includes year‐dummies interacted with a dummy which is 1
if the Labor party had majority control of the council in any year of the Poll‐Tax period (1990‐1992). The right graph is based on the same
specification as Figure 3, but the outcome variable is evasion on the business rate. The sample period is 1990‐2005, and the omitted year is 2005.

Table 1
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Poll Tax Evasion = [Net Collectable ‐ Net Collected] / [Net Collectable]
Poll Tax Liability

.0285
(.0059)

.0283
(.0060)
‐8.7395
(4.2970)

.0287
(.0062)
‐9.9374
(4.6981)
‐.3425
(.5905)

.0240
(.0061)
‐5.8293
(4.9016)
‐.8100
(.5200)
‐.0144
(.0193)
.4824
(.9176)
‐.0107
(.0207)
3.7423
(.9494)

.0245
(.0061)
.2652
(5.9762)
‐.7249
(.6215)
‐.0185
(.0236)
1.0993
(1.0369)
.0105
(.0210)
3.9873
(.9780)
‐.1703
( .0732)
34.6561
(9.0165)
‐6.9202
(2.3311)

Year Dummies

X

X

X

X

X

Region Dummies

X

X

X

X

X

684

684

684

684

619

Log (per capita income)
Log (population)
Conservative Seat Share
Conservative Control
Labour Seat Share
Labour Control
(Top Band Houses)/(Bottom Band Houses)
Share Households Renting from Private
Share Households Renting from Council

Observations

Notes: This table estimates a cross‐council model of determinants of evasion during the Poll Tax period
(1990‐1992). The unit of observation is a council‐year. Conditional poll‐tax evasion in the main text is
defined as the residual component of poll‐tax evasion from the regression in Column 5.

Online Appendix
A

UK Local Taxation

Although the tax base changed during our sample period, the local council has retained
responsibility for enforcing and spending the revenue it collects from taxes levied on households.18 Prior to the introduction of the poll tax, a system of local rates had been in use
since 1601 with minor exceptions. Rates were levied on all properties based on a measure of
their rental value. This was assessed by the Valuation O¢ ce, which would upgrade the value
in line with improvements. The owner was liable to pay tax whether a property was used
for domestic or business purposes.
In 1990, domestic rates were replaced by the community charge, popularly referred to
as “the poll tax”.19 This was a ‡at-rate per-head tax that was levied at any occupant in a
council, whether they were owning or renting their dwelling house. A few groups –including
nuns, criminals and recipients of income support –were exempted. Other low-income groups,
such as students and unemployed, were liable for 20% of the standard amount. Otherwise,
the poll tax was levied independently of an individual’s income and wealth. Ostensibly, this
reform was to improve political accountability by creating equal stakes for every citizen. But
the tax was deemed unfair since it was not linked to individual circumstances –it broke the
link between a property’s value and the tax levy, a hallmark of the earlier regime and a feature
of almost every existing system of local taxation. The perceived unfairness resulted in major
protests and riots accompanied by unprecedented levels of tax evasion by UK standards.20
In 1993, the poll tax was abolished and replaced by the present council tax. It is based
on the value a property would have sold for in the open market on April 1st 1991. The
Valuation O¢ ce individually assessed each property and assigned it to one of a given set
of preassigned valuation brackets. The council sets the council tax rate, which implies a
liability for each bracket. Thus, the council tax results in one bill for each household that
occupies a property. Like the poll tax, the council tax was paid by the occupant, whether a
renter or an owner. But unlike the poll tax, the council tax reintroduced the link between
18
Councils had complete ownership of revenue collected from business property taxes only up until 1989.
Under the ’national non-domestic rates’ from 1990, the business property tax continued to be enforced by
the council, but the revenue was transfered to central government, and then partially redistributed back to
councils, according to a centrally set multiplier.
19
See Butler, Adonis and Travers (1994) for a discussion of the factors leading up to the introduction of
the poll tax and its subsequent abolition.
20
It was not the …rst time in British history that a poll tax had triggered a mass protest –more than 600
years before, in 1381, the poll tax is considered to have a had central place in triggering the peasants’revolt.

19

taxes and property values, thus restoring some semblance of fairness in the local tax system.
However, no revaluations have taken place after 1991 and no new bands have been introduced
with increasing property prices.21 As the council tax has become decreasingly detached from
actual property values, its fairness have come under debate.
There is no simple way of comparing tax levels across the three tax regimes due to
the di¤erent tax bases. However, we can make a rough guess of the level of taxation per
dwelling.22 This suggests that domestic rates per dwelling in 1989 were around £ 501 (std.
110), the poll tax per dwelling in 1990 was £ 677 (std. 214) and the council tax per dwelling
in 1993 was £ 509 (std. 289). But the poll-tax number is somewhat misleading, because
of cuts in 1991 and 1992 – a per-head reduction by £ 110 in 1991 brought the poll tax per
dwelling down to almost exactly the same liability level as under the domestic rates and the
council tax. Nevertheless, we may want to condition on each council’s poll-tax level when
analyzing evasion from the this tax.

B

De…nitions and Sources

We calculate a measure of yearly average tax evasion for each council and year ( c;t in the
model) as the di¤erence between net collected tax revenue and net tax liability (xc;t in the
model) in year t, expressed as a percentage of net liability in t. Doing this for the relevant
tax base in each regime –i.e., 1980-89, 1990-92 and 1993-2009 –we obtain our main measure
of evasion. We calculate tax evasion separately for each year. Collected revenue is measured
net of any tax that was collected from outstanding arrears from previous years. Similarly,
net liability is calculated as gross liability minus all exemptions and outstanding arrears. We
are thus reasonably con…dent that our measure of evasion is net of any lagged evasion-related
error component, which is important for interpreting our decay and dynamic-path results.
We can calculate the evasion measure based on the net amounts due and collected for the
three main tax bases of interest: domestic rates, poll tax, and council tax. Unfortunately, our
measure of business rates evasion (1990-2005) is based on gross amount due (versus net of
exemptions and outstanding arrears), and total amount collected (versus net of outstanding
arrears).
Under the present council-tax system (from 1993), as well as the rates system (in 198089), councils combine a registry list of all properties with independently assessed valuations
21

There have been talks of re-valuation of properties in England, but these have systematically been
postponed. However, in Wales, re-valuation of properties occured in April 2003.
22
The methodology from CIPFA (1993, page 8, rows 12 and 16-17) is used to calculate the poll tax per
dwelling in 1990. However, using this method, poll tax per dwelling is missing for approximately 30% of the
councils. CIPFA (1993) has data on domestic rates per dwelling in 1989 and the council tax per dwelling in
1993.

20

of these properties to draw up a tax liability for all households. Under the poll tax (1990-92),
councils relied on population registers used in the rates system to count the number of adult
individuals liable for the tax. This makes the total liability per household a straightforward
calculation. Since no deductions are allowed against other taxes, yearly household payments
are known to the councils. This makes it straightforward –for the councils and for research
purposes –to measure and track tax evasion.
No publicly available long-run administrative estimates of evasion rates exist for any
of the three systems. However, the Department for Communities and Local Government,
together with the O¢ ce of National Statistics, published estimates of collection and evasion
rates for the council tax over the period 2006-2011 (Communities and Local Government,
2011). For 2009, our average measure of evasion for the UK is 2.69%, against theirs of 2.90%.
Reassuringly, the correlation is 0.99 at the council-matched level.
Our data on evasion is constructed from two series produced by the Chartered Institute
for Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA).23 We have digitized CIPFA’s series for all
years prior to 1996, with a resulting sample size of 8,220 council-year evasion observations.24
To the best of our knowledge, this dataset is the …rst to measure tax evasion in a consistent
way for the three regimes of local household property taxation in the UK.25

C

Robustness

In this section, we discuss some alternative explanations for the results and whether the
evidence supports them.
The pre-poll-tax period as a robustness check If the poll tax disrupted a tax-paying
social norm, we should see no pattern like Figure 3 in the period before the introduction
of the poll tax. If we did observe a similar pattern, this would be analogous to a violated
assumption of parallel pre-trends in a di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimation.
Figure A1 about here
To investigate this, we repeat the analysis underlying Figure 3, but for the 1980-89 pe23

CIPFA is a professional accountancy body which collects a large set of statistics on the functioning on
the councils. CIPFAStats produces the Revenue Collection series and has been producing local government
data for over 100 years.
24
For years 1980-1989 we relied on the annual “Rate Collection Statistics, Actual”. From 1990 to 2009, we
use the annual “Revenue Collection Statistics, Actual.”
25
Besley, Preston and Ridge (1997) study the determinants of evasion during the poll-tax era and our data
are consistent with theirs during this period.

21

riod. Thus, we interact year dummies for 1981-1989 (1980 is the left-out indicator) with the
indicator for above-median conditional poll-tax evasion and plot the estimated coe¢ cients in
Figure A1. None of these is statistically di¤erent from zero. In other words, whatever source
of heterogeneity makes poll-tax compliance persist for ten years, it was not observed in the
1980s. This makes it plausible to attribute the evasion patterns to a temporary shift in the
intrinsic motives for tax compliance associated with the poll tax.
Additional controls The persistence results are robust to a wide set of controls, including
a council-speci…c linear trend and region times year dummies. The sample period throughout
is the period 1993-2009 –i.e., the period after the poll tax has been abolished. And in each
case, the omitted year-dummy is for 2009.
The upper-left panel in Figure A2 plots the coe¢ cients on year interacted with a dummy
variable which is equal to one if conditional poll-tax evasion is above the median from a
regression of council-tax evasion on a set of year dummies, year-dummies interacted with a
high conditional poll-tax evasion dummy, and council …xed e¤ects. The upper-right panel
plots the coe¢ cients when the upper-left regression model is augmented by a council-speci…c
linear-trend while the lower-left panel reports the coe¢ cients from the model in the upperleft augmented with a full set of region-by-year interaction terms. Dashed lines denote the
95% con…dence interval of the interaction term, when the standard errors are clustered at
the council level.
Figure A2 about here
Figure A3 repeats the speci…cations reported in Figure A2 but this time for the unconditional
poll tax evasion.
Figure A3 about here
Across both Figures, the …ndings are consistent suggesting that there is some factor which
is driving the initial condition for councils in the two groups and which is not picked up by
the controls.

C.1

Enforcement

So far, we have not considered the possibility of an endogenous enforcement in response to the
shock to compliance. However, given the nature of the poll-tax episode, it seems reasonable
to suppose that tax authorities would have taken steps to recoup lost revenues. We …rst
explore this in theory and show that the basic dynamics of the core model are preserved
under reasonable assumptions. We then hypothesize that shifts in political control give an
22

exogenous shock to enforcement.
Endogenous enforcement To explore the implications of allowing enforcement to be
endogenous, we will suppose that enforcement follows a policy rule which depends on the
level of non-compliance. To motivate this, note that the revenue raised by council c in year
t is given by
rc;t = (1
(9)
c;t )xc;t .
Now de…ne:
m
^ (x; ; i;

t 1)

= arg max f[1
m

G (x

i

m

(

t 1 ))] x

c (m; )g

where c ( ; ) is an increasing convex cost function. The variable captures (time-varying)
factors which a¤ect the costs and bene…ts of enforcement. We assume that c (m; ) is increasing with cm (m; ) > 0 so that higher is associated with higher costs of enforcement, The
…rst-order condition is then
g (x

i

m

(

t 1 )) x

(10)

= cm (m; ) :

We now have the following observations
Result With < 1=2, the optimal enforcement level m is increasing in x and
decreasing in i and . Moreover, if z = i +
( t 1 ), then @ m=@z
^
> 1.

t 1;

and

These results make sense. Tax authorities have a higher marginal gain to enforcement
when taxes are higher. When intrinsic motivations to pay are higher, then optimal formal
enforcement is lower. As a high level of historical enforcement encourages compliance, it
reduces formal enforcement. The …nal result relies on
@m
=
@z

g 0 (x m z)
>
g 0 (x m z) + cmm (m; )

1;

since for < 1=2, the density is increasing. Factors in which increase the marginal cost,
or reduce the marginal bene…t, to investing in enforcement reduce investments in formal
enforcement. More generally, it is clear that whether an enforcement is likely depends on
how steep is the marginal cost curve. In the short-run where it is di¢ cult to increase the
size of an enforcement department or to ratchet up the process, then this function could be
quite steep in which case we would have expected only modest enforcement response to the
poll tax shock.

23

To integrate this into the model, we propose a policy “rule” based on a linear approximation to (10):
m
^ (xc;t ;

c;t ; ic;t ;

c;t 1 )

= xc;t

ic;t

(

c;t

c;t 1 )

where ; > 0, 1 > > 0 and 1 > > 0. How far and are from one depends on the
steepness of the marginal cost of enforcement function.
Substituting this expression into (2), equilibrium evasion in council c at date t will now
be:
) xc;t (1
) ic;t + c;t (1
)
( c;t 1 )) :
c;t = G ((1
This preserves the essence of the model above but factors which a¤ect the cost of enforcement
are now part of c;t and coe¢ cient which a¤ects the dynamics.
Endogenous enforcement has implications for interpreting the poll-tax shocks. First,
observe that the e¤ect of an intrinsic motivation shock is dampened by an enforcement
response but not eliminated since < 1.
Now consider what happens with a temporary to intrinsic motivation given by (7) beginning from a steady state. Now the initial shock to non-compliance is:
c

= G (1

) xc

0

(1

) ic;t +

c

(1

^c

)

G (1

) xc +

c

(1

) ic;t

and the root of the core di¤erence equation is now
=

g (1

) xc

(1

) ic +

(1

c

)

^c

(1

)

^c :

It is clear from these expressions that the e¤ect of a given change in ic;t is dampened by
endogenous enforcement since < 1 and < 1. The initial shock will be smaller and the
adjustment path back to steady state is also slower.
This simple model shows that the interpretation of the results is robust to allowing enforcement to be endogenous. However, it also opens up the possibility of looking at enforcement
as an endogenous outcome from the poll tax shock.
Measurement We have also collected a proxy of council-tax enforcement. We use this to
validate the hypothesis that switches into majority control is associated with higher counciltax enforcement, and thus with shocks to tax enforcement.
The data source is the same series of CIPFA publications used to construct the evasion
measure (Section 3.1). If a household does not comply with council-tax payments, the council’s …rst action is to send out a reminder. If non-payment persists, or payment in full is
not received, the council can summon the household to attend a court hearing. Only when
24

(1

)

a summons order has been issued may the council proceed to other methods to recover the
debt, including (in order of severity) taking money directly from wages and bene…ts, ordering
baili¤s to collect the amount, placing a lien on the property, and starting proceedings for a
prison sentence. In practice, the debt is often recovered before the …nal steps are reached.
Thus, reminders constitute a ‘soft’signal of enforcement while issuing a summons is a more
directed and costly e¤ort by the council.
Correlations between enforcement and evasion Against this background, we use the
ratio of the number of court summons relative to the number of reminders in a council-year
as a proxy for enforcement. In our sample, the council sends out an average of 0:31 summons
per reminder (std. 0:28, 25th percentile 0:17, 75th percentile 0:35). If this measure proxies
for exogenous enforcement (mc;t in our theory), it should predict decreases in tax evasion.
On the other hand, if it re‡ects an endogenous response to evasion, we would observe a
positive correlation with evasion. In a cross-sectional regression, summons over reminders
is positively correlated with evasion. But in a within-council regression – i.e., one with
council …xed e¤ects – summons over reminders is negatively correlated with evasion, with
an elasticity of 0:61 (std. 0:16). This indicates that our measure is a reasonable proxy
of enforcement e¤ort. Moreover, the negative within-council correlation suggest that the
declining di¤erence between high poll-tax-evasion councils and low poll-tax-evasion councils
is not driven by gradually higher levels of enforcement in high poll–tax-evasion councils.

25

-4

-2

Percent
0

2

4

Figure A1

1981

1983

1985
Year

1(High Conditional PT Evasion)*1(Year)

1987

1989
95% CI

Notes: This graph plots estimates from the same specification as Figure 3, when the outcome variable is evasion on the Domestic Rates base
during 1980‐1989. The omitted year is 1980. Section 3.2 and Table 1 give more details on the construction of conditional poll‐tax evasion.

0

0

1

1

Percent
2 3

Percent
2 3 4

4

5

5

Figure A2

1993

1996

1999
2002
Year

2005

1(High Conditional PT Evasion)*1(Year)

2008

1996

1999
2002
Year

1(High Conditional PT Evasion)*1(Year)

2005

2008
95% CI

0

1

Percent
2 3

4

5

95% CI

1993

1993

1996

1999
2002
Year

1(High Conditional PT Evasion)*1(Year)

2005

2008
95% CI

Notes: The upper‐left panel plots the 1(Year)*1(High Conditional Poll Tax Evasion) coefficients from a regression of council‐tax evasion on a set
of year dummies, year‐dummies interacted with a dummy for conditional poll tax evasion above median, and council fixed effects. The upper‐right
panel plots the coefficients when the upper‐left regression model is augmented by a council‐specific linear trend. The lower panel reports the
coefficients when the upper‐left regression model is augmented with a full set of year‐by‐region interactive fixed effects. In all panels, the sample
period is 1992‐2009, and the omitted year 2009. Dashed lines denote the 95% confidence interval on the interaction term between year‐dummies
and high conditional poll‐tax evasion, where standard errors are clustered at the council. Section 3.2 and Table 1 give more details on the
construction of conditional poll‐tax evasion.

3
Percent
1
2

0

0

Percent
1
2

3

Figure A3

1993

1996

1999
2002
Year

2005

95% CI

1993

1996

1999
2002
Year

1(High PT evasion)*1(Year)

2005

2008
95% CI

0

Percent
1
2
3

4

1(High PT Evasion)*1(Year)

2008

1993

1996

1999
2002
Year

1(High PT Evasion)*1(Year)

2005

2008
95% CI

Notes: the panels in this graph are based on the same regression models as in Figure A2, but where the high conditional poll‐tax evasion dummy
is replaced with a high poll‐tax evasion dummy. The upper‐left panel plots the 1(Year)*1(High Poll Tax Evasion>=Median) coefficients from a
regression of council‐tax evasion on a set of year dummies, year‐dummies interacted with a dummy for poll tax evasion above median, and council
fixed effects. The upper‐right panel plots the coefficients when the upper‐left regression model is augmented by a council‐specific linear trend.
The lower panel reports the coefficients when the upper‐left regression model is augmented with a full set of year‐by‐region interactive fixed
effects. In all panels, the sample period is 1992‐2009, and the omitted year is 2009. Dashed lines denote the 95% confidence interval on the
interaction term between year‐dummies and high conditional poll‐tax evasion, where standard errors are clustered at the council. Section 3.2
gives more details on the poll‐tax evasion dummy, and the construction of the conditional poll‐tax evasion measure.

