                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TAX AND SPENDING
                    POLICIES IN MODELS WITH FINITE HORIZONS




                               William H. Branson

                                 Giampaolo Galli




                             Working Paper No. 2557




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1988




The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program in International
Studies and was done at the Banca dItalia. The authors are grateful to Daniele
Terlizzese for helpful comments. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the Banca dItalia.
Support from the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2557
                                                   April 1988



                On the Difference Between Tax and Spending Policies
                           in Models with Finte Horizons



                                     ABSTRACT


     This paper uses the Blanchard (1985) finite horizon model to
                                                                   study how
taxes and government spending can be
                                     managed to stabilize aggregate demand.

     It is shown that tax policy cannot stabilize demand in less time than it
stabilizes  the public debt, but that, if government
                                                     spending is the
instrument of policy, demand can be stabilized
                                                independently of the dynamics
of the debt. These results imply that if the objective    is to stabilize the
debt while maintaining demand as close as possible to a
                                                          pre-determinedtarget
path, and taxes are the instrument, taxes would have to be changed
temporarily  as much as feasible. On the other hand, if the instrument is
government spending, it can be changed gradually to achieve the objectives.

     The dynamic effects of taxes are a
                                         straightforward implication of the
intertemporal budget constraint, when it is assumed that agents cannot be
surprised by government policies. More traditional dynamics can be obtained
if it is assumed that the government succeeds in
                                                  announcing a policy and
implementing a different one. If however the announcement is no credible,
discretion is inferior to a predetermined tax rule.




William H. Branson                        Giampaolo Galli
411 Woodrow Wilson School                 Servizio Studi
Princeton University                      Banca d'Italia
Princeton, N.J. 08544                     Via Nazionale 91, Rome 00184
(609)452-4828                             (06)4792-2683
      ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TAX AND SPENDING POLICIES
                 IN MODELS WITH FINITE HORIZONS

              William H. Branson and Giampaolo   Gaul




1.    Introduction   and Summary

      It  is well known that a sufficient condition for tax policy
to affect consumption is that agents' horizon be shorter than that
of government.   In this case a decrease in taxes today boosts
consumption   of   the   present generation because some other
generation will pay the higher taxes which will have to be raised
in the future to finance the deficit. If agents'         life is
stochastic,  consumption will be affected because there is some
probability that those currently living will not be there to pay
for future taxes.


      The main implication of these propositions for macroeconomic
modelling is that the time pattern of consumption depends on the
time profile of taxes and of the public debt. This fact has of
course been recognized at least since Modigliani and Brumberg laid
down the life—cycle theory of household behaviour in 1954 and Ando
and   Modigliani (1963) estimated the resulting equation for
consumption expenditure.
      A difficulty that has always been recognized with the life
cycle theory concerns aggregation; even with the most convenient
assumptions concerning individual behaviour,    exact aggregation
over agents of different ages proves   to be an  impossible task.
Blanchard (1985) solved the problem of aggregation by assuming
                                  2


that     every  period each agent faces the same constant probability
of     death.  While this assumption has its limitations, Blanchard's
finite     horizon model provides an interesting framework to inquire
with a new blend of rigor into issues which have long been central
to macroeconomic theory    and policy. In a recent paper Gaul and
Masera (1988) have used an open economy version of Blanchards
model to answer the following question. Suppose an exogenous shack
(e.g. an increase in the world rate of interest) causes the public
debt to start rising: does a combination of fiscal and monetary
policy exist that stabilizes the public debt while keeping income
along some predetermined path (so as to avoid both unemployment
and inflation)?
      The core of the problem is the following, Aggregate demand
is a function of both the flows (of taxes and government spending
and the stock of the debt. When the latter starts to rise and the
                                                  in order to meet
government reduces spending or increases taxes
the solvency requirement there are two conflicting forces on the
level   of activity originating from a rising stock and a declining
flow, Galli and Masera show that a under rather general conditions
it   is possible to reduce   j2ymsendin        at a rate which just

compensates the effects of a growing debt on the level activity.
The ensuing policy prescription is that spending be reduced
gradually.
      The work of Galli and Masera focussed on government spending
as the instrument;    nothing is said about taxes,, which are held
constant in the analysis. It turns out that in this model the
economics of tax policy is very different from that of public
spending. The effects of these two policies differ for reasons
which go well beyond those popularized by Haavelmo's (1945)
analysis of the balanced budget multiplier.
      The basic point    that we make here is that there exists no
tax policy that can decouple the growth of consumption from that
of the debt. No matter how fast taxes are increased, consumption
                                3


continues to rise as long as the stock of debt rises; in other
words    in  this model,    independen-ly of the values of the
parameters, stock  effects always dominate.
       In order   to maintain income as close as possible to a

predetermined path in the face of shocks, taxes must temporarily
be changed as much as is feasible so as to quickly stabilize the
debt. In formal terms, the solution to the problem of minimizing a
loss function in the deviation of income from target is to achieve
a discrete change in the stock of debt, which requires an infinite
instantaneous flow rate of taxation.        This policy allows the
authorities to immediately attain the target. In economic terms
this means changing the stock of the debt by the stroke of a pen.
Even if one rules out extreme solutions, it still remains that
shock treatment,    rather  than gradualism, is the prescription of
this model when taxes, rather than spending, are the instrument of
policy.
      The following proposition further highlights the difference
between tax and spending policies. When government spending is
increased, there exists no sequence of present and future taxes of
finite size that can avoid fluctuations of the level of activity.
When spending is increased, the debt starts to rise: until it
reaches a position of rest, consumption continues to rise. If
taxes are raised as much as spending so as to keep the budget in
balance, income rises as in Haavelmo's model. In order to avoid
the  increase in income, taxes must be increased by more: the debt
then starts to fall and so does consumption until the system has
reached a new steady state. In substance, if taxes are raised so
as to keep the debt constant, income varies; if they are raised by
the amount that is necessary to stabilize income, the debt starts
to vary and so do consumption and income.
      The  sharp asymmetry between the dynamic effects of tax and
spending policies in this model is, in our view, rather puzzling
and worth some investigation in order to understand its economic
                                4



significance and the extent to which it iz jecific to the chosen
model.
       In section 2 we    set up the simplest version of the model
which is necessary to obtain the    results the economy is closed,
labour is the only factor of production and prices are fixed. In
section 3 we derive the basic results. In section 4 we give an
economic interpretation   of the results. The basic suggestion is
that these results are straightforward implications of the inter—
temporal budget constraint when agents know the policy rule and
expectations about future non—interest income are consistent with
the model. Nore traditional dynamics can be obtained in two ways.
The first one is to introduce liquidity constraints in this case
the intertemporal   budget is not the relevant constraint for the
maximization problem. This approach has been extensively developed
in the literature.
      The second possibility is to assume that agents can be
surprised by government policies. We develop this second approach
and construct an example in which agents may have incorrect
forecasts about taxes but are rational in the sense that they
compute future income in a way which is consistent with the model
subject to the expected policy. It is shown that, given a loss
function in the deviation of income from target, a tax policy
exists that hits the target in every period. Furthermore, under
these assumptions, it is possible to derive an expression which
closely resembles the consumption function estimated by Ando and
Nodigliani (1963>.
      In section     5 we revert to the hypothesis that agents know
the   future policy   and characterize the dynamic behaviour of the
economy   under   the    two   assumptions  of precommittment and
discretion.   With    precommittment,    the loss function, while
positive, attains a lower value than under discretion because the
government   decides    its  strategy using     the   full   set   of
expectational constraints implied by the model.
                                           5


      The main point is that the as5umption of time consistency
acts as a constraint on the public autorities which, although not
powerless as in a Ricardian world, tiil cannot achieve the full
range  of macroeconomic   objectives which traditional    analysis
associates with tax policy.
      This conclusion is much more general than the model which is
used in this paper. It holds as well if investment and a foreign
sector are introduced or if prices are assumed to be market
clearing. In different or more complex models,        the lack of
controllability of the demand for consumption will be reflected on
different variables or on the same variables in different ways.



2.     The Theoretical         Framework

       We    consider    the     simplest IS—LM economy in which labour is
the  only factor of production and the price of goods in terms of
money is fixed and normalized to 1. The government budget
constraint is explicitly considered and states that current
expenditure (including interest> is financed through taxes, short
term bonds or money. The only complication relative to the text-
book model concerns the consumption function whose derivation
follows Blanchard (1985).
      Denote   by   c(s,t),  y(s,t),   m(s,t),   w(s,t),   h(s,t)
consumption, non—interest income, money balances, assets (money
plus short term government bonds) and human wealth of an agent
born at time s, as of time t. Let r(t) and t(t) be the interest
rate  and lump sum taxes at time t. p and 9 denote the probability
of death and the discount rate and are both constant. Under the
assumption that the instantaneous     utility is logarithmic, the
agent maximizes


1       5t
             J    [ in   c (s,v) +    (i—a)    ln
                                                    mJe8t_av
                                6


The  individual has a contract with an in  occ company according
to which the company inherits the agent wealth {ircluding money)
in exchange for the payment         urpw(s,t) to the agent while he
is alive. The dynamic budget conotraint of the individual Ia thus


(2)             (r(t)+p]w(s,t)+y(s,t)-T(t)-c(s,t)—r(t)m(s,t)

The term r(t)m(s,t) is subtracted from the RHS of (2) because only
the bond component of w(s,t)      yields interest Subject to the
appropriate transversality condition, the solution to this problem
from the first—order conditions when the only uncertainty concerns
the time of death can be written as


(3)   c(s.t)a(8+p)[w(s,t)+h(s,t)],and


(4)   m(s,t)   (l—)(8+p) (w(s,t)÷h(s,t))


where h(s,t) is human wealth defined as


(5)   h(s,t)


Aggregation over consumers can be dome the hard way as in Sian—
chard (1985) or in the following way, If no agents died at time t
(in which case the insurance industry would go brankrupt) the
evolution of aggregate wealth would be given by (2) with aggregate
variables substituting for individual ones. However every period p
individuals  die; since the probability of death is independent of
age,  p will also be the fraction of aggregate wealth that is
tranferred to the insurance     industry Hence in aggregation the
term pW(t) (upper case letters denoting aggregates over consumers)
must be subtracted from the budget constraint, which becomes:
                                              7



(6)    W(t} -    r(t)W(t)+Y(t)-T(t)-C(t)-r(t)M(t)
where T(t) is total tax payments.
       Similar   reasoning can be applied to human wealth. In this
case,   however,   the fraction of wealth that vanishes because p
individuals   die every period is immediately replaced by that of p
individuals   who are born. The replacement is one to one because,
by assumption,  income and taxes                  are  evenly distributed among
consumers of different age. The                   evolution of aggregate human
wealth is hence


(7)    fiCt)     [r(t)+p]H(t)-EY(t)-T(t)1


Aggregate money demand and consumption will be given by

(8)    C(t) —    (8+p)      A(t)    ,   and


(9)    M(t) —    (l—)(8÷p)         A(t)


where A(t) is total wealth defined as


(10)   A(t) —    H(t)   +   A(t)    -




The model is closed by the goods market equilibrium condition

(11)   Y—C+G,
where G is government consumption. We assume that the central bank
intervenes in the bond market so as keep the interest rate
constant (r(t) — r for all t); this assumption allows us to con-
centrate on movements of the IS schedule of the system neglecting
the feedbacks from the LM. We finally write
                                         8



(12)    ()       a   T(t)   +   iif(t)
sq.     (12)     is
                convenient way to paraneterise a policy reaction
                       a
function for luap sun taxes. In the prelialnary analysis of this
paragraph we set T(t) constant for all t: in this case eq. (12)
states that taxes are increised as the le'iel of the public debt,
lflt), rises. In the following sections we will neód to consider
nore general paths for T(t).
      To characterize the dynanic behaviour of the systel, we sun
(6) and (7) using (8), (9) and (10): this yieldS
         I
(13) A       a   (r—G)A—pW

Using    (8), (9), (11) and (12), eq.            (6) becoaes
         I   a —(y—r)if+G-T—(1—e)(O+p)A      .
(14)    if


On the systea (13) and (14), we Sapose

(15)     r—O)O,and
(16)     y—r>O.
      Later in this section we will discuss the reasons why these
restrictions are inposed. For the aoaent, we take then as given
and describe the phase diagraa of the systea (Fig.. 1)
                                    9



                                                                    Fig. 1


              G—T                                    C          0
                                                     A —   0   (C — 0)
           (l—a(8+p)
                     A




                                              G-T               w
                                              y— r

       0
The A — 0 line is the      locus along which total wealth (A) is
constant;    since    from equation (8) consumption is proportional to
A,  along this       schedule consumption is constant as well. The
equation for this schedule is obtained by setting A equal to                 zero
in eq. (13) and solving for A:


(17)


Eq. (17) has intercept at zero and a positive slope (since r—8>0).
The partial derivative of A with respect to A is positive:
                                                0
therefore the direction of motion around the A — 0 schedule is
unstable.    This    is   represented in   Figure    1 by      vertical arrows
pointing away from the A     — 0 line.
                                            0
       The downward sloping line labelled W     0 represents   the
combinations of A and W which maintain the debt constant. From eq.
(14), an increase in the debt reduces W because of the assumption
that taxes are increased by a factor y which is greater than the
rate of interest. Also an increase in A reduces W.  From eq.   (9)
the term (1—a)(O+p)A on the RHS of (14) is equal to rM: an     in-
crease   in A shifts    the financing of the deficit from bonds to
                                          10


money, thus
        a
             allowing the government to                   on interest payments.
Setting W   0  in equation (14) yields                   the expression for the
constant debt line:


(18)    A      —                         W÷ G   —
                   (l—m)(8+p) {Y_r                  T]
                   a
Around       the   q     0  the direction of motion is stable:
                             line,
horizontal arrows point  towards the line.
      In conclusion,    the dynamics of the system is saddle point
stable: the saddle path is line SS in the figure.


        Wenow explain why we impose restriction (15) and (16).
Restriction (15) ensures that we are considering cases in which
the public debt is positive in the steady state, This is seen from
eq. (17): if consumption and therefore A are positive, the debt is
positive only if r—8>0. We could of course consider the case
which the government is a net creditor in steady state, but th.i
is a less interesting case and will be neglected.
      Restriction (16) is sufficient, but by no means necessary,
to ensure that the system be a saddle point stable. Solving for W
from (17) and (18) yields


(19)    w      —        (G.-T)


where        is the determinant of the system:


(20)         — —   (y—r)(r—8)    —   p(l—)p(e+p)

Saddle point           stability requires that the determinant be negative.
Hence for W            to be positive, G—T must also be positive. When y=O,
G—T is the             primary deficit; if it is positive the debt may be
stable only            if in steady state     the government receives net
                                  11


interest from the private sector, i.e. money is larger than wealth
(   small in (20)) which implies that bonds are negative. If y     is
positive the system may both be stat1e and have positive bonds in
steady state (for which a necessary and sufficient condition is
y > —
        --); if it is greater than r, is negative and the system
is saddle point stable regardless of the value of (including the
case when —l and our unbacked currency has no value, as in
Sargent, 1987, chapt. 4.1).



3.      The Basic Results


        Thesystem defined by eqs. (13) and (14) is invariant with
respect       to
             equal  changes in G and T. However when G and T are
increased by equal amounts income rises from eq. (11), the goods
market equlibrium condition. The balanced budget multiplier is
1  as in the simple textbook model (on this point see also Rankin
(1987) and Frenkel and Razin (1987)).
        If                        0
         T rises more than G, the w — 0 schedule shifts down as
in Figure 2.
                                                          Fig. 2

                                             0
                   C,   A                    A-C




                                                   w

        Since expected net non—interest disposable income falls, the
human    wealth component of A immediately falls from E to S. Over
                                       12


time   the public debt           shrinks    and   so   dn   total   wealth   and
consumption.
        If    at  point B income   is unchanged relative to point E
(because      taxes have been raised in such a way as to cause a fall
in consumption which equals the increase in G), it will neces-
sarily be falling further from point B to the new steady state E'.
      This example shows that a once and for all change in T does
not stabilize income continuously when G is changed. This point
can be made more general in two ways. First a single change in T
does not stabilize income, in the face of any shock (interest
rate,    u,    p,    8). This can easily be checked graphically. The nore
interesting         point is there exists no pattern of T(t) which can
stabilize income continuously;     furthermore the time it takes to
stabilize income is no smaller than the time it takes to stabilize
the public debt. The reverse is not true; the debt may be fixed
while consumption and income change.
       These points are easily proved. From eq. (13) we know that
A    0 implies that the level of the debt be constant.     Recalling
that consumption depends only on A, this means that consumption
will always vary unless the debt is constant. Since A is the sum
of human wealth plus the debt, another way of stating this point
is to say that under no circumstance can the variation of human
wealth be equal in size and opposite in sign to that of the debt.
To illustrate this point, suppose for a moment that there is no
money (u      1): in this case the dynamics of the debt (eq. 13) is
independent   of  A.  It may then be thought       that it should be
possible   to  have  separate control over  the dynamics of W and H.
Current taxes can be used to control the dynamics of the debt,
which is completely independent of future taxes. Given present
taxes,   it may seem that there should exist a future path of taxes
that causes current human wealth to vary, at least for some time,
in such a way as to keep the sum of human wealth and the debt
constant. Eq. (13) tells us that this is not possible (regardless
                                            13


of whether a is equal or greater than zero).
       This point is much more general than the model used in this
paper: eq. (13) is derived exclusively from aggregation of the
first—order conditions of individual consumers. It holds as well
in models with flexible prices and market clearing, or in models
in which there      is a foreign sector or labour is not the only
factor   of production.   The only thing that would change is the
definition of W, which, in more complex models, could no longer be
indentified with the public debt.
       In this model,    an immediate implication   is that   if G
changes,   consumption  will start to vary over time, unless P is
changed by the same amount (so as to keep W   0); if this is done
however income increases.
      Concerning the sign of the change in consumption, it can be
shown that if r, p and S are constant any fiscal policy which
causes the debt not to fall at any time (rise) and to increase
(decrease)   at   least   sometimes, will cause consumption to
continuously  increase  (decrease>  at all times.    This is the
following

proposition: let w(t0,v) be the level of the debt expected for
time v, as of time t0 and (v, v+5) be the change in the debt
expected to occur between v and v+6, i.e.

       A(v,v+6)                      —
                        W(t0,v+)         W(t0,v)


       A(v,v÷6)     > 0 for all 6>0 and
                                                 v>t0

and    A(v,v÷6)     >   0 for some 6>0 and
                                                   v>t0

then
       A(t+6)   —   A(t)   > 0 for    all   t0   < t    <   v+& and   6 > 0
                                              14




where    v+        is the last period in which wealth rises.


Proof.       Integrating       (13) forward yields

                      _8)(t_v)
A(t)
             fe                      pW(t0,v)dv    Je_(r_epw(t0,t+v)dv

Similarly

A(t+&)         J     e8pw(t0,t÷8÷v)dv
which can be written as


(21)     A(t+6)         f
                              e_(    8)Vp(w(tt+v)    +   (t+v,t+v+6))dv

                       A(t) +        j; e9'pA(t÷v,t÷v+8)dv
Since (.,.) is never negative A(t+6) > A(t). If t is smaller than
the last time in which (.,.) is positive A(t+6) > A(t).



4.       Interpretation

         The        results     of     the previous section are somewhat puzzling
for two reasons.
      First, they are at variance with what one can obtain from a
traditional consumption function; this is often written in a form
like


(22)     C         c[Y—T,W]
                                                l

In (22) there always exist a level and rate of change   of T that
holds C constant at any desired level when W    0.
       Second, from a mathematical point of view, there are as many
independent   instruments  Cone tax for each period) as there are
targets (income in each period). The mathematical puzzle is easily
resolved noting that the target can be attained continuously
moving the instruments by an infinite amount: if wealth taxes can
be levied (which is the same as setting the flow of T equals to
infinity),  then wealth can instantly be brought to the desired
steady state. A surprise wealth tax (or subsidy) solves the
problem of the debt and that of the stabilization of income at the
same time.
      From the economic point of view, the lack of controllability
of the system derives critically from the assumption that agents
know future policies.
       If   we       relax     this
                           assumption,  agents will maximize (1)
subject to (2) and aggregate consumption and wealth will still be
given by (8) and (14). Human wealth will not however accumulate as
in eq. (7). The discounted value of expected net income will have
to be written as


(23)   H(t) -
                 J     [Y(t,v) —       T(t,v)Je+(t_dv
where Y(•) and T(.) now depend on t, the time when the expectation
is taken. Differentiating (23) with respect to t and assuming that
the present is known (so that Y(t,t) — Y(t) etc.), yields


(24)   H(t) -    -    [Y(t)    —   TCt)J   +   (r÷p)   H(t) ÷ Y(t)    ,   where

(25)   T(t) -                [Y(t,v)   —   T(t,v)J     e+(t_dv
Y(t)   represents        the       revision of expectations          as new information
                                                 16


comes in. Proceeding as before we can add             (6)   and (24), using   (8)

and (9); this yields


(26)    A     (r—9)       A   — pW +   Y(t)
The presence of the surprise term Y(t) in (26) suggests that it
should now be possible to control the level and the dynamics of A
independently of W. We pursue this idea and assume that agents
have rational expectations in the sense that they compute future
income   in a way that is consistent with the model; they may
however be wrong in their forecasts of future taxes. Under these
assumptions,  we can derive a consumption function which is very
similar to (22).
      The solution is obtained as follows. We first compute the
value of A(t) which is consistent with the model, given W(t) and
agents expectations about future taxes. In the Appendix, we show
that this is given by


(27)    A(t) —       L [W(t)+f(t)]          ,   and
                     vi

(28)    f(t)    —         e_X2(t)(G_T(t,v)]dv
where          is the expectation of T at tine v, as of time
            T(t,v)
is the unstable root of the system (eqs (13) and (14)). v1 is the
first element of the right eigenvector associated with the stable
root (X1)

                r— e—
(29)    v1—                    .




Since r—8>Q         and
                      V1    positive.
                          X<O,         is
      Equations (27)  and (28) determine consumption              at each point
in time. (13> determines the evolution of the debt.
                                                       17


      Next we formulate a rule according to which agents revise
their expectations. For instance, suppose that agents believe that
T will gradually evolve from its current value to a fixed
value    :
(30>           T(t,v)        —   X[T(t)—j          ;       X > 0


Since total taxes T are given by T plus the term yW, eq. (30>
implies that agents believe that taxes tend toward a value which
is given by a constant                   plus an increasing function of the level
of the debt. Integrating                 (30>, substituting the result in (26i and
integrating again yields


 31 >    ft        G —
                   >2
                             T(t>    —   _____
                                         X22+X)
If   X 0, agents simply consider current T as permanent.
      Substituting (31> and (27) into the consumption                                             function
yields

(32>     C(t) — n0          [wt+—
                                         —             —

                                                            22>              }
                                                                                  , where

          0       1—a   (r— '    1           1—a
                                                   p(1—a)(jp                     a(8+p>   >
                                                       r—8—X1                      V1

Substituting (11> and (12> in (32) yields

(33)          —         +        (Y—T) + n3            (T—)         ,   with
                                                                                              X
                  x2 n0 >
                  X2t0
                          0          2         X2+n0
                                                            >   0         113
                                                                                   (X2+n0)(X2+X)
                                                                                                    > 0



With constant parameters and X         0,  (33> is a particular
functional form of (22) and closely resembles the consumption
function estimated in Ando and Modigliani (1963).
                                               18


        Themain point is that in (33), as well as in (22), wealth
and taxes appear separately so that the system can be controlled
                                          level of consumption and
continuously through taxes at any desired
therefore of income.
      From (32) and the goods market condition (11), one can solve
for T(t) as a function of the desired level of income
                                                             after
Substituting then into the debt accumulation equation (14),
                         as  a  function  of     and G, yields the
A has been expressed
following   stable   differential   equation,   which   completely
characterizes the dynamics of the system under discretionary
policies.


        W     — a    W
                               —
                          — (G—T) A —+        1*
                                              IY —G)


where          •+    A2
                          +   A—   r    >0.
        The implication        is that a loss function of the form


(34)    L(t)
                    ft1yt_y*J2et_dv
can be set equal to its minimum value (zero), through appropriate
tax policies, for any          Y
                         and any shock that hits the system. As in
                                                                is
Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Calvo (1978) the optimal plan
time inconsistent.



 5.      The Suboptimality of Discretiom


         We    now   revert the assumption that agents have correct
                                   to
 forecasts of future taxes and show that the path for taxes which
 has been derived in section 4 is suboptimal.
       Consider the following expression for T(t):
(35)     T(t) — B.. +               W(t)

Substituting (35) into (32), using (11), we can solve for the
values
        B0 and B1, as a function of target income (y*) which
result  under the assumption that the government reoptimizes every
period.



               G   + [G—Y
                            *         v1X2
(36)     B0                     1




(37)     l
      We now show that setting B1       is not optimal in the sense
                                    >'2
that it does not minimize the loss function (eq. 34).
      Suppose that the government commits itself to a tax rule of
the     form of (35). Using (27) the equation for the saddle path can
then be written as


        A(t) — v0 +
(38)                      v'W(t)
where v0 is a constant. We can hence write


(39)    A(t)       A* —   e)i(t_to) vl                 {W(tQ)_w*]


where    A       W are the steady state levels of A and W when Y =
               and
       Giventhe relation between
                                 A1 (the speed of adjustment of the
system)   and  v1 (eq. 29), for any t we have that A(t) — A* (hence
Y(t) —  y*) is smaller the larger A1 in absolute value. In turn the
relation between     and    is given by  l

(40)    A1
                   {(r_Y_1)
                                     +     (r-e)   —   (9)2         4p(l-)(O+p)
                                                                                  }
                                 20




   is a monotonically   decreasing function of   ,; moreover   it is

unbounded, i.e.

(41)   urn       —                    —




       The limiting case in which    is set equal to infinity cor-

responds to a wealth tax; in this case the system jumps imme-
diately to the steady state. Wealth is no longer a predetermined
variable because the flow of taxes is unbounded.
      In conclusion the formal solution to the problem of mini-
mizing the loss function is to set      equal to infinity. If this
is not feasible    it still   remains true that if the authorities
commit themselves to a rule like (35) with       l larger than X2 they
can attain a lower value of the loss             function than under
discretion.
                                                 21


Appendix

      To derive eqs. (27) and (28) of section 4 we first compute
the  standard rational expectation solution of the model and show
how it should be modified to allow for suprises.
      Consider the following differential system


(1)     Dx(t)    e   mx(t) +     C 2(t)


x(t)  is a 2xl vector of state variables, aCt) an nxl vector of
forcing or exogenous variables. B and C are constant matrixes and
D is the linear differential operator. for the model of this paper
the elements of x(t) are W(t) and ACt), aCt) is the scalar G—T(t)
and C   —   transpose      (1,01.
        Since        the     aodel        has     two distinct   roots, S   can be
diagonalised      by'   a similarity transformation

(2)     A—v1mv.
V  is a 2x2 matrix of eigeavectors of B and A is a diagonal matrix
whose diagonal elements are the eigenvalues     C 0 and 12> 0).

      Let


(3)     puC1x.
Then    (1)   can be written as

(4)     Dp(t)    —   Ap(t)   +   v'   C   s(t)


or

(Sa)              a 11p1(t) + u1 C          s(t)      •   and
        Dp1(t)
                                                      22


                                     +
(5b)    Dp2(t)            X2p2(t)        u2 C z(t)

where u1 and u2 are the first and second row of                     V', Normalizing
the second row of V to be equal to I we have


                      1
        v_i                    1
                               L—i
                                     —V2
                 v1—v2

where    v1
                  are the elements of the first row of
                and
               v2
                                                                            V   Postmul—
tiplication by C yields


                                     z(t)       ,   and
        u1Cz(t)            vl.-v2


                           —     1
        u2Cz(t)                      z(t)
                               vi_v2

Since         > 0, we solve (Sb) forward to obtain


(6)     p2(t)         e2t       k2   +
                                         12 JteX2t_zt,vdv
where  z(t,v)  is the value of z expected for time v as of time t.
For         to  be bounded, it is required that k2      0. (Sa) is
     p2(t)
solved backward to obtain


                 —                          +
(7)     p1(t)         eXl(t_tO)k1                   v1v2   J::xlt_z
where  z(t,v) — z(v) for v   t by the assumption that the past and
the present are known.
      It is important    to note that t0 is the time when the last
surprise occurred. This means that in (6) z(t,v) =           since    z(t0,v)
t  > to. The value of k1 is derived from initial condition at t =
      for the predetermined variable W(t).
to
         Evaluating the first row of (3) at t =                 to yields
                                                                 23



(8)               —
                      p1(t0)            — W(t0)         -
                                                                      p(t0)
Note     that          since        W
                    is predetermined, while A is not,
                                                      k1 jumps at
t0.  (6), (7)  and (8) are the solutions of the problem Cx can be
obtained postrecursively inverting (3)) when no surprises occur
between t0 and t.
         If
          surprises occur and do so in continuous time, the system
is still valid with the caveat that t =     therefore    will vary
                                                      k1                      t0;
with    t:


(8')    k1(t)
                         - w(t)          -
                                             V
                                                   p2(t)
                         V1                  V1

Setting       t
                       to
                             in (7) and using (8') yields


(7')    p1(t)               k1(t)

Given the normalization of V, X                                      Vp is written in scalar form as

(9a)    W(t> —          v1p1(t) + v2p2(t)                    ,       and

(9b)    A(t) —          p1(t)       +
                                        p2(t)
Substituting (8') in (9b} yields

(10)    A(t) —                W(t) —              p2(t)          +    p2(t)   —
                                                                                  — W(t)   +   12   p2(t)


Using    (6)          in (10), yields


        A(t) —          —                                   and
(11)                          [w(t)+f(t)]           ,




(12)
         f(t)=$eX2(t(G_T(t,v))dv
                                       24


Bibliography
Ando, A. and     F. Modigliani  (1963), "The 'Life Cycle' Hypothesis of
                 Aggregate Implications   and Tests", American Economic
    Saving:
    Review,      n. 53, part 1, March.

Blanchard, 0. (1985), "Debt, Deficits,               and     Finite Horizons",
    Journal of Political Economy, April.

Calvo,  0. (1978), "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a
    Monetary Economy", Econometrica, 46(6).
Frenkel,    3.     and   A.   Razin   (1987),   "Spending,  Taxes and Real
    Exchange Rates", unpublished manuscript,          September 22.

Galli,  G. and R.S. Nasera (1988), "Government Deficits and Debts.
    The Necessity and Costs of Adjustment: The Case of Italy",
                                                           General
    paper prepared for the NEDO Conference on "Keynes's
    Theory After 50 Years", London, 15-48 September 1987 (forth-
    coming in Macmillan, 1988),
Haavelmo,  'r.  (1945), "Multiplier Effects of a Balanced Budget",
    Econometrica, vol. XIII, pp. 311—318.

           F.E. and E.C. Prescott  (1977),  "Rules Rather Than
Kydland,
    Discretion:  The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans", Journal of
    Political Economy, 85(3).
                                                           and the
!odigliani, F. and R. Brumberg (1954), "Utility Analysis
    Consumption   Function: An Interpretation of Cross—Section
    Data",  in K.K. Kurihara (ed.),     Post Keynesian Economics,
    Rutgers University Press.
                                                              Two—
Rankin, N. (1987), "An Intertemporal Version of Mundell's
    Country Flexible Exchange Rates Model with Disequilibrium
    Microfoundations: Is Policy Interdependence Inevitable?", CEPR
    Discussion Paper n. 185, June.

Sargent,   T.J.  (1987),  "Dynamic Macroeconomic Theory", Cambridge
     (Mass.), Harvard University Press.
