NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DECLINING LABOR MARKET PROSPECTS OF LESS-EDUCATED MEN
Ariel J. Binder
John Bound
Working Paper 25577
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25577

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

We thank Charlie Brown, Gordon Hanson, Enrico Moretti, Mel Stephens, and Tim Taylor for
helpful comments. Binder acknowledges research support from an NICHD training grant to the
Population Studies Center at the University of Michigan (T32 HD007339). Tyler Radler
provided excellent research assistance. Errors and opinions are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Ariel J. Binder and John Bound. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Declining Labor Market Prospects of Less-Educated Men
Ariel J. Binder and John Bound
NBER Working Paper No. 25577
February 2019
JEL No. E24,J12,J21,J22,J23,J31
ABSTRACT
Over the last half century, U.S. wage growth stagnated, wage inequality rose, and the labor-force participation
rate of prime-age men steadily declined. In this article, we examine these labor market trends, focusing
on outcomes for males without a college education. Though wages and participation have fallen in
tandem for this population, we argue that the canonical neo-classical framework, which postulates
a labor demand curve shifting inward across a stable labor supply curve, does not reasonably explain
the data. Alternatives we discuss include adjustment frictions associated with labor demand shocks
and effects of the changing marriage market—that is, the fact that fewer less-educated men are forming
their own stable families—on male labor supply incentives.
Our observations lead us to be skeptical of attempts to attribute the secular decline in male labor-force
participation to a series of separately-acting causal factors. We argue that the correct interpretation
probably involves complicated feedback between falling labor demand and other factors which have
disproportionately affected men without a college education.

Ariel J. Binder
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
USA
ajbinder@umich.edu
John Bound
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jbound@umich.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25577

During the last 50 years, labor market outcomes for men without a college education in
the United States worsened considerably. Between 1973 and 2015, real hourly earnings for the
typical 25-54-year-old man with only a high school degree declined by 18.2 percent,1 while real
hourly earnings for college-educated men increased substantially. Over the same period, laborforce participation by men without a college education plummeted. In the late 1960s, nearly all
25-54-year-old men with only a high school degree participated in the labor force; by 2015, such
men participated at a rate of 85.3 percent.
In this article, we examine secular change in the U.S. labor market since the 1960s. We
have two distinct but related objectives. First, we assemble an overview of developments in the
wage structure, focusing on the dramatic rise in the college wage premium. Second, we examine
possible explanations for the decline in labor-force participation among less-educated men. We
begin this part with a review of literature connecting declining labor market activity with
declining wages in this population. While such a connection indicates a reduction in labor
demand, we point out that the canonical neoclassical framework, which emphasizes a labor
demand curve shifting inward across a stable labor supply curve, does not reasonably account for
this development. This is because wages have not declined consistently over the sample period
while labor-force participation has. Moreover, the uncompensated elasticity of labor supply
necessary to align wage changes with participation changes, during periods when both were
declining, is implausibly large.
We then examine two oft-discussed developments outside of the labor market: rising
access to Social Security disability insurance (DI), and the growing share of less-educated men
with a prison record. Rising DI program participation can account for a non-trivial share of

1

Hourly earnings declined from $21.40 to $17.50. Throughout this article we adjust reported wages to 2017 prices
using the Personal Consumption Expenditure deflator.

2

declining labor-force participation among men aged 45-54, but appears largely irrelevant to
declining participation in the 25-44-year-old group. Additionally, we document that most nonparticipating men support themselves primarily on the income of other family members, with a
distinct minority depending primarily on their own disability benefits. The literature has not
progressed far enough to admit a reasonable quantification of the impact of rising exposure to
prison on the labor-force participation rate, but recent estimates suggest that sizable effects are
possible. We flag this as an important area for further research.
The existing literature, in our view, has not satisfactorily explained the decline in lesseducated male labor-force participation. This leads us to develop a new explanation. As others
have documented, family structure in the United States has changed dramatically since the
1960s, featuring a tremendous decline in the share of less-educated men forming and maintaining
stable marriages. We additionally show an increase in the share of less-educated men living with
their parents or other relatives. Providing for a new family plausibly incentivizes a man to
engage in labor market activity: a reduction in the prospects of forming and maintaining a stable
family, then, removes an important labor supply incentive. At the same time, the possibility of
drawing income support from existing relatives creates a feasible labor-force exit. We suspect
that changing family structure not only shifts male labor supply incentives independently of
labor market conditions, but also moderates the effect of a male labor demand shock on laborforce participation. Since male earning potential is an important determinant of new marriage
formation, a persistent labor demand shock which reduces male earning potential exerts an
impact on male labor-force participation which operates through the marriage market.
Much prior research has addressed U.S. labor market trends over the last half century,
including several recent reviews on male employment (Moffitt 2012; CEA 2016; Abraham and

3

Kearney 2018). Our aim is not to exhaustively review the literature, but rather to point out
where we think consensus has developed and where we think important questions remain
unanswered. In the synthesis that emerges, the phenomenon of declining prime-age male laborforce participation is not coherently explained by a series of separately-acting causal factors. A
more reasonable interpretation, we argue, involves complex feedbacks between labor demand,
family structure, and other factors which have disproportionately affected less-educated men.

The U.S. Wage Structure since 1970
Prime-age men of all education levels experienced robust wage growth in the mid-1960s
and early 1970s, as shown in Figure 1, which plots trends in geometric average hourly earnings
by education group.2 This growth ceased after 1973, with hourly earnings for all but those with
advanced degrees falling for the next 20 years. After rising again for a decade starting around
1994, hourly earnings stagnated for the next decade (again, apart from those with advanced
degrees). Over the last few years, hourly earnings have begun to grow again for men of all
education levels. It is too early to tell whether this growth is a blip in the long-run trend or the
beginning of a sustained increase. Nonetheless, for groups without a college degree, real hourly
earnings were substantially lower in 2015 than they were in 1973.3

2

We use the March supplement to the Current Population Survey throughout this paper unless otherwise specified.
Following the standard definition, we consider prime-age men to be between the ages of 25 and 54. Within each
education group we implement a reweighting method to hold constant the age distribution across time. We compute
geometric averages by applying the exponential function to the average of log hourly earnings. An online appendix,
available at <>, includes details regarding data processing as well as additional figures and tables.
3
The hourly earnings numbers we report represent geometric average hourly earnings for those working in the
reference year. Conceptually, we might prefer the typical wage that a man might expect (including those not
working). Using techniques developed by Juhn, Murphy and Topel (1991) we imputed wages for those who did not
work throughout the entire reference year. Including these imputations in our calculation of wages mildly affects
the trends but does not substantially alter the broad patterns across time. See Appendix Figure A1.

4

Substantial changes in wage dispersion are also apparent. During the 1970s, wages of
college graduates fell relative to those of high school graduates; after 1980, the college wage
premium increased dramatically. For example, in 1980, the average college graduate earned
1.26 times as much per hour as the average high school graduate. By 2015, this differential had
widened to 1.68. The wage differential for advanced degree holders relative to high school
graduates grew more sharply, from 1.41 to 2.17. Note that we are using the geometric average,
which is less sensitive than the arithmetic average to outlier earners: if hourly earnings are lognormally distributed, the geometric average is the median of the distribution. Moreover, we have
removed outlier earners from our calculations (see Appendix for details). Even with these
adjustments to the data, we still measure a large secular increase in male wage dispersion.
A breakdown of the full sample into different demographic groups reveals similar
patterns (Appendix Figure A2). For example, whites and blacks of all ages and education levels
experienced strong wage growth in the mid-1960s and early 1970s. Thereafter, whites and
blacks of all ages experienced substantial wage decline—especially the high school dropout
populations. This was followed by robust growth for all demographic groups from 1994-2002
and then modest decline throughout the 21st century. Since the early 1990s, cumulative wage
growth appears to be higher for high school dropouts than for high school graduates or those
with some college education. One modest exception to these overall patterns is that secular wage
fluctuations appear relatively muted for the 45-54 age group. Card and Lemieux (2001) have
shown how these patterns are consistent with cohort-specific changes in relative supply, though

5

an alternative explanation is that older workers are more insulated from labor market change than
younger workers.4
When analyzing secular change in labor market outcomes by education group, an
important question is whether the underlying skill composition of education groups has remained
constant over time. This may be especially relevant for the less-educated groups of interest. For
example, in the late 1960s, nearly 40 percent of prime-age men had not completed high school;
by the 2010s, this share had plummeted to around 10 percent. The share of prime-age men with
only a high school degree has remained relatively constant over time as high school completion
rates but also college participation rates have risen. It is plausible that at least a portion of
observed secular declines in wages and employment among less-educated men stem from this
population becoming increasingly negatively selected on labor market skills.
To assess this possibility, we compiled data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of
Youth (NLSY) containing well-validated measures of cognitive and non-cognitive skills.
Results and further discussion comparing the 1959-65 birth cohorts (drawn from the NLSY79) to
the 1980-84 birth cohorts (drawn from the NLSY97) appear in the online appendix. Perhaps
surprisingly, we document little evidence that average skill levels in the high-school-dropout and
high-school-graduate populations declined between the two cohorts. Our observations are
relatively consistent with the work of Altonji, Bharadwaj and Lange (2012) documenting
population improvements in various skill levels between the NLSY79 and 97 cohorts.
Explaining Wage Dispersion

4

While the focus of this paper is on men, it is worth mentioning that wages for women have followed similar trends
(Autor 2014), though with more overall wage growth since the late 1970s, commensurate with the narrowing of the
gender wage gap (Blau and Kahn 2017).

6

Labor economists have drawn on the neoclassical supply-demand framework to interpret
secular changes in wage dispersion. For example, the relative size of the college-educated
workforce grew rapidly during the 1970s, inducing the relative wages of college graduates to fall
(Freeman 1975). Since then, the relative supply of college-educated workers grew at a slower
rate and their relative wages rose dramatically. These developments are consistent with an
outward shift in relative demand for college-educated workers (Katz and Murphy 1992; Murphy
and Welch 1992; Bound and Johnson 1992; for a longer-term perspective, Goldin and Katz
2008). Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008) attributed secular growth in the college wage premium
over the 1970s-early 2000s to an outward shift in relative demand which proceeded at a constant
pace until the early 1990s and then slowed somewhat.
Since 1990, a voluminous literature has analyzed potential causes of shifts in relative
demand. Some initially observed that rising trade with countries with abundant supplies of lessskilled workers should put downward pressure on the relative wages of less-skilled U.S. workers
(for example, Murphy and Welch 1991). Economists during the 1990s produced a range of
empirical estimates of this effect, generally finding that the magnitudes were not nearly large
enough to explain the entire observed decline in relative wages. According to the 1997 survey of
William Cline, “a reasonable estimate…would be that the international influences [have]
contributed about 20 percent of the rising wage inequality in the U.S.” Even this modest
estimate was high relative to other contemporary surveys (for example, the 1995 “Symposium on
Inequality and Trade” issue of this journal).
Over the last 25 years, the North American Free Trade Agreement was implemented,
China joined the World Trade Organization, and the volume of trade between high and middleincome countries increased dramatically. Nonetheless, more recent studies reached the same

7

basic conclusion, with Katz (2008) suggesting that rising trade accounted for less than 20 percent
of the increase in the college wage premium between 1980 and 2006 (see also Krugman 2008;
Bivens 2007). More recently, Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013) leveraged commuting-zone-level
variation to estimate that rising import competition from China could explain roughly 25 percent
of the decline in U.S. manufacturing employment between 1990 and 2007. Their estimates
indicate large effects of trade on highly-exposed communities but are consistent with modest
overall effects of trade on relative wages.
What explains the other 80 percent of the growth in dispersion in the U.S. wage
structure? During the 1990s, a consensus arose that skill-biased technological change was a
primary driver. Bound and Johnson (1992) and Katz and Murphy (1992) showed that labor
reallocation across sectors could account for relatively little of the shift in the utilization of
skilled labor during the 1980s. Most of the change occurred within narrowly defined sectors,
suggesting a broad-based shift in demand for skilled labor unrelated to trade forces.5 Berman,
Bound and Grilliches (1994) and Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) reported similar findings,
while also showing that skill upgrading was most rapid within industries which invested most in
computer technologies.
The “skill-based” framework succeeds in explaining the dramatic growth in wage
dispersion of the 1980s. However, since the 1990s, wages of high school dropouts relative to
high school graduates and those with some college have not continued to decline—if anything
they have increased. Accordingly, Autor, Levy and Murnane (2002, 2003) envisioned a
framework in which the production process involves several types of tasks: for example, manual,

5

Feenstra and Hanson (1996; 1999) argued that the outsourcing of intermediate products implied that the framework
used by the above authors would underestimate the role played by trade. While this point is well-taken, even after
accounting for outsourcing, Feenstra and Hanson’s estimates suggested that skill-biased technological change was
substantially more important than trade in explaining the rise in the relative demand for college-educated labor.

8

routine, and abstract. Computers substitute for labor in routine tasks but complement labor in
abstract tasks, resulting in increased relative demand for labor with high cognitive skill. Autor,
Katz and Kearney (2006, 2008) have also hypothesized that computers do not impact low-skill
manual tasks: thus, this “task-based” framework can account for the post-1990s polarization of
relative wage growth.6 The task-based framework has become an enormously influential in
terms of understanding which jobs are vulnerable to displacement (Acemoglu and Autor, 2011).
Research following Autor, Levy and Murnane (2002, 2003) has found that routine tasks are
likeliest to be moved offshore or automated (e.g. Frey and Osborne 2017) and, in general, that
skill-biased technological change is fundamentally altering the nature of work (Levy and
Murnane 2004; Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018).
Other factors may also have contributed to the growth in wage dispersion since 1980.
Some have focused on institutional factors. For example, DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996)
estimated that the decline in unionization of workers contributed close to 20 percent of the rise in
the college wage premium over the 1980s, although these estimates ignore general equilibrium
effects of de-unionization. While such effects in theory could cut in either direction, recent work
has found positive spillover effects of unions on the wages of comparable nonunion workers
(Fortin, Lemieux and Lloyd 2018). DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) also estimated that the
falling real minimum wage modestly increased the college wage premium for young men but had
negligible effects for more experienced men. Subsequent research has confirmed small effects of
changes in the minimum wage on the wages of low-wage workers (Lee 1999; Autor, Manning

6

Holzer (2010) has argued that the polarization claim is oversold: while middle-skill jobs have been disappearing in
some sectors, they have been stable or growing in others. A different explanation emphasizes feedback effects of
the skill-based framework operating through the product market. For example, an increase in relative demand for
skilled labor may raise skilled households’ demand for service-oriented products which are intensive in unskilled
labor (Mazzolari and Ragusa, 2013; Murphy, 2016).

9

and Smith 2016). Other work has discussed the impact of the deregulation of various industries
(Hirsch 1988; Rose 1987; in this journal, Fortin and Lemieux 1997).
Another factor that has received considerable attention is the assimilation of massive
inflows of women and immigrant men into the U.S. labor market. As illustrated in Appendix
Table A1, women and immigrant men of all education statuses and age levels have increasingly
entered the U.S. labor market since 1960. However, the entry of women has been skill-biased.
For example, among 35-44-year-olds, the female share of the college-educated workforce more
than doubled, from 25 percent in 1960 to 51 percent in 2016. On the other hand, the female
share of the high school graduate workforce increased only slightly, from 38 percent in 1960 to
41 percent in 2016. It is therefore unlikely that the entry of women into the workforce has
increased the college wage premium: if anything, such a development should have exerted
downward pressure.
The effect of immigration on the male wage distribution is more complicated to evaluate.
Inspection of Table A1 reveals that the increase in competition from immigrant men has been
modest and relatively uniform across education statuses—except for high school dropouts, where
the share immigrant men increased from roughly 5 to roughly 40 percent between 1960 and
2016. The impact of this influx on native (and immigrant) labor market opportunities remains a
hotly debated topic (see Card 2009; Borjas 2016; in this journal, Peri 2016). While it might
seem that the large inflow of workers with less than a high school education would significantly
depress high school dropouts’ relative wages, there are several reasons to suspect smaller effects.
First, if dropouts and high school graduates are close to perfect substitutes (as Card 2009
argued), the negative impact of this inflow will be diffused across all those with no more than a
high school education. Second, if immigrants tend to specialize in certain occupations, this may

10

increase opportunities for workers in other occupations due to production complementarities
(Peri and Sparber 2009). Third, the endogenous responses of natives to an influx of immigrants
is likely to dilute the economic effects of immigration (for a fuller discussion of each of these
issues, see Peri 2016). It does seem likely, however, that immigrants depress relative wages
locally in occupations into which they cluster (Cortes 2008; Burstein et al. 2017).
Secular Stagnation
If average wages for prime-age men had been trending upward strongly, then greater
wage dispersion could have been accompanied by higher wages for all, even the less-educated.
But instead, greater wage dispersion happened against a backdrop of stagnant average wage
growth. As reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, labor productivity grew at a brisk pace of
2.8 percent per year between 1948 and 1972. Thereafter, between 1973 and 2016, productivity
growth averaged only 1.4 percent per year (apart from a temporary boom from 1995 to 2004).
Thus, even if real hourly earnings had kept pace with productivity, there would have been a
slowdown in average wage growth. But additionally, in the last 20 years, labor’s share in
national income has steadily dropped (Appendix Figure A3; for explanations of this
phenomenon, see Elsby et al. 2013, Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014, Autor et al. 2017), leading
real hourly earnings to grow even more slowly than labor productivity. In the face of stagnant
overall wage growth created by these two developments, greater wage dispersion has translated
into a modest reduction in wages paid to less-skilled men.

The Secular Decline in Male Labor-Force Participation
As reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, there has been a near-continuous decrease
in the labor-force participation rate of prime-age American men, from 97.2 percent in 1960 to
11

88.2 percent in 2015: a cumulative decline of 9 percentage points. Considering that the
population of prime-age men in 2015 was around 61.4 million, the secular decline in
participation implies a cumulative loss of 5.53 million men from the prime-age workforce.7
In Figure 2 we plot the 1965-2016 evolution of the labor-force participation rate by
education status, using data from the March supplement to the Current Population Survey based
on individuals’ reported labor-force statuses in the survey week. The solid series include all
prime-age men, while the dashed series exclude foreign-born immigrants. (The CPS does not
record birthplace until 1994.) This exclusion lowers measured participation for high school
graduates and dramatically affects the downward trend for those without a high school diploma,
reflecting increasing representation of immigrants in this segment of the population combined
with their higher participation rates (Borjas 2017). The hourly earnings series presented earlier
in Figure 1 are not nearly as sensitive to the exclusion of immigrants.
As in the case of earnings, we observe a dramatic rise in labor-force participation
dispersion across education levels. In 1965, the difference in the participation rate between
advanced degree holders and high school dropouts was 3.2 percentage points; by 2015, this
difference had widened to 17.6 percentage points. Within the U.S.-born population, the
difference in the participation rate between advanced degree holders and high school dropouts
was a tremendous 31.5 percentage points in 2015. Clearly, most of the secular decline in primeage male labor-force participation can be attributed to those without a college degree; we focus
on this group for the remainder of the paper.

7

Although we focus here on the labor-force participation rate, the literature has sometimes focused on the
employment-to-population ratio. This statistic has also exhibited a long-run decline, but the pattern is far more
cyclical (at shorter as well as slightly longer-run frequencies). Business cycle dynamics are not a focus of this
paper, although it should be acknowledged that the participation rate exhibits mild cyclicality as well. This was
particularly evident in the early 2000s boom (Charles, Hurst and Notowidigo 2016), Great Recession, and
subsequent recovery. At the long-run frequency of interest, cyclicality does not affect the participation rate.

12

Appendix Figure A4 breaks the full sample up into demographic sub-groups by race, age
and education, and confirms that the same overall pattern of decline in prime-age male laborforce participation holds true within each sub-group. However, within each education status,
blacks experienced larger declines than whites at all age levels. This is especially true among
high school dropouts, where black participation rates tumbled by 30-40 percentage points. We
also note some heterogeneity in participation trends by age: while all age groups have withdrawn
from the labor force consistently over the sample period, the rate of withdrawal for young
workers aged 25-34 relative to older workers increased slightly after the mid-1990s. (This is
apart from high school dropouts aged 45-54, who have experienced alarmingly high rates of
withdrawal from the labor-force.)
Is Non-Participation Temporary or Permanent?
Does the measured labor-force participation rate reflect brief periods of non-participation
experienced by a sizable share of the population, or perpetual non-participation experienced by a
small share of the population? An account of how non-participation is distributed in the
population provides information about the appropriate theoretical framework for examining
change. For example, the canonical neoclassical labor supply framework conceives of the
amount of time spent working, given an hourly wage rate, as an optimal tradeoff between income
and substitution effects (Deaton and Muellbauer, 1980). This framework cannot readily shed
light on the decision not to spend any time working, which represents a corner solution.
However, if most men who are not participating at a given point in time will participate in the
future, then the standard framework remains a useful tool to analyze (changes in) male
participation behavior.

13

Using retrospective reports of labor-force status from the March Current Population
Survey, Juhn, Murphy and Topel (1991, 2002) argued that the rise in male joblessness since the
1960s was almost entirely the result of a growing number of men withdrawing permanently from
the workforce. Using contemporaneous reports of labor-force status, Coglianese (2018) recently
challenged this contention, showing that retrospective reports result in an undercount of brief
non-participation spells. We continue to examine this issue by leveraging two longitudinal
sources of labor-force participation data. The data come from a U.S. Census Bureau data
product which links Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) respondents to their
earnings information from the Social Security Administration (SSA). Details are provided in the
online appendix.
Using the SIPP data, we define participation as working at least one week in the given
survey month, and report in the top panel of Table 1 participation transition probabilities for
currently non-participating sub-groups of men with high school education or less. We consider
two such groups: men who experienced a transition from participation to non-participation
within the first 12 sample months, and men who began the sample period as non-participants.
We observe substantial short-run spells of non-participation. Among white high school
graduates who experienced a transition to non-participation, 51 percent had returned to the labor
force after 3 months, and 77 percent had returned to the labor force after 12 months. Among
white high school graduates who began the sample period as non-participants, 25 percent were in
the labor force after 3 months and 49 percent were in the labor force after 12 months. While
there are mild education and racial gradients to these estimates, we note striking consistency
across demographic groups.

14

Using earnings histories from the SSA, which exist on a consistently-coded basis for the
years 1978-2011, we are also able to construct participation transition rates over a longer-run
horizon. These are shown in the second panel of Table 1. Following Coglianese (2018), we
define yearly participation as a situation in which total administrative earnings for the year
exceed the threshold of one-half of the federal minimum wage times 40 hours per week times 13
weeks. We construct two similar groups of non-participants: men who experienced a transition
to yearly non-participation within the first 15 years observed, and men who were nonparticipants in the first year observed. (Because the definition of participation differs in these
short- and long-run analyses, the 12-month hazards reported in the top panel of Table 1 differ
from the 1-year hazards reported in the bottom panel.) Among white high school graduates who
experienced a transition to full-year non-participation, 66 percent had achieved annual
participation 2 years later, and 83 percent had achieved annual participation 5 years later.
Among white school graduates who entered the sample as full-year non-participants, 54 percent
achieved annual participation after 2 years, and 76 percent achieved annual participation after 5
years.
These findings indicate substantial churn into and out of the labor force at long-run as
well as short-run frequencies.
How do Jobless Men Survive?
Another important aspect of labor market non-participation is an account of how nonparticipating men obtain resources. Table 2 records annual household income statistics for
prime-age men with low labor-force attachment. (We define low labor-force attachment as no
more than 13 weeks of employment during the reference year.) The March supplement to the
Current Population Survey does not fully distinguish among relevant sources of income until

15

1992; thus, we consider all years from 1992 to 2017. For each education status, the top panel
reports average levels of annual income, rounded to the nearest hundred and broken down by
income source. This illustrates how much income the average man has access to and where it
comes from. The bottom panel records the frequency with which each source of income
accounts for the largest share of total household income, thereby illustrating heterogeneity in
income receipt. The online appendix contains additional information on data processing and
discusses some additional tabulations.
Low-participating men earn very little income: average earnings across all demographic
groups are at or below $1,300—an extremely low amount to live on for an entire year (top
panels). Accordingly, only 2-3 percent of the time does the man’s own earnings account for the
largest share of total household income (bottom panels). Among 45-54-year old men, own
disability-related benefits are relatively important, amounting to around $7,300 for whites and
$5,300 for blacks. Own disability benefits constitute the largest share of total household income
in 25-30 percent of these cases. While this number is not small, it still represents a distinct
minority; and for younger groups, own disability benefits are relatively unimportant. Across all
demographic groups, income from other household members appears to be the dominant income
source. This is especially true among 25-34-year-old men, where cohabitants’ income accounts
for 82-86 percent of total household income on average, and some source of cohabitants’ income
accounts for the largest share of household income 70-75 percent of the time. Even among 4554-year men, some source of cohabitants’ income accounts for the largest share of household
income in the majority of cases.
In tabulations not shown, we found that around 40 percent of white high school dropouts,
30 percent of white high school graduates, 53 percent of black high school dropouts and 44

16

percent of black high school graduates lived in households with total income below the federal
poverty line. Much smaller shares, however—5-7 percent of whites and 7-10 percent of
blacks—lived in extreme poverty (last row of the table). We define extreme poverty as a
situation in which household members subsist on less than $4 per day at 2017 prices,
implementing a square-root equivalence scale to adjust for household size. For example, the
extreme poverty threshold for a 4-person household is $4 per day times 365 days times sqrt(4) =
$2,920. Even smaller shares of men—around 3 percent across all groups—lived above the
extreme poverty line but depended primarily on food stamps assistance (third-to-last row of the
table). Thus, while living standards may not be high for these men, the income of other
household members plays an effective role in keeping most of them out of extreme poverty.
It is important to reiterate that the above numbers are based on survey data. There is
ample reason to believe that the reported earned income figures are underestimates, because
episodic sources of income tend to be underreported (Mathiowetz, Bound and Brown 2002) or
even unreported (Edin and Lein 1997; Meyer and Sullivan 2003, in this journal 2012; Bollinger
et al. forthcoming). Recent work using administrative data has demonstrated that survey data
understates the incomes of low-income men and overstates incidence of extreme poverty (Meyer
and Mittag 2015; Meyer et al. 2018). However, this work tends to confirm the notion that men
with a weak attachment to the workforce largely persist on the incomes of other household
members.

Explaining the Decline
Less-educated men have experienced downward trends in wages, employment and
participation since the early 1970s. Therefore, in attempting to explain the latter trends, a
17

reasonable starting point is to ask if changes in the returns to labor market activity can account
for the observed decline in labor market activity.
This interpretation of the data gained currency with the work of Juhn, Murphy and Topel
(1991, 2002; see also Juhn 1992). Focusing on the period of the late 1960s thru late 1980s, these
authors estimated labor supply curves from repeated cross-sectional and cross-regional data. In
both cases, for less-skilled men, they found strong associations between declines in wages and
declines in labor market activity, implying an uncompensated labor supply elasticity of around
0.4 for the lowest skilled group.8 They interpreted their findings as reflecting labor demand
shifts against a stable and upward-sloping supply curve.
We are uncomfortable with this interpretation for two reasons. The first is that it belies
the conventional wisdom that the (uncompensated) labor supply curve for men is inelastic. This
conventional wisdom comes from the fact that tremendous wage increases in the US, Canada, the
UK and Germany between 1900 and 1970 have all been associated with small declines in the
labor force participation of prime-age men (for international evidence, see Pencavel 1986; for US
evidence, see Ruggles 2015). This notion makes economic sense: if leisure is a superior good,
we would expect leisure’s share in total household consumption to rise as wages rise. Second,
although wages and participation for less-educated men trended downward in tandem throughout
the 1970s and 80s, participation continued to decline after 1995, when wages were
comparatively stable (recall Figure 1).
More recent work has also attributed secular decline in less-educated male wages and
employment to declining labor demand (Autor 2011; Moffitt 2012; CEA 2016). For example,

8

Interpreting this estimate as an uncompensated (Marshallian) labor supply elasticity, rather than as an intertemporal (Frisch) elasticity, implies assuming that workers anticipated the wage changes they experienced to be
permanent rather than temporary. Given the apparent protracted nature of local labor demand shocks in low- and
medium-skill male sectors (to be discussed below), this assumption seems appropriate.

18

Abraham and Kearney (2018) write: “Our review of the evidence leads us to conclude that labor
demand factors are the primary drivers of the secular decline in employment over the 1999 to
2016 period.” The growth of support for this connection has come from recent studies of local
labor demand shocks. As mentioned earlier, Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013) found that
commuting zones with rising exposure to manufactured imports from China saw substantive
declines in manufacturing employment and wages. Similarly, Charles, Hurst and Schwartz
(2018) estimated that a 10 percent decline in manufacturing employment since 2000 led to an 18
percent decline in wages, a 7.9 percent decline in hours worked and a 4.6 percentage point
decline in employment of less-educated men. These estimates imply an uncompensated labor
supply elasticity of above 0.4.
It is important reconcile such estimates with the conventional wisdom of a small, or zero,
uncompensated elasticity of labor supply. One possible reconciliation recognizes that the labor
demand shocks in our period of study not only involve wage cuts, but also job losses, including
mass layoffs or the closing of establishments. Displaced male workers take some time to return
to the workforce (Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan 1993; Autor et al. 2014), in part because
current local job losses are often associated with subsequent local job losses. For example, DixCarneiro and Kovak (2017) found that initial shocks (albeit in Brazil, not the United States)
played out over an extended period partly because of the slow adjustment of capital to the initial
shocks. In general, several researchers have documented the slowness of local economies to
recover from economic shocks (Bartik 1991; Yagan 2017; Austin, Glaeser and Summers
forthcoming).
After losing work, individuals may not easily transition into new jobs. For instance,
Foote and Ryan (2015) showed that medium-skill displaced male workers tend to face few

19

attractive alternatives within their skill class and sector. Jaimovich and Siu (2015) captured this
phenomenon in the context of a search model, in which those losing their jobs in declining
sectors of the economy must consider whether to search for new work in the declining sector or
invest in new skills. Such a framework can capture business cycle patterns but also secular shifts
of the Beveridge curve. A parallel literature has illustrated a reluctance of workers to migrate to
better labor markets (Kennan and Walker 2011; Dao, Furceri and Loungani 2017; Zabek 2018),
underscoring the potential importance of migration as well as search frictions.
These dimensions of individual and local labor market adjustment following shocks
strike us as key factors underlying the strong secular relationship between wages and
participation seen in the 1970s, 1980s, and since 2002. Such adjustment frictions are also
consistent with the fact that many spells of non-participation are not permanent (recall Table
1)—though it may take some time, most displaced individuals do return to the workforce. A
labor supply framework which takes these factors seriously may help resolve the apparent
inconsistency between the male labor supply behavior revealed by the historical record and that
of the more recent period.
The Expansion of Disability Insurance
A parallel explanation for the large increase in less-educated male joblessness, despite a
comparatively small decrease in their wages, rests on factors operating outside of the labor
market. An oft-examined factor is the dramatic increase in the availability and generosity of
income maintenance programs targeted at people with disabilities. The largest such program is
the Social Security Disability Insurance program (DI), of which we provide a brief history in the
appendix. The DI rolls expanded considerably between the 1960s and early 1990s and have
grown more slowly since. (For discussion in this journal, see Liebman 2015. Appendix Figure

20

A4 graphs trends in the population share of men receiving DI benefits by age group.)
To assess the extent to which DI expansions have impacted the male labor-force
participation rate, Bound (1989) proposed the “rejected-applicant” method, which involves
comparing participation behavior of those receiving DI benefits to those who applied for benefits
but failed to pass the medical screening necessary to be granted benefits. In a sophisticated
application of this method, Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2013) used random variation in
stringency across DI case examiners to estimate that prime-age men on the margin of DI receipt
have a labor-force participation rate of 40 percentage points higher than marginal beneficiaries.
Two issues arise when using this estimate to draw broader inferences about how the
Social Security Disability Insurance program has impacted prime-age male labor-force
participation. First, if the marginal beneficiary is healthier than the average beneficiary, then the
marginal beneficiary’s work propensity may be more sensitive to benefit receipt than that of the
average beneficiary. Second, estimates based on the rejected-applicant method are conditional
on having applied for benefits. Since non-participation is necessary for eligibility, application
for DI benefits itself may reduce participation. It may also affect rejected applicants’ subsequent
participation behavior (Bound, 1989; Parsons, 1991; Bound 1991): rejected applicants may
reapply, time spent out of work may affect rejected applicants’ job prospects, and the act of
applying may permanently affect individuals’ identities.
Bound, Lindner and Waidmann (2014) attempted to circumvent these issues by arguing
that the participation rate of individuals who report having a health-related work limitation but
who never applied for DI benefits should be a conservative upper bound on the participation rate
of both rejected and accepted applicants. Using SIPP-SSA data, they reported an employment
rate differential between prime-age men with work limitations who never applied for DI benefits

21

and those who were awarded benefits of roughly 50 percentage points. The reported
employment differential between rejected applicants and those awarded benefits was roughly 30
percentage points.
Pulling these considerations together, let us conservatively assume that the participation
disincentive induced by applying for benefits outweighs the fact that the marginal beneficiary
may be healthier than the average beneficiary. Under this assumption, Maestas et al.’s (2013)
estimate of 0.40 times the DI participation rate lower-bounds the effect of the availability of DI
benefits on the labor-force non-participation rate. On the other hand, under the assumption that
the rejected applicant pool is the same size as the beneficiary pool (a slight exaggeration relative
to what Bound, Lindner and Waidmann 2014 report), Bound, Lindner and Waidmann’s (2014)
logic yields an upper bound of 0.50 + 0.30 = 0.80 times the DI participation rate.
Table 3 uses March Current Population Survey data to compare prime-age male DI and
labor-force participation rates, by age and education, between 1975-84 and 2008-2017.9
(Decadal averages are used to reduce sampling error.) The last row of the table implements the
bounding exercise just described, reporting a conservative upper bound estimate of the
contribution of increased DI program participation to the concomitant rise in non-participation.
Increased DI participation explains virtually none of the rise in non-participation among high
school dropouts and little of the rise in non-participation among high school graduates below age
45. On the other hand, it could explain up to 25 percent of the rise in non-participation among
45-54-year-old high school graduates. In tabulations not shown, we found similar results for the
“some college” group.

9

Published data on the number of individuals receiving DI benefits do not report breakdowns by education.
However, March CPS survey responses about income receipt seem to closely track published administrative
statistics on DI receipt.

22

In addition to the roughness of this bounding exercise, we note that the growth in DI
participation may be endogenous to falling labor demand. Previous work has demonstrated that
adverse local labor demand shocks expand the DI rolls (Black, Daniel and Sanders 2002; Autor
and Duggan 2003; Charles, Li and Stephens 2017). Rising DI participation may thus underlie
some of the adjustment behavior noted above: rather than search for new work, displaced
workers in relatively poor health may simply apply for DI.
Mass Incarceration
The size of the U.S. prison population rose dramatically between 1970 and 2000, from
roughly 0.1 percent to 0.5 percent of the total resident population (Raphael and Stoll, 2013). We
have been studying the civilian, non-institutionalized male population in this paper—those
incarcerated are excluded. However, as incarceration rates have grown, so has the previouslyincarcerated share of the currently-non-institutionalized population. Bucknor and Barber (2016)
estimated that in 2014, between 6.0 and 7.7 percent of all prime-age men had previously been
incarcerated. For black men, the rates were between 19.4 and 21.9 percent; for high school
dropout men, the rates were between 26.6 and 30.1 percent. Bucknor and Barber (2016) do not
report cross-tabulations by education and race, but their figures suggest that potentially a
substantial fraction of black male dropouts have prior prison records.
Survey data show that men with criminal records are less likely to be employed than
observationally similar individuals without records. Employers report a reluctance to hire men
with criminal convictions, while audit studies have found that those with criminal records are
less likely to be called back for interviews (Holzer, Raphael and Stoll 2006a, 2006b; Pager 2003,
2007; Pager, Western and Bonikowski 2009). The most credible estimates of the effect of prior
incarceration on employment leverage random assignment of defendants to courtrooms, judges

23

and prosecutors. Taking this design to data from Harris Country, Texas, Mueller-Smith (2015)
found that each additional year behind bars reduced post-release employment propensity by 3.6
percentage points. For felony defendants with stable pre-charge earnings, incarceration for one
or more years reduced employment propensity by much larger amounts. Moreover, MuellerSmith found prior incarceration to increase subsequent criminal activity. Harding et al. (2018)
recently found comparable results using data from Michigan.
These estimates strongly support the notion that incarcerating men is likely to have
significant effects on their future labor market outcomes (see also Raphael 2014). That said,
there is no straightforward way to make inferences from such estimates about the impact of mass
incarceration on non-institutionalized male labor-force participation. First, the estimates vary
considerably across different sub-populations. Second, the statistical design delivers causal
effects for the marginal, not the average, man incarcerated. Third, the estimates do not capture
spillover effects of mass incarceration on local labor markets and communities.10 Thus, while
we do not feel comfortable using available information to even crudely estimate the effect of
mass incarceration on the decline in male labor-force participation since the early 1990s, it seems
likely that such effects exist and could be of sizable magnitude, especially among populations
who have experienced particularly large exposure to prison (high school dropouts and blacks
without any college education). We flag this as an important area for further research.

Feedback from the Marriage Market to Male Labor Supply

10

On spillover effects, two points are in order. First, recent research has found evidence of employer statistical
discrimination on expected prior criminal history (Doleac and Hansen 2016; Agan and Starr, 2018). These findings
suggest that, due to low-skill employers’ hiring responses, rising incarceration may impact the labor market
prospects of those who were not previously incarcerated but have similar observable characteristics to those who
were. Second, men with outstanding warrants may be reticent to seek formal employment, as described in the
ethnographic work of Goffman (2014) and supported in statistical analysis by Brayne (2014).

24

The above discussions frame a puzzle. On its own, falling labor demand does not
sufficiently explain the secular decline in less-educated male labor-force participation—at least,
not without allowing for substantial adjustment frictions in the long run as well as the short run.
Rising access to disability insurance is at most a partial explanation for the 45-54-year-old group
and matters quite little for younger men and for high school dropouts. Rising exposure to prison
may be a significant factor for dropouts and for blacks without college education, but labor-force
participation for these groups began declining decades before prison populations skyrocketed.
Certainly no single explanation can sufficiently explain the decline; and even in combination, the
explanations appear insufficient.
We suspect that there is another factor at play. We claim that the prospect of forming and
providing for a new family constitutes an important male labor supply incentive; and thus, that
developments within the marriage market can influence male labor-force participation. A
decline in the formation of stable families produces a situation in which fewer men are actively
involved in family provision or can expect to be involved in the future. This removes a labor
supply incentive; and the possibility of drawing support from one’s existing family, as shown
earlier in Table 2, creates a feasible labor-force exit.
The Retreat from Marriage and Onset of Parental Cohabitation
American family structure has undergone dramatic change since the 1960s, featuring a
reduction in the incidence of stable two-parent households that has been concentrated in the noncollege-educated population (Cherlin 2014; in this journal, Lundberg, Pollak and Stearns 2016).
We summarize these changes in Table 4. Across all demographic groups without college
education, the share of men currently married fell dramatically between 1970 and 2015.
Currently-marrieds now make up a distinct minority of the black population without college

25

degree. As of 2015, only white high school graduates above age 35 were married a majority of
the time, but even these groups experienced a 30-percentage-point drop in currently-married
rates since 1970.11 Similar changes have occurred for the some-college population.
Over the same period, the share of men living with at least one parent has risen in equally
dramatic fashion. While parental co-residence was a rare event in 1970, by 2015, over onequarter of whites and 40 percent of blacks aged 25-34 lived with a parent. Older groups
experienced a smaller but still substantial rise in parental co-residence, especially considering the
extremely low base rates. For example, white high school graduates aged 35-44 experienced a
greater-than-threefold increase in the rate of parental co-residence, from 4 percent in 1970 to 13
percent in 2015. In tabulations not shown, we documented similar increases (though starting
from higher base rates) in the shares of men cohabiting with parents or other adult relatives.
In this journal, Stevenson and Wolfers (2007) emphasized the contribution of a variety of
important developments to the secular decline in marriage, including greater access to
contraception, liberalization of family law, changes in home production technology which have
reduced gains from task specialization within the household, and changes to how prospective
partners match (for example, the rise of online dating). Falling stigmatism of out-of-wedlock
childbearing and single motherhood are also likely relevant (Akerlof, Yellen and Katz 1996).
Others have argued that male earning potential is central to stable marriage formation.
Becker (1981) popularized the “specialization-and-exchange” theory of marriage, which predicts
that gains from marriage are an increasing function of the gender wage gap. Other work has

11

Some of the measured decline in marriage has been offset by a rise in cohabitation with an unmarried partner.
However, for the less-educated, cohabitation is often a transient and unstable situation. Copen, Daniels and Mosher
(2013) report a median duration of cohabitations for less-educated individuals of 22-24 months, based on 2006-2010
data from the National Survey of Family Growth. Ishizuka (2018) reports similar findings in SIPP data, and also
finds that cohabitations are less likely to transition into marriages for less-educated individuals. Since our
underlying concept of interest is stable family formation, the focus on marriage seems warranted for this population
of men.

26

suggested the influence of “male breadwinner norms:” even after accounting for specialization
incentives, the marriage rate appears to decline when a local labor market shock makes men less
likely to out-earn women (Bertrand, Kamenica and Pan 2015). A different paradigm contends
that marriage occurs when the level of resources exceeds a standard associated with successful
family pursuits (Easterlin 1966, 1987). Ruggles (2015) argued for the importance of declining
less-educated male earnings prospects relative to those of their fathers. A variant marriage
threshold is the typical living standard within a peer reference group (Gibson-Davis, Edin and
McLanahan 2005; Watson and McLanahan 2011; Ishizuka 2018). In this view, rising income
inequality harms the marriage prospects of below-median individuals.
Marriage as a Social Institution for Male Employment
Previous work has associated marriage with a decline in irresponsible male behavior
(Akerlof, 1998), such as crime (Edlund et al., 2013) and excessive drug and alcohol use (Duncan,
Wilkerson and England, 2006). In the words of Lundberg, Pollak and Stearns (in this journal,
2016): “If social and economic changes have reduced the value of marriage to noncollege
graduates, these changes may also be responsible for a further causal…effect on men’s
behavior.”
Male participation in the labor force may also be a socially responsible activity that, like
the avoidance of pathological behaviors, is intertwined with stable marriage. To the extent that
the gains from marriage depend on male earnings, married men face an additional incentive to
find and maintain a job. Indeed, the securing of gainful employment may even be stipulated by
men’s (explicit or implicit) marital contracts with their wives. This mechanism has dynamic
implications: with the expectation that they will one day marry and provide for a family, single
men are incentivized to invest in their future productivity by working today. Doing so also

27

improves their positions in the marriage market, raising their probabilities of matching with highquality spouses. As marriage rates, and attendant marital expectations decrease, so do these
labor supply incentives.
We offer an informal assessment of this marriage market mechanism of labor supply in
Table 5. We divide the population of interest into three mutually exclusive statuses: men living
with at least one parent, unmarried men not living with a parent, and married men not living with
a parent. We compute the decline in observed labor-force participation attributable to changes in
population shares between these statuses versus changes in labor-force participation rates within
each status during the period from 1970-2015. Our proposed mechanism emphasizes the
contribution of shifts between statuses (as married men work more than unmarried men and
marriage rates have declined); and declining labor-force participation within unmarried statuses
(as expectations of stable family formation have declined among those currently unmarried).
The latter process should be especially relevant for younger groups, where future marital
expectations have plausibly changed the most.
As reported in the last column of Table 5, the decline in labor-force participation among
those currently married accounts for a minority of the total observed decline in all demographic
groups. This is especially true among blacks: the within-married component accounts for less
than one-third of the total decline across all black sub-groups. We also observe the predicted age
gradient: for groups of men aged 25-34, the within-married component accounts for only about
one-quarter of the total change. Moreover, the 25-34 age groups have experienced almost as
large a decline in labor-force participation as the older groups.
This mechanism offers an interpretation of the puzzle of the recent and disproportionate
decline in labor-force participation among young males, identified by Aguiar et al. (2017). In

28

Appendix Table A4 we repeated the above decomposition for the population of men with 0-10
years of potential experience and not enrolled in school, considering changes from 1997-2015.
For this group, observed declines in labor-force participation are largely explained by the
between-status component and the within-living-with-parents component. Today’s less-educated
labor market entrants face increasingly small probabilities of forming their own stable families.
Thus, while Aguiar et al. (2017) attribute their disproportionate withdrawal from the labor force
to the rising value of leisure (stemming from innovations in video gaming technology), we
suggest that a marriage-market-based fall in the value of work could be an alternative
explanation.
Implications for the Relationship between Labor Demand and Labor Supply
The marriage market mechanism we propose adds complexity to the relationship between
male labor demand and labor supply. To the extent that male earning potential positively
influences marriage, a decline in male labor demand results in fewer males forming and heading
their own stable families. Thus, a male labor demand shock produces—through the marriage
market—an indirect effect on male labor supply incentives and resultant labor-force
participation.
The recent findings of Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2018) indicate that this indirect channel
may be important. These authors found that rising local exposure to import competition from
China led to local declines in the marriage rate and in the share of children living with their
fathers. Thus, the large employment effects of local labor demand shocks may embed familyrelated effects in addition to the other adjustment frictions we have discussed. Family processes
may also interact with these other adjustment frictions, for example by making men more
dependent on their adult relatives and less amenable to finding a new occupation or labor market

29

in which to seek employment. In addition, others have argued that mass incarceration has
disrupted family formation (for example, Charles and Luoh 2010; Schneider, Harknett and
Stimpson 2018). These relationships further complicate the separate quantification of the
various forces driving the decline in male labor-force participation.

Conclusion
During the last 50 years, the earnings of prime-age men in the United States have
stagnated and dispersed across the education distribution. At the same time, the labor-force
participation rates of men without a college education have steadily declined. While wage and
participation trends are often linked for this population, we have argued that this connection
cannot solely be the result of an inward labor demand shift across a stable and elastic labor
supply curve. The uncompensated labor supply elasticities implied by the twin declines of
wages and participation during the 1970s, 1980s and 2000s appear too large to be plausible.
Moreover, labor-force participation continued to decrease in the 1990s while wages were rising.
While the increasing availability of disability benefits and the increase in the fraction of the
population with prior incarceration exposure may help explain some of the participation decline,
we doubt either factor can explain the bulk of the decline.
We have argued that more plausible explanations for the observed patterns involve
feedbacks from male labor demand shocks, which often involve substantial job displacement, to
worker adjustment frictions and to family structure. Marriage rates, and corresponding male
labor supply incentives, have also fallen for reasons other than changing labor demand. We have
moreover noted interactions between labor demand and disability benefit take-up, and between
mass incarceration and family structure. These factors have all converged to reduce the
30

feasibility and desirability of stable employment, leading affected men, who may not often be
eligible for disability or other benefits, to participate sporadically in the labor market and depend
primarily on family members for income support. In sum, our observations lead us to be
skeptical of attempts to attribute the secular decline in male labor-force participation to a series
of separately-acting causal factors. We prefer an interpretation in which falling labor demand
combined with other interconnected factors have led to substantially lower participation rates
among men with less than a college education.

31

References
Abraham, Katharine G., and Melissa S. Kearney. 2018. “Explaining the Decline in the U.S. Employment-toPopulation Ratio: A Review of the Evidence.” Working Paper 24333. National Bureau of Economic
Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w24333.
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and
Earnings.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, 4:1043–1171.
Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-7218(11)02410-5.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2018. “Automation and New Tasks: The Implications of the Task
Content of Production for Labor Demand.” https://economics.mit.edu/files/16338
Agan, Amanda, and Sonja Starr. 2018. “Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial Discrimination: A Field
Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (1): 191–235. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjx028.
Aguiar, Mark, Mark Bils, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Erik Hurst. 2017. “Leisure Luxuries and the Labor Supply
of Young Men.” Working Paper 23552. National Bureau of Economic Research.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w23552.
Akerlof, George A. 1998. “Men Without Children.” The Economic Journal 108 (447): 287–309.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0297.00288.
Akerlof, George A., Janet L. Yellen, and Michael L. Katz. 1996. “An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock
Childbearing in the United States.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2): 277–317.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2946680.
Austin, Benjamin, Edward Glaeser, and Lawrence H. Summers. Forthcoming. “Saving the Heartland: PlaceBased Policies in 21st Century America.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Autor, David H. 2014. “Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality among the ‘Other 99 Percent.’”
Science 344 (6186): 843–51. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1251868.
———. 2011. “The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the U.S. Labor Market: Implications for Employment
and Earnings.” Community Investments 23 (2): 11–16.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. 2018. “When Work Disappears: Manufacturing Decline
and the Falling Marriage Market Value of Young Men.” Discussion Paper 11465. IZA Institute of Labor
Economics.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2017.
“Concentrating on the Fall of the Labor Share.” American Economic Review 107 (5): 180–85.
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20171102.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review 103 (6): 2121–68.
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.6.2121.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Jae Song. 2014. “Trade Adjustment: Worker-Level
Evidence.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4): 1799–1860. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju026.

32

Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1): 157–206.
https://doi.org/10.1162/00335530360535171.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2006. “The Polarization of the U.S. Labor
Market.” American Economic Review 96 (2): 189–94. https://doi.org/10.1257/000282806777212620.
———. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 90 (2): 300–323. https://doi.org/10.1162/rest.90.2.300.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1998. “Computing Inequality: Have Computers
Changed the Labor Market?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (4): 1169–1213.
https://doi.org/10.1162/003355398555874.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2002. “Upstairs, Downstairs: Computers and Skills on
Two Floors of a Large Bank.” ILR Review 55 (3): 432–47. https://doi.org/10.1177/001979390205500303.
———. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118 (4): 1279–1333. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355303322552801.
Autor, David H., Alan Manning, and Christopher L. Smith. 2016. “The Contribution of the Minimum Wage to
US Wage Inequality over Three Decades: A Reassessment.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 8 (1): 58–99. https://doi.org/10.1257/app.20140073.
Bartik, Timothy. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? Kalamazoo, MI:
Upjohn Press. http://research.upjohn.org/up_press/77.
Becker, Gary S. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches. 1994. “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within U. S.
Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 109 (2): 367–97. https://doi.org/10.2307/2118467.
Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan. 2015. “Gender Identity and Relative Income within
Households.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2): 571-614.
Bivens, L Josh. 2007. “The Gains from Trade: How Big and Who Gets Them?” Working Paper 280.
Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders. 2002. “The Impact of Economic Conditions on Participation in
Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust.” American Economic Review 92 (1): 27–
50. https://doi.org/10.1257/000282802760015595.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2017. “The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations.”
Journal of Economic Literature 55 (3): 789–865. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20160995.
Bollinger, Christopher R., Barry T. Hirsch, Charles M. Hokayem, and James P. Ziliak. Forthcoming. “Trouble
in the Tails? What We Know about Earnings Nonresponse Thirty Years after Lillard, Smith and Welch.”
Journal of Political Economy.
Borjas, George J. 2016. We Wanted Workers: Unraveling the Immigration Narrative. New York, NY: W. W.
Norton & Company.

33

———. 2017. “The Labor Supply of Undocumented Immigrants.” Labour Economics 46 (June): 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2017.02.004.
Bound, John. 1989. “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants.” American
Economic Review 79 (3): 482–503.
———. 1991. “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants: Reply.” The American
Economic Review 81 (5): 1427–34.
Bound, John, and George E Johnson. 1992. “Changes in the Structure of Wages During the 1980’s: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations.” American Economic Review 82 (3): 371-392.
Bound, John, Stephan Lindner, and Timothy Waidmann. 2014. “Reconciling Findings on the Employment
Effect of Disability Insurance.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3 (11): 1-23. https://doi.org/10.1186/21939004-3-11.
Brayne, Sarah. 2014. “Surveillance and System Avoidance: Criminal Justice Contact and Institutional
Attachment.” American Sociological Review 79 (3): 367-391.
Bucknor, Cherrie, and Alan Barber. 2016. “The Price We Pay: Economic Costs of Barriers to Employment for
Former Prisoners and People Convicted of Felonies.” CEPR Reports and Issue Briefs. Center for
Economic and Policy Research. https://ideas.repec.org/p/epo/papers/2016-07.html.
Burstein, Ariel, Gordon Hanson, Lin Tian, and Jonathan Vogel. 2017. “Tradability and the Labor-Market
Impact of Immigration: Theory and Evidence from the U.S.” Working Paper 23330. National Bureau of
Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23330.
Card, David. 2009. “Immigration and Inequality.” American Economic Review 99 (2): 1–21.
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.2.1.
Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to College for
Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2): 705–46.
https://doi.org/10.1162/00335530151144140.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2016. “The Masking of the Decline in
Manufacturing Employment by the Housing Bubble.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (2): 179–200.
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.30.2.179.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Mariel Schwartz. 2018. “The Transformation of Manufacturing and the
Decline in U.S. Employment.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 33 (May).
http://www.nber.org/chapters/c14081.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Yiming Li, and Melvin Stephens. 2017. “Disability Benefit Take-Up and Local Labor
Market Conditions.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 100 (3): 416–23.
https://doi.org/10.1162/rest_a_00692.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Ming Ching Luoh. 2010. “Male Incarceration, the Marriage Market, and Female
Outcomes.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (3): 614–27.
https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00022.
Cherlin, Andrew J. 2014. Labor’s Love Lost: The Rise and Fall of the Working-Class Family in America. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.

34

Cline, William R. 1997. Trade and Income Distribution. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International
Economics.
Coglianese, John. 2018. “The Rise of In-and-Outs: Declining Labor Force Participation of Prime Age Men.”
https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/coglianese/files/coglianese_2017_in-and-outs.pdf .
Copen, Casey E., Kimberly Daniels, and William D. Mosher. 2013. “First Premarital Cohabitation in the
United States: 2006-2010 National Survey of Family Growth.” National Health Statistics Reports (64): 115.
Cortes, Patricia. 2008. “The Effect of Low‐Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from CPI Data.”
Journal of Political Economy 116 (3): 381–422. https://doi.org/10.1086/589756.
Council of Economic Advisers. 2016. “The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor-Force
Participation.”
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/20160620_cea_primeage_male_lfp.pd
f
Dao, Mai, Davide Furceri, and Prakash Loungani. 2016. “Regional Labor Market Adjustment in the United
States: Trend and Cycle.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (2): 243–57.
https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00642.
Deaton, Angus, and John Muellbauer. 1980. Economics and Consumer Behavior. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution
of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica 64 (5): 1001–44.
Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, and Brian K. Kovak. 2017. “Trade Liberalization and Regional Dynamics.” American
Economic Review 107 (10): 2908–46. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20161214.
Doleac, Jennifer L, and Benjamin Hansen. 2016. “Does ‘Ban the Box’ Help or Hurt Low-Skilled Workers?
Statistical Discrimination and Employment Outcomes When Criminal Histories Are Hidden.” Working
Paper 22469. National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w22469.
Duncan, Greg J., Bessie Wilkerson, and Paula England. 2006. “Cleaning up Their Act: The Effects of Marriage
and Cohabitation on Licit and Illicit Drug Use.” Demography 43 (4): 691–710.
https://doi.org/10.1353/dem.2006.0032.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1987. Birth and Fortune. 2nd ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1966. “On the Relation of Economic Factors to Recent and Projected Fertility Changes.” Demography
3: 131–53.
Edin, Kathryn J., and Laura Lein. 1997. Making Ends Meet: How Single Mothers Survive Welfare and LowWage Work. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Edlund, Lena, Hongbin Li, Junjian Yi, and Junsen Zhang. 2013. “Sex Ratios and Crime: Evidence from
China.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (5): 1520–34. https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00356.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2013. “The Decline of the U.S. Labor Share.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2013 (2): 1–63. https://doi.org/10.1353/eca.2013.0016.

35

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1996. “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality.”
American Economic Review 86 (2): 240–45.
———. 1999. “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates For the United
States, 1979–1990.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3): 907–40.
https://doi.org/10.1162/003355399556179.
Foote, Christopher L., and Richard W. Ryan. 2015. “Labor-Market Polarization over the Business Cycle.”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 29 (1): 371–413. https://doi.org/10.1086/680656.
Fortin, Nicole M., and Thomas Lemieux. 1997. “Institutional Changes and Rising Wage Inequality: Is There a
Linkage?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (2): 75–96. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.11.2.75.
Fortin, Nicole M., Thomas Lemieux, and Neil Lloyd. 2018. “Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution of
Wages: The Role of Spillover Effects.” https://econ2017.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2018/12/pdf_paper_thomaslemieux-spillovers.pdf
Freeman, Richard B. 1975. “Overinvestment in College Training?” The Journal of Human Resources 10 (3):
287–311. https://doi.org/10.2307/145193.
Frey, Carl Benedikt, and Michael A. Osborne. 2017. “The Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs
to Computerisation?” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 114 (January): 254–80.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.08.019.
Gibson‐Davis, Christina M., Kathryn Edin, and Sara McLanahan. 2005. “High Hopes but Even Higher
Expectations: The Retreat from Marriage Among Low-Income Couples.” Journal of Marriage and
Family 67 (5): 1301–12. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2005.00218.x.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Belknap Press.
Harding, David J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, Anh P. Nguyen, and Shawn D. Bushway. 2018. “Imprisonment and
Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” American Journal of Sociology 124 (1):
49–110. https://doi.org/10.1086/697507.
Hirsch, Barry T. 1988. “Trucking Regulation, Unionization, and Labor Earnings: 1973-85.” The Journal of
Human Resources 23 (3): 296–319. https://doi.org/10.2307/145831.
Holzer, Harry J. 2010. “Is the Middle of the U.S. Job Market Really Disappearing? A Comment on the
‘Polarization’ Hypothesis.” Center for American Progress.
Holzer, Harry J., Steven Raphael, and Michael A. Stoll. 2006a. “How Do Employer Perceptions of Crime and
Incarceration Affect the Employment Prospects of Less-Educated Young Black Men?” In Black Males
Left Behind, edited by Ronald B. Mincy. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press.
Holzer, Harry J., Steven Raphael, and Michael A. Stoll. 2006b. “Perceived Criminality, Criminal Background
Checks, and the Racial Hiring Practices of Employers.” The Journal of Law and Economics 49 (2): 451–
80. https://doi.org/10.1086/501089.
Ishizuka, Patrick. 2018. “The Economic Foundations of Cohabiting Couples’ Union Transitions.” Demography
55 (2): 535–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-018-0651-1.

36

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of Displaced
Workers.” The American Economic Review 83 (4): 685–709.
Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry E. Siu. 2015. “Job Polarization and Jobless Recoveries.”
http://faculty.arts.ubc.ca/hsiu/work/polar20150503.pdf
Juhn, Chinhui. 1992. “Decline of Male Labor Market Participation: The Role of Declining Market
Opportunities.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1): 79–121. https://doi.org/10.2307/2118324.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel. 2002. “Current Unemployment, Historically
Contemplated.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2002 (1): 79–116.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel. 1991. “Why Has the Natural Rate of Unemployment
Increased over Time?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1991 (2): 75–142.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2534590.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014. “The Global Decline of the Labor Share.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129 (1): 61–103. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjt032.
Katz, Lawrence F. 2008. Comment on “Trade and Wages, Reconsidered” by P. Krugman. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 2008 (1): 143-149.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963–1987: Supply and
Demand Factors.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1): 35–78. https://doi.org/10.2307/2118323.
Kennan, John, and James R. Walker. 2011. “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration
Decisions.” Econometrica 79 (1): 211–51. https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA4657.
Krugman, Paul R. 2008. “Trade and Wages, Reconsidered.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2008 (1):
103–54. https://doi.org/10.1353/eca.0.0006.
Lee, David S. 1999. “Wage Inequality in the United States During the 1980s: Rising Dispersion or Falling
Minimum Wage?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3): 977–1023.
https://doi.org/10.1162/003355399556197.
Levy, Frank, and Richard J. Murnane. 2004. The New Division of Labor: How Computers Are Creating the
Next Job Market. Princeton, NJ; New York, NY: Princeton University Press; Russell Sage Foundation.
Lundberg, Shelly, Robert A. Pollak, and Jenna Stearns. 2016. “Family Inequality: Diverging Patterns in
Marriage, Cohabitation, and Childbearing.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (2): 79–102.
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.30.2.79.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. “Does Disability Insurance Receipt
Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt.” American
Economic Review 103 (5): 1797–1829. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.5.1797.
Mathiowetz, Nancy, John Bound, and Charles Brown. 2002. “Measurement Error in Surveys of the LowIncome Population.” In Studies of Welfare Populations, Committee on National Statistics, National
Research Council.
Mazzolari, Francesca, and Giuseppe Ragusa. 2013. “Spillovers from High-Skill Consumption to Low-Skill
Labor Markets.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (1): 74–86.
https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00234.
37

Meyer, Bruce D., and Nikolas Mittag. 2015. “Using Linked Survey Data and Administrative Data to Better
Measure Income: Implications for Poverty, Program Effectiveness and Holes in the Safety Net.”
Working Paper 21676. National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w21676
Meyer, Bruce D., and James X. Sullivan. 2003. “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and
Consumption.” The Journal of Human Resources 38: 1180–1220. https://doi.org/10.2307/3558985.
———. 2012. “Identifying the Disadvantaged: Official Poverty, Consumption Poverty, and the New
Supplemental Poverty Measure.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26 (3): 111–36.
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.26.3.111.
Meyer, Bruce D., Derek Wu, Victoria Mooers, and Carla Medalia. 2018. “The Use and Misuse of Income Data
and the Rarity of Extreme Poverty in the United States.” Working paper.
Moffitt, Robert A. 2012. “The Reversal of the Employment-Population Ratio in the 2000s: Facts and
Explanations.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 201–64.
Mueller-Smith, Michael. 2015. “The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration.”
https://sites.lsa.umich.edu/mgms/wp-content/uploads/sites/283/2015/09/incar.pdf
Murphy, Daniel. 2016. “Welfare Consequences of Asymmetric Growth.” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 126 (June): 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2016.02.003.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Finis Welch. 1991. “The Role of International Trade in Wage Differentials.” In
Workers and Their Wages, edited by Marvin H. Kosters. Washington, DC: The AEI Press.
———. 1992. “The Structure of Wages.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1): 285–326.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2118330.
Pager, Devah. 2003. “The Mark of a Criminal Record.” American Journal of Sociology 108 (5): 937–75.
https://doi.org/10.1086/374403.
———. 2007. Marked: Race, Crime, and Finding Work in an Era of Mass Incarceration. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. http://www.press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/M/bo5485761.html.
Pager, Devah, Bart Bonikowski, and Bruce Western. 2009. “Discrimination in a Low-Wage Labor Market: A
Field Experiment.” American Sociological Review 74 (5): 777–99.
https://doi.org/10.1177/000312240907400505.
Parsons, Donald O. 1991. “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants: Comment.”
The American Economic Review 81 (5): 1419–26.
Pencavel, John. 1986. “Labor Supply of Men: A Survey.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, 1:3–102.
Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1573-4463(86)01004-0.
Peri, Giovanni. 2016. “Immigrants, Productivity, and Labor Markets.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30
(4): 3–30. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.30.4.3.
Peri, Giovanni, and Chad Sparber. 2009. “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3): 135–69. https://doi.org/10.1257/app.1.3.135.
Raphael, Steven. 2014. The New Scarlet Letter? Negotiating the U.S. Labor Market with a Criminal Record.
Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute.
38

Raphael, Steven, and Michael A. Stoll. 2013. Why Are So Many Americans in Prison? Russell Sage
Foundation.
Rose, Nancy L. 1987. “Labor Rent Sharing and Regulation: Evidence from the Trucking Industry.” Journal of
Political Economy 95 (6): 1146–78. https://doi.org/10.1086/261509.
Ruggles, Steven. 2015. “Patriarchy, Power and Pay: The Transformation of American Families, 1800-2015.”
Demography 52 (6): 1797–1823.
Schneider, Daniel, Kristen Harknett, and Matthew Stimpson. 2018. “What Explains the Decline in First
Marriage in the United States? Evidence from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1969 to 2013.”
Journal of Marriage and Family 80 (4): 791–811. https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12481.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2007. “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and Their Driving Forces.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2): 27–52. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.21.2.27.
Watson, Tara, and Sara McLanahan. 2011. “Marriage Meets the Joneses Relative Income, Identity, and Marital
Status.” Journal of Human Resources 46 (3): 482–517. https://doi.org/10.3368/jhr.46.3.482.
Yagan, Danny. 2017. “Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession.” Working Paper 23844. National
Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23844.
Zabek, Mike. 2018. “Local Ties in Spatial Equilibrium.” https://mikezabek.com/pdf/LocalTies.pdf.

39

Figure 1
Real Hourly Earnings by Education Status, Men Aged 25-54, 1965-2016
(2017 dollars)

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the March Supplement to the Current Population Survey. Annual wage and
salary income is adjusted for top-coding and converted to 2017 dollars using the Personal Consumption
Expenditures deflator. Hourly earnings are computed by dividing annual earnings by total hours worked (the
product of weeks worked and usual hours worked per week). Before the 1976 survey, weeks worked and usual
hours worked per week are imputed using demographic information in conjunction with information on bracketed
weeks worked and hours worked last week. Within each education status, a re-weighting procedure is employed to
hold the age distribution constant across each year. See the online Appendix for further details. Geometric average
hourly wages are computed as the exponential of the average of log hourly wages. Graph presents 3-year centered
moving averages.

40

Figure 2
Labor-Force Participation Rates by Education Status, Males Aged 25-54, 1965-2016

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the March supplement to the Current Population Survey. Dotted lines
exclude foreign-born (the CPS begins tracking birthplace in 1994). Within each education status, a re-weighting
procedure is employed to hold the age distribution constant across each year. See the online Appendix for further
details. Graph presents 3-year centered moving averages.

41

Table 1
Male Workforce Attachment over the Short and Long Run for those with High School
Education or Less: Evidence from SIPP-SSA Longitudinal Data, 1978-2011
Short-run N --> P transition probabilities
Group
Race
Education
1 month 3 months 6 months 12 months
Dropouts
0.18
0.45
0.63
0.72
Experienced a P-->N
Whites
HS grads
0.19
0.51
0.69
0.77
transition in first 12
Dropouts
0.16
0.33
0.50
0.59
panel months
Blacks
HS grads
0.15
0.38
0.57
0.66
Dropouts
0.08
0.24
0.38
0.46
Whites
Non-participant in
HS grads
0.09
0.25
0.40
0.49
first panel month
Dropouts
0.05
0.16
0.24
0.30
Blacks
HS grads
0.07
0.18
0.29
0.36
Long-run N --> P transition probabilities
Group
Race
Education
1 year
2 years 5 years 10 years
Dropouts
0.42
0.58
0.76
0.83
Experienced a P-->N
Whites
HS grads
0.50
0.66
0.83
0.89
transition in first 15
Dropouts
0.34
0.50
0.69
0.77
years observed
Blacks
HS grads
0.40
0.57
0.76
0.83
Dropouts
0.27
0.39
0.54
0.62
Whites
Non-participant in
HS grads
0.43
0.54
0.72
0.81
first year observed
Dropouts
0.29
0.38
0.51
0.57
Blacks
HS grads
0.34
0.47
0.63
0.74
Source: Authors’ calculations based on 1984-2008 SIPP panels (top panel) and SIPP panels linked to SSA earnings
records (bottom panel). Sample consists of men with 0-30 years of potential experience and not enrolled in school
at the beginning of the SIPP panel window. The top panel reports the share of men who transitioned out of nonparticipation by the given month—1, 3, 6, or 12 months after the initial experience of non-participation. 2 groups of
men are considered: those who experienced a transition to non-participation within the first 12 panel months, and
those who were non-participants at the start of the panel window. The bottom panel considers the SSA earnings
records of all SIPP panel respondents, over the subset of years 1978-2011 when the respondents had between 0 and
30 years of potential experience. It reports the share of men who transitioned out of non-participation by the given
year—1, 2, 5, or 10 years after the initial experience of non-participation. Yearly participation is defined as having
total administrative earnings for the year above a minimum threshold. 2 groups of men are considered: those who
experienced a transition to non-participation within the first 15 years of observation, and those who were nonparticipants in the first year of observation. See main text and online Appendix for further details.

42

Table 2
Household Income Characteristics of Men with Low Labor-Force Attachment by Race,
Education and Age, 1992-2017
Panel A. High School Dropouts
Whites
35-44

25-34
Average Annual Income ($)
Own earnings
Total unearned income
own disability-related benefits
own other unearned income
cohabitants' total earnings
cohabitants' total unearned income
household food stamps income
Maximal Source of Income (%)
Own earnings
Own disability-related benefits
Earnings OR unearned income from:
parents
spouse
other HH members
HH food stamps income
Other source or tie
None (living on < $4 per day)

45-54

Blacks
35-44

25-34

45-54

900
35,000
3,300
900
21,800
8,000
1,000

1,100
28,300
5,700
1,100
13,100
7,400
1,000

500
28,400
7,600
1,500
12,500
6,100
700

500
29,200
2,400
400
18,600
6,600
1,200

400
28,300
4,200
700
15,800
6,800
800

300
23,500
5,400
900
10,100
6,300
800

3
12

2
23

2
31

2
10

2
18

1
27

30
15
25
4
5
6

21
20
20
3
6
5

11
20
21
3
7
5

38
5
31
4
4
6

22
12
31
3
5
7

16
12
26
4
6
8

Panel B. High School Graduates
Whites
35-44

25-34
Average Annual Income ($)
Own earnings
Total unearned income
own disability-related benefits
own other unearned income
cohabitants' total earnings
cohabitants' total unearned income
household food stamps income
Maximal Source of Income (%)
Own earnings
Own disability-related benefits
Earnings OR unearned income from:
parents
spouse
other HH members
HH food stamps income
Other source or tie
None (living on < $4 per day)

45-54

Blacks
35-44

25-34

45-54

1,300
43,000
3,100
1,600
30,200
7,400
700

1,300
35,900
5,300
2,100
19,900
7,900
700

1,300
36,200
7,200
3,600
18,000
6,900
500

600
36,800
2,400
800
26,100
6,600
900

700
29,200
3,600
1,300
17,000
6,500
800

600
27,800
5,300
2,200
14,100
5,500
700

3
9

3
18

2
25

2
7

2
14

2
24

35
14
25
3
6
5

21
22
19
3
7
7

12
24
19
2
10
6

41
7
29
2
5
7

23
17
25
3
6
10

11
19
23
3
8
10

43

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the March Supplement to the Current Population Survey. Sample consists of
all households in which at least one prime-age man with “low labor-force attachment” resided, defined as a man
who worked no more than 13 weeks in the reference year. Households with imputed sources of income are
excluded. Disability-related benefits are not fully identifiable until 1988; food stamps benefits are not identifiable
until 1992; as a result, we consider the years 1992-2017. The top sub-panels record average levels of the man’s
household’s yearly income in 2017 dollars, rounded to the nearest hundred and broken down by income source. The
bottom sub-panels record the frequency with which each source of earnings accounts for the largest share of total
household income. Extremely poor households which subsist on less than $4 per day (with a square-root
equivalence scale to adjust for household size), are classified as having no maximal source of income. See main text
and Appendix for further detail.

44

Table 3
Assessing the Effect of Greater Receipt of Social Security Disability Insurance on the
Secular Decline in Male Labor-Force Participation

SSDI
Participation
Rate
LF NonParticipation
Rate

1975-84
2008-17
Change
1975-84
2008-17
Change

25-34
0.030
0.022
-0.008
0.102
0.182
0.080

Dropouts
35-44
45-54
0.046
0.076
0.039
0.088
-0.007
0.012
0.106
0.153
0.175
0.304
0.069
0.151

SSDI change / OLF change

-0.100

-0.101

Conservative upper-bound
contribution of SSDI growth
to non-participation growth

-4%

-4%

0.079
6%

HS Graduates
25-34
35-44
45-54
0.009 0.014
0.027
0.022 0.030
0.059
0.013 0.016
0.032
0.036 0.034
0.070
0.120 0.122
0.171
0.084 0.088
0.101
0.155
12%

0.182
15%

0.317
25%

Source: Social Security Administration published reports (Social Security Disability Insurance information) and the
March Supplement to the Current Population Survey (labor-force information). Decadal averages are used to reduce
sampling error. (Highly) conservative upper bounds equal 0.4 times the ratio of SSDI growth to non-participation
growth when SSDI growth is negative, and 0.8 times the ratio of SSDI growth to non-participation growth when
SSDI growth is positive. See main text for a discussion of these upper-bound multipliers.

45

Table 4
Males Living in Selected Family Arrangements by Race, Education and Age, 1970-2015
(shares)
Race

Education
Dropouts

Whites
HS Grads

Dropouts
Blacks
HS Grads

Age
25-34
35-44
45-54
25-34
35-44
45-54
25-34
35-44
45-54
25-34
35-44
45-54

1970
0.81
0.86
0.86
0.83
0.90
0.89
0.65
0.66
0.70
0.70
0.70
0.75

Currently Married
1985
2000
0.61
0.48
0.75
0.59
0.79
0.66
0.63
0.53
0.79
0.65
0.84
0.74
0.31
0.23
0.50
0.32
0.58
0.44
0.42
0.32
0.58
0.45
0.67
0.53

2015
0.37
0.51
0.49
0.38
0.58
0.61
0.14
0.27
0.31
0.17
0.38
0.46

1970
0.12
0.06
0.04
0.10
0.04
0.03
0.17
0.09
0.02
0.13
0.08
0.06

Living with Parent
1985
2000
0.18
0.22
0.09
0.14
0.05
0.06
0.14
0.16
0.05
0.10
0.03
0.05
0.36
0.40
0.16
0.25
0.07
0.13
0.26
0.31
0.10
0.18
0.06
0.11

2015
0.28
0.17
0.12
0.25
0.13
0.09
0.47
0.29
0.20
0.41
0.22
0.12

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the March Supplement to the Current Population Survey. Statistics were
calculated in 5-year windows around the specified years: thus 1970 refers to 1968-72; 1985 refers to 1983-87; 2000
refers to 1998-2002; 2015 refers to 2013-17.

46

Table 5
Family Structure Decompositions of Changes in the Male Labor-Force Participation Rate
by Race, Education and Age
(percentage point changes between 1970 and 2015)
Race

Education
Dropouts

All Men
HS grads

Dropouts
Whites
HS grads

Dropouts
Blacks
HS grads

Age
25-34
35-44
45-54
25-34
35-44
45-54
25-34
35-44
45-54
25-34
35-44
45-54
25-34
35-44
45-54
25-34
35-44
45-54

Total Change
-13.5
-11.0
-21.0
-11.2
-11.0
-14.8
-21.2
-23.3
-33.1
-10.0
-10.8
-13.6
-31.6
-27.5
-35.5
-18.8
-15.2
-20.5

Between
-4.7
-3.7
-5.5
-3.5
-3.3
-3.6
-6.3
-5.8
-6.5
-2.8
-2.9
-3.2
-11.8
-8.1
-10.0
-5.3
-4.2
-4.8

Within
w/ Parent Unmarried Married
-3.9
-1.4
-3.5
-2.1
-1.8
-3.5
-2.4
-4.7
-8.4
-3.6
-1.3
-2.8
-2.2
-1.7
-3.9
-1.7
-3.8
-5.7
-5.3
-3.7
-6.0
-3.5
-4.5
-9.5
-3.1
-8.6
-14.9
-3.1
-1.5
-2.7
-2.4
-1.6
-3.9
-1.6
-3.5
-5.3
-9.9
-6.2
-3.6
-8.1
-6.5
-4.8
-4.4
-11.3
-9.8
-7.0
-2.5
-4.0
-2.8
-3.4
-4.8
-2.2
-7.5
-5.9

within married
contribution
26%
32%
40%
25%
35%
39%
28%
41%
45%
27%
36%
39%
11%
17%
28%
21%
32%
29%

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the March Supplement to the Current Population Survey. See online
Appendix for detail on how the within/between decomposition was executed. LFP rates were measured in 5-year
windows around the beginning and endpoints: thus 1970 refers to 1968-72; 2015 refers to 2013-2017.

47

