                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EMPLOYER CONCERNS AND RESPONSES TO AN AGING WORKFORCE

                                            Robert L. Clark
                                             Steven Nyce
                                              Beth Ritter
                                            John B. Shoven

                                        Working Paper 25572
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25572


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2019




This study was supported, in part, by a grant from the Sloan Foundation’s Working Longer Program.
 Members of the North Carolina State University Human Resource Advisory Board reviewed an early
draft of the surveys and made helpful comments. Mark Beasley of the NCSU Enterprise Risk Management
Initiative provided helpful comments on the risk management survey. Bob Gormley, Ben Gentry,
and Alan Glickstein of Willis Towers Watson provided ideas for this paper and the conference organized
by NBER in November. Anirudh Mylavarapu assisted with the creation of tables and charts. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Robert L. Clark, Steven Nyce, Beth Ritter, and John B. Shoven. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Employer Concerns and Responses to an Aging Workforce
Robert L. Clark, Steven Nyce, Beth Ritter, and John B. Shoven
NBER Working Paper No. 25572
February 2019
JEL No. J1,J2,J23,J26

                                         ABSTRACT

Economist and public policy analysts have devoted considerable research to examining the work
and retirement decisions of employees. Much less effort has been spent on understanding the
concerns and challenges of employers if their workers delay retirement and remain on the job
until older ages. In this study, we report findings from three employer surveys with the objective
of learning how organizations are responding to the aging of their workforces. The surveys
provide several important observations. First, employer concerns about workforce aging vary
considerably across the economy. To some firms, these demographic changes are of immediate
concern and are viewed as a significant risk to the organization while other firms remain more
concerned about potential productivity and cost effect of an older labor force. Second, most
employers expect the importance of workforce aging to increase in the next five years. In
response, a significant proportion of organizations are making changes to working conditions and
compensation policies. Third, firms remain reluctant to adopt formal phased retirement policies
but are more willing to offer part-time employment, return to work, and other policies on a case
by case basis.

Robert L. Clark                                 Beth Ritter
Poole College of Management                     North Carolina State University
Box 7229                                        bmritte2@ncsu.edu
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695                               John B. Shoven
and NBER                                        Department of Economics 579
robert_clark@ncsu.edu                           Serra Mall at Galvez Street
                                                Stanford, CA 94305-6015 and
Steven Nyce                                     NBER
Willis, Towers, Watson                          shoven@stanford.edu
steven.nyce@willistowerswatson.com
                    I.      Assessing the Organizational Risk of an Aging Workforce

          As the national population ages so does the country’s labor force. The aging of the

workforce of individual employers is a function of past hiring patterns, turnover rates,

compensation practices, employment policies, and the age productivity profile. As a result, the

extent of aging varies over time and across companies and organizations. An important question

is how the aging of a firm’s workforce affects productivity, costs, and the overall culture of

employees. Some companies are concerned about the loss of experience and company-specific

knowledge if a significant proportion of the work force retires together while other employers may

be more focused on the increase in labor costs and the potential decline in productivity if retirement

is delayed. Very little is known about how employers are reacting to later retirement and an

increase in the proportion of their labor force in the older age groups. 1

          The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that the percent of the labor force aged 55 and older

rose from 11.9 percent in 1994 to 21.7 percent in 2014 and the BLS projects that this trend will

continue so that in 2024, 24.8 percent of the national workforce will be aged 55 and older (Toossi,

2015). The increasing share of the labor force age 55 and older is driven in part by the aging of

the population which results in a higher percentage of the population at older ages; 2 however,

another important component of the aging of the labor force is substantial increase in the labor

force participation rate among older cohorts. The participation rate of individuals aged 55 and



1
    Clark and Morrill (2016) review issues that influence employer concerns associated with an aging
workforce and delayed retirement.
2
    Similar statistics for the population show that 26.2 percent of the national population was 55 and older in
1994 and that this increased to 34.2 percent and is projected to increase to 38.2 percent in 2024 (Toosi,
2015).

                                                        1
older rose from 30.1 percent in 1994 to 40.0 percent in 2014 (Toossi, 2015). Thus, older workers

have become more important to the productive capacity of the nation due to the aging of the

population and increasing proportion of older workers who are delaying their departure from the

labor force. Throughout the labor force, individuals are seeking to remain in the labor force until

older ages. This trend reflects delaying retirement from career jobs but also an increase in second

careers and bridge jobs (Quinn, Cahill, and Michael Giandrea, 2015).

       These data illustrate that the nation’s population is aging and as a result the American labor

force is also aging. Aging implies that a greater proportion of workers will be age 55 and older

and perhaps more significantly, a higher fraction will be 65 and older. Another important aspect

of this demographic transition is that individuals are living to older ages. This is reflected in the

increase in life expectancy at ages 60 and 65. Greater life expectancy implies that if workers

continue to retire at traditional ages, they will have more years in retirement. In response,

retirement ages have been increasing as has the labor force participation rates at older ages.

Another aspect of labor force aging is that the number of individuals retiring in the coming years

may increase which reflects the changing age structure of the workforce.

       To learn more about whether firms and other organizations view these issues as a

significant risk factor, we developed and fielded three surveys of senior managers in a diverse set

of employers. The first survey was developed by the research team and fielded by Willis Towers

Watson (WTW). This survey focused mainly on human resources managers at large employers

and sought to ascertain how they viewed current and future workforce aging. The second survey

was organized in conjunction with the Enterprise Risk Management program at North Carolina

State University. This survey was sent to a wide range of chief risk officers at firms and nonprofit

organizations. The objective of this survey was to determine whether risk managers viewed labor

                                                 2
force aging as short and long risks to the success of the organization. Finally, we sent a more

targeted survey to members of the Grocery Manufacturers Association to ascertain how firms in a

particular industry are facing the challenges of an aging workforce.

         Important questions included in the surveys focused on how firms view the aging of the

labor force. Are they concerned about the loss of talent associated with projected large number of

retirements? Are they concerned about the increasing proportion of their work force at older ages?

Does the change in the age structure of employees require employers to modify employment and

compensation policies? This paper presents the findings from these three surveys and assesses the

importance of the information provided in the surveys.




   II.      WTW Survey of Human Resource Managers

         In July 2018, a survey of the impact of an aging workforce was sent to human resources

managers by the Research and Innovation Center of Willis Towers Watson. The objective of the

survey was to determine how firms are responding to the aging of their workforce. Responses

were received from 143 HR leaders representing firms and organizations of varying sizes and

industries. The organizations included in the survey employed 2.9 million employees. Table 1

presents sample means for the respondents’ type of firm. The largest number of organizations

represented in the survey were from the manufacturing sector (24 percent) and employers in energy

and utilities (21 percent). HR leaders from health care organizations represented 20 percent of the

overall sample while firms from the financial services sector composed an additional 12 percent

of the responses. Over half of the responses were from individuals employed by for-profit,

publicly-traded companies. The sample also included responses from for-profit, private companies

(18 percent) and non-profit organizations (18 percent). In terms of the number of employees, the

                                                3
sample was rather evenly split by 4 size categories with 28 percent of organizations having less

than 5,000 employees, 24 percent having between 5,000 and 9,999 workers, 25 percent employed

between 10,000 and 24,999, and 23 percent had a workforce composed over 25,000 employees

                                                  [Table 1]

       The surveys consisted of a series of questions requesting information on the degree of

concerns that firms have associated with the aging of their workforces and how they are responding

to the changing age composition of the labor force. Most questions allowed the respondents to

indicate the degree of concern on a scale from one to five with one indicting little or no concern

and 5 indicting a great concern. In the following discussion, we often group levels 1 and 2 together

as indicating little concern and levels 4 and 5 together as indicating significant concerns while

level three is assumed to be a more moderate level of concern.

   a. Retirement Trends

       Firms in our sample report that they have an average retirement age of 63; however, almost

half of the respondents (48 percent) indicated that the average age of retirement in their

organization had increased over the past five years. Further changes are expected as 58 percent

indicated that expected retirement ages would increase over the next five years. The average age

of retirement (age 63) aligns with the average desired age reported by employers (age 63), which

suggests that employers are effectively managing the retirement patterns at their workplaces.

       However, 31 percent of respondents indicate employees retiring later than the desired

retirement age was a high level of concern to their organization and an additional 34 percent of

HR managers report that their organization is facing moderate challenges with employees retiring

later than the desired age over the last five years (Table 2). In contrast slight over one-third report


                                                  4
no issues with later retirements. Looking ahead, the challenges of later retirements are expected

to increase with 36 percent of employers facing significant challenges and the same percentage

facing moderate challenges representing nearly three-quarters of respondents.

                                                 [Table 2]

       Employers report fewer concerns with employees retiring earlier than the desired age. In

fact, only 13 percent report significant challenges over the last five years with employees retiring

earlier than expected and 29 percent report moderate challenges which accounts for 42 percent of

respondents. Overall concerns about early retirements over the next five years is expected to

increase slightly to 46 percent. There are two important observations associated with concerns

about retirement ages: the level of concern varies across firms and the degree of concern is

expected to increase over the next five years.

       HR managers in our survey expressed the view that employees who wanted to delay

retirement had a preference for remaining with their company (see Chart 1). Over three fourths of

respondents (76 percent) said that they agreed/strongly agreed with the statement “Most older

employees would like to remain with our organization, even if a comparable job opportunity was

available elsewhere.” One reason that workers might delay retirement is that they do not believe

that they have sufficient resources to retire. In general, respondents did not feel that their

employees had insufficient resources to retire at their desired age (44 percent disagreed with this

statement while only 29 percent agreed). The HR managers were also asked “Most older workers

at our organization are likely to work into their 70s for financial reasons.” While 52 percent of

the respondents disagreed with this statement 23 percent agreed with it.

                                                 [Chart 1]


                                                 5
       Yet, what do employees say when responding to similar questions? Results from Willis

Towers Watson’s Global Benefits Attitudes Survey indicates that more than half of older workers

are facing some sort of financial struggle (either short-term worries and/or long-term retirement

readiness concerns). Even more, one-third of older workers report feeling “stuck in their job and

would retire if they could”. This suggests the financial challenges facing older workers are likely

more significant than what HR mangers responding to the survey realize. In fact, this could push

the average retirement age even higher, as older employees report their expected retirement age is

67 compared to 63 today.

       An important observation from these responses is that workforce aging varies considerably

across firms. As a result, employment and compensation policy changes are much different among

firms that are concerned about delayed retirement compared to those that do not think workforce

aging is a significant problem for their organization.

   b. Are Organizations Concerned about Retirement Trends?

       The aging of the labor force implies that a relatively large proportion of employees are now

approaching retirement which creates the potential for a significant loss in talent and knowledge.

The magnitude and importance of increases in annual retirements will vary across employers.

Respondents were asked a series of questions about the impact of aging and delayed retirement

policies at their firm. Chart 2 indicates the proportion of firms that stated they agree or strongly

agree with a series of statements about older workers. In response to the statement “Our

organization has a significant number of employees at or approaching retirement age”, 83 percent

of the HR managers agreed or strongly agreed with this statement. This observation reflects the

aging of the national population and the resulting increase in the proportion of the American labor

force aged 55 and older described above.

                                                 6
                                                [Chart 2]

       Older employees have become a valued asset at many organizations. In fact, 80 percent of

employers view older employees as significant contributors to their company’s success. As such,

a similar number of HR managers also say that managing the timing of employees’ retirements is

an important business issue. However, 75 percent of organizations indicate that they are not

effectively managing the pace and timing of employee retirements today – only 25% say they are

effectively doing so. This clearly indicates that the greying of the workforce is an important

business issue with obstacles that many employers have yet to overcome.

       When asked to identify the main reasons that managing the orderly retirement of employees

is important to the business strategy, talent management issues and productivity concerns topped

the list (Chart 3). Notably, 83 percent indicated knowledge transfer was a key concern. Workforce

aging and delayed retirement raised concerns about the promotion of younger employees (35

percent) and impact on productivity (60 percent). From a business strategy perspective, costs were

less of a concern as fewer respondents mentioned the impact of delayed retirement on pay (18

percent) and benefit costs (24 percent). But as we show below, costs become a greater concern in

the context of managing business operations.

                                                [Chart 3]

       The respondents were then asked to compare this risk of talent and knowledge loss to other

labor market risks facing the firm over the last five years, such as turnover of younger workers,

attracting new employees, etc. On this issue, respondents were rather evenly split with 34 percent

of the respondents indicating that the concern about retirements was more significant than other

labor market risks to their organization compared to 32 percent who felt it was a less significant


                                                7
risk relative to other labor market concerns and 35 percent thinking it was of similar importance

(Table 3). When considering the next five years, there is a considerable increase in concerns about

the loss of critical skills and talent at organizations relative to other labor market risks; 54 percent

of employers indicate this is a significant concern for their organization over the next five years.

                                                   [Table 3]

        In a series of related questions, respondents indicated their opinion on whether their

organization had encountered challenges in the following areas associated with increased

retirements (Table 4). One fifth stated that over the past five years they had faced an issue of a

large number of retirements coming at the same time while 39 percent worried about the loss of

company specific knowledge due to retirements, and 44 percent reported having difficulty finding

workers with similar knowledge and skills relative to retirees. Across the all of these areas,

respondents expressed more concern about these challenges over the next five years.

                                                   [Table 4]

        Beyond the talent management issues, 44 percent of employers identified rising benefit

costs and 35 percent flagged increased salary costs as a concern they have been dealing with due

to employees delaying retirement (Table 5). This too is not expected to subside as rising costs of

benefits and wages are a growing concern for employers over the next half decade. Concern over

the relatively large number of retirements and the associated loss of talent was expressed by many

respondents. Most HR leaders thought that the importance of the potential loss of experience

workers would increase in the next five years. Once again the survey indicates the considerable

differences across organizations.

                                                   [Table 5]


                                                   8
   c. Employer Policies in Response to an Aging Workforce

       It is important to have a better understanding of whether firms are responding to the

changes in retirement patterns and the aging of the workforce. The HR managers provide useful

information about what programs their organizations have adopted and what additional policies

they are considering for the future. Table 6 shows the proportion of respondents who indicated

whether their firm had already adopted various policies, were planning to implement the policy in

2019, or considering the policy for 2020. Survey responses indicated that 20 percent of firms had

offered shorter hours for retirees and 27 percent had instituted part-year employment options for

older workers. Another 17 percent of respondents indicated that their employer planned to offer

each of these programs in 2019 or were considering them for 2020.

                                                 [Table 6]

       Several other policies have been adopted by firms to make the transition from a career job

into retirement smoother. Policies include modifying working conditions for older workers

(adopted by 36 percent of firms), providing additional training to help older workers maintain their

productivity (offered by 40 percent of employers), allow workers to change positions and reduce

management responsibilities (30 percent), and create job assignments that blend work with

volunteer hours (11 percent).

       One policy that does not seem to be gaining popularity is the use of formal phased

retirement programs. Only nine percent of respondents indicated that their firm had adopted a

formal policy; however, 14 percent of employers indicated that they either plan to adopt a phased

retirement program in 2019 or were considering one for 2020. When asked why their firm did not

offer a phased retirement plan (see Table 7), 26 percent indicated concern about compliance


                                                 9
challenges, 42 percent stated that these programs were not aligned with the firm’s workforce

strategy and 32 percent indicated that they were difficult to administer. Interestingly, 11 percent

reported a lack of employee interest in having a phased retirement program. Among the few firms

(11 total companies) with a formal phased retirement plan, all reported that less than 10 percent of

eligible employees enrolled in the plan.

                                                 [Table 7]

         Instead, employers have opted to use more informal approaches to phased retirement.

Chart 4 shows that more than half of respondents (55 percent) indicate that employees frequently

(14 percent) or sometimes (41 percent) phase into retirement following an informal approach on a

case by case basis. This varies widely by company type with employers in the health care and IT

and Telecom industries using this approach the most while it is less common in the public sector

or retail industry. Half of employers are frequently (10 percent) or sometimes (40 percent) having

retirees return to work after retirement either as an employee (49 percent) or as contract workers

(51 percent). Most frequently, retirees who asked to return held a professional role, as a manager

or technical expert; it’s less common among retirees who had a sales role or performed manual

tasks.

                                                 [Chart 4]

         In addition to these policies to make working conditions better suited for older employees,

Table 6 also shows the incidence of firms offering services to make retirement easier and perhaps

more attractive. Policies include providing financial wellbeing and retirement planning programs

(66 percent), opportunities for post-retirement hours of work as a consultant or contingent worker

(49 percent) and social benefits to assist individuals in the transition to retirement (11 percent).


                                                 10
Some respondents indicated that their firms continue to attempt to encourage workers to retire by

increasing retirement benefits (19 percent) and offering early retirement windows (13 percent).

   d. Summary of Findings from HR Managers
   The survey of human resource managers asked respondents to provide an assessment of the

aging of their workforce and whether they expect this aging to continue. The objective of the

survey was to determine whether individual employers are observing an aging of their labor force

and whether the firm has responded to this trend by adopting new employment and compensation

policies. The key observations from the survey are:

   1. Knowledge transfer and improving employee productivity is a key reason that managing

       orderly retirement is important to business strategy

   2. Almost 60 percent of employers expect their retirement age to increase over the next five

       years. Employers are concerned about the rising benefit and salary costs of an aging

       workforce and the impact of delayed retirement on succession planning.

   3. Many organizations are attempting to adopt programs that allow retired employees to keep

       working and to provide greater flexibility in their working environment.

   4. Few employers offer a formal phased retirement program while more firms offer informal

       approaches to older workers to remain on the job.

   5. There is considerable diversity across large employers concerning the pace and impact of

       an aging workforce and delayed retirements. Thus, there are substantial differences in how

       employers are responding to the aging of the workforce.

   6. HR managers expect that workforce aging will continue over the next five years and the

       challenges associated with delayed retirement will increase.




                                               11
                                    III.    Survey of Risk Managers 3

          To learn more about whether firms and other organizations view these issues as a

significant risk factor to their success, we surveyed risk officers to ascertain how they viewed the

risk of current and future work force aging to their organization. Will this loss of talent put the

organization at risk as knowledgeable older workers leave and are replaced by younger, less

experienced employees? If so, are they modifying employment and compensation policies in an

effort to provide incentives for older workers to delay retirement and remain on the job? This

report describes the key findings from a 2018 survey of risk managers in the U.S. economy. The

key finding is that the potential that an organization will lose talented older workers in the coming

years is viewed as both a short and long run risk by many organizations.

          In June 2018, a survey of the impact of an aging workforce was sent to the leading risk

managers by the North Carolina State University Enterprise Risk Management Initiative. The

objective of the survey was to determine whether risk managers thought an aging labor force and

its impact on retirement decisions of older workers posed significant risks to the operations of their

organization. We received responses from 142 risk officers representing firms and organization

of varying sizes and industries.

          Table 8 presents sample means for the respondents’ type of organization. Slightly over

one third of the respondents were employed by publicly-traded companies and not –for-profit

organizations respectively with just over one quarter of the respondents representing privately-



3
    The authors thank Mark Beasley and his Enterprise Risk Management Initiative, North Carolina State
University for providing access to their list of key risk managers at organizations across the country. You
can learn more about the ERM program at https://erm.ncsu.edu/



                                                    12
held for profit enterprises. In terms of the number of employees, 27 percent of organizations had

less than 500 employees while 25 percent had more than 10,000 workers. As measured by annual

revenues, 36 percent of the respondents were employed by organizations reporting annual revenues

of less than $500 million while 25 percent had annual revenues that exceed $5 billion. The largest

number of organizations represented in the survey were from the financial sector (33 percent) and

non-profit organizations (30 percent) while an additional 11 percent came from the manufacturing

sector.

                                                   [Table 8]

   a. Are Risk Managers Concerned about Talent Loss Due to Retirements?

          The aging of the labor force implies that a relatively large proportion of employees are now

approaching retirement which creates the potential for a significant loss in talent and knowledge.

The magnitude and importance of increases in annual retirements will vary across employers. The

risk managers were asked to state their agreement or disagreement with three statements

concerning their view of the risk associated with this trend and its impact in the coming years. The

first statement was:

          “The risk of losing talent and knowledge due to anticipated increases in employee

retirements is a significant risk concern for our organization in the near term (one to two years).

Respondents were given the option to indicate whether they strongly disagree, disagree, neither

disagree or agree, agree, or strongly agree with the statement. The first row of Table 9 shows the

distribution of responses to this statement. The observation from these responses is that 57 percent

of the respondents either strongly agreed/agreed with this statement while only 26 percent

disagreed/strongly disagreed with the statement.


                                                  13
                                              [Table 9]

       The importance of talent lost to risk managers varies substantially across industries.

Among our respondents, 81 percent of those in manufacturing along with 67 percent in mining

and not-for profit organizations agreed or strongly agreed that the loss of talent was a significant

concern in the near term while only 33 percent of risk managers in retail and 37 percent of those

in service expressed a similar level of concern. The level of concern over the loss of talent also

varied by the size of the organization with over 70 percent of those with over 10,000 employees

indicating that they thought the loss of talent was a risk concern while only half of those with fewer

than 10,000 employees reported a similar level of concern.

       Next, the statement was repeated but the time frame was increased to the next three to five

years and then to over five years. As the time period is increased, risk managers become more

concerned about the risk of losing talent due to increases in retirement. For example, over 70

percent of surveyed risk managers reported that they agreed/strongly agreed with the statement

about risk in the next three to five years and also for the longer term, over five years. In contrast,

the proportion of respondents who disagreed/strongly disagreed fell as the time frame for concern

lengthened.

       The respondents were then asked to compare this risk of talent and knowledge loss to other

labor market risks facing the firm such as turnover of younger workers, attracting new employees,

etc. Table 10 indicates that thirty percent of the risk managers indicated that the concern about

retirements was more significant than other labor market risks to their organization compared to

18 percent who felt it was a less significant risk to other labor market concerns.

                                                 [Table 10]


                                                 14
       The survey indicates that individuals in organizations whose focus is on the risks that

influence the sustainability of the organization and its long run success are concerned about the

loss of talent and knowledge of increased retirements associated with the aging of the labor force.

The level of concern increases in the upcoming years as the nation and the labor force continue to

age. Thirty percent of risk managers ranked this loss of talent risk as more significant than other

labor market risks with 53 percent indicating that this risk was similar to other labor market

concerns. Thus, the survey supports the conclusion that many risk managers have recognized the

potential adverse effect that the loss of talent through labor force aging and increased retirements

will have on organizations in the next five years. The responses also show the diversity across

organizations as they confront the aging of the workforce.

   b. Are Employers Responding to the Risk of Talent Loss?

       In the previous section, we saw that many risk managers believe that impending increases

in retirement are a significant risk to their organizations. In a series of statements, we asked these

same managers whether their organization has responded to the perceived risks of talent loss due

to retirements by adjusting compensation, modifying benefits, or introducing new employment

policies. In general, the risk managers expressed more concern about the importance of the risk

than they report that their organization has responded to this risk with specific policy changes (see

Table 11).

                                                 [Table 11]

       When asked to comment on the statement “Our organization is adjusting compensation

(e.g., wages and salary to entice employees to stay longer” 32 percent agreed/strongly agreed with

the statement but 45 percent either strongly disagreed/disagreed.         Similarly when asked to


                                                 15
comment on the statement “Our organization is modifying benefits (other than wages and salary)

to make it more attractive to stay longer” 27 percent agreed/strongly agreed and 45 percent

disagreed/strongly disagreed.      Finally, when asked to comment on the statement “Our

organization is introducing new employment policies that increase flexibility and incentives for

employees to stay longer” 35 percent agreed/strongly agreed while 40 percent disagreed/strongly

disagreed. Once again, we observe considerable diversity across the employers represented by the

risk managers in our survey; however, on balance the concern about loss of talent by the risk

managers seems not to be reflected by compensation and policy changes. We posed one final

statement on this seeming contradiction, “Our organization is not making any adjustments to

impact the pace and timing of employee retirements.” The responses follow those about specific

actions described above as 47 percent agreed/strongly agreed with this statement.

   c. Summary of Findings from Risk Managers

       The primary objective of our survey of risk managers is to ascertain whether those

responsible for reviewing risks to their organizations perceive aging and its related effects as a

significant risk to the future success of the organization. The respondents indicate that aging and

the loss of talent is viewed as a significant risk to many organizations and that the importance of

this risk will increase over the next five years. Recognizing that the aging of the workforce is a

risk factor does not necessarily lead to employers modifying employment and compensation

policies to alter the impact of associated with retirement decisions. It is clear from our survey that

labor market risk associated with aging varies substantially across employers by size and industry.

   The key observations from the survey are:




                                                 16
1. The potential that an organization will lose talented older workers in the coming years is

   viewed as both a short and long run risk to organizations. Over half (57 percent) of the

   risk managers agreed/strongly agreed with the following statement “The risk of losing

   talent and knowledge due to anticipated increases in employee retirement is a significant

   risk concern for our organization in the near term (one or two years).” When asked the

   same question about the risk in the next 3 to 5 years or over five years, over 70 percent of

   the respondent indicated that the risk of losing talent and knowledge was a significant risk.

2. One third of risk managers believe that loss of talent in the coming years is a significant

   risk to their organizations. Thirty percent believe that this risk was more significant than

   other labor market risks for their organization while another 53 percent replied that this

   risk was similar to other labor market risks for their organization.

3. Concern over this labor market risk is leading about a third of organizations to modify

   their compensation and employment policies to encourage older workers to remain on the

   job. Around 30 percent of the respondents agreed/strongly agreed with the statements that

   their organization was adjusting compensation to entice employees to stay longer,

   modifying benefits to make it more attractive to stay longer, and are introducing new

   employment policies that increase flexibility and incentives for employees to stay longer.

   In contrast, 47 percent agreed/strongly agreed with the statement that their organization

   was not making any such adjustments.

4. Over two thirds of the risk managers report that their organizations believe that older

   workers are an important component of their labor force. Almost three quarters (71

   percent) of the risk managers agreed/strongly agreed that their “organization views older

   employees as significant contributors to our company’s success” and 41 percent thought



                                            17
   that their organization views older employees as an important part of their

   business/workforce strategy. In contrast to these positive assessments, one fifth thought

   that their “organization views the aging workforce as a liability that may increase costs or

   reduce productivity more than a talent loss risk” and 18 percent agreed/strongly agreed

   with the statement that “our organization views older employees remaining in the

   workforce longer as an inhibitor to our company’s success.”

5. The importance of workforce aging varies substantially across sectors in the economy and

   across firms in each sector. Risk managers believe that this risk and its importance to their

   firm will increase in the coming years.




                                             18
                                IV.     Survey of Grocery Manufacturers 4

      In July 2018, a survey of the impact of an aging workforce was sent to the senior HR leaders

for member firms in the Grocery Manufacturers Association. (GMA). The GMA is comprised of

consumer goods firms that manufacture products available in grocery stores. The objective of the

survey was to determine whether HR leaders in this industry thought an aging labor force and its

impact on retirement decisions of older workers posed significant risks to the operations of their

organization. We received responses from 11 of the 35 HR leaders who received the survey for a

response rate of 31 percent. The respondents were split evenly between private and publicly-

traded firms with the majority having annual revenues between $1 billion and $5 billion. In terms

of number of employees 55 percent of the firms employed less than 10,000 employees, 18 percent

employ between 10000 and 20000 employees and 27 percent of the entities employ greater than

20,000 employees.

      a. Are HR Leaders Concerned about Talent Loss Due to Retirements?

      The HR leaders were asked to state their agreement or disagreement with three statements

about their view of the risk associated with this trend and its impact in the coming years. The first

statement was:

          “The risk of losing talent and knowledge due to anticipated increases in employee

          retirements is a significant risk concern for our organization in the near term (one to two

          years.”




4
    The authors thank the Grocers Manufacturers Association for providing access to their member firm’s
Human Resources contacts across the country.

                                                    19
Respondents were given the option to indicate whether they strongly disagree, disagree, neither

disagree or agree, agree, or strongly agree with the statement. The first column of Table 12 shows

the distribution of responses to this statement. The observation from these responses is that 64

percent of the respondents agreed with this statement while 28 percent disagreed/strongly

disagreed with the statement.

                                             [Table 12]

       Next, the statement was repeated but the time frame was increased to the next three to five

years and then to over five years. As the time period is increased to three to five years, HR

professionals become more concerned about the risk of losing talent due to increases in retirement.

86 percent of surveyed HR leaders in the GMA reported that they agreed/strongly agreed with the

statement about risk in the next three to five years but as the time period increased to over five

years that same percentage of agreed/strongly agreed decreased to 54 percent. A majority of

professionals agreed it is a significant risk but there is less agreement in the longer term greater

than five years view.

       The respondents were then asked to compare this risk of talent and knowledge loss to other

labor market risks facing the firm such as turnover of younger workers, attracting new employees,

etc. The majority of HR professionals (55 percent) indicated that the concern about retirements

was the same as other labor market risks to their organization compared to 18 percent who felt it

was a less significant risk compared to other labor market concerns.

       Considering a different perspective, we transition from an overall talent assessment to a

specific talent concern perspective. We asked respondents about their concerns for white collar

talent and for hourly skilled talent. For this group, over 90 percent of respondents agreed/strongly

agreed that their organization views the loss of skilled hourly talent as their largest aging workforce



                                                  20
concern. When considering the loss of skilled white collar talent 27 percent indicated it was their

largest aging workforce concern.

        The survey indicates that individuals in organizations whose focus is on talent management

in organizations are concerned about the implications of the aging of the labor force. The survey

supports the conclusion that many Human Resources professionals have recognized the potential

adverse effect that the loss of talent through labor force aging and increased retirements will have

on organizations specifically in the next five years and for specific segments of their workforce.

    b. Are Employers Responding to the Risk of Talent Loss?

        For this group, concern over this labor market risk has not resulted in these organizations

making modifications to their compensation and benefit plans to encourage older workers to

remain on the job. Over 80 percent of HR leaders disagreed that compensation plans were being

adjusted to entice employees to stay longer and over 72 percent indicated that benefits plans were

not being modified. Lastly, 9 percent agreed that they were introducing new employment policies

that increase flexibility and incentives for employees to stay longer.

        An approach that is being discussed to slow the loss of talent is to allow employees to

reduce their time commitment, scheduled hours or responsibility and still remain with their

organization. When our responding HR professionals were asked if their firms already have

policies that allow a full-time associate to transition to a reduced hour status or a role of less

responsibility over 45 percent indicated that yes, they do offer this flexibility. Those that do offer

this flexibility described their policies this way:

        “We have no policies, but the practice has happened.”

        “We offer part time employment and engagement of former employees in consulting roles

        post retirement.”

                                                  21
        “We offer exactly that, reduced work hours and responsibilities.”

        “We offer phased retirement.”

        “We have very flexible policies for reduced hours over an extended period of time that

        result in corresponding reduced pay and benefit eligibility. These have been well-received

        by all parties.”

     A final question asked of the Human Resource leaders was if early retirement incentives have

been part of their talent strategies in the past one, five or ten years. 36 percent of the respondents

indicated that their firm had offered an early retirement incentive as part of a reduction in force in

the last year five years.

     c. Summary of Findings for GMA Member Human Resource Professionals

     The objective of the survey was to determine whether HR leaders in the grocers manufacturing

industry thought an aging labor force and its impact on retirement decisions of older workers posed

significant risks to the operations of their organization. We received responses from 11 HR leaders

completing the survey. The key observations from the survey are:

1.      The potential that an organization will lose talented older workers in the coming years is

        viewed as both a short and five year risk to organizations. Nearly two in three or 64 percent

        of the leaders agreed with the following statement “The risk of losing talent and knowledge

        due to anticipated increases in employee retirement is a significant risk concern for our

        organization in the near term (one or two years).” When asked the same question about

        the risk in the next 3 to 5 years, over 81 percent of the respondents agreed/strongly agreed

        that the risk of losing talent and knowledge was a significant risk.

2.      The majority of HR leaders believe that the risk of loss of talent due to an aging workforce

        is the same as other labor market risks. 55 percent replied that this risk was similar to

                                                 22
     other labor market risks for their organization, while 27 percent believe that this risk was

     more significant than other labor market risks for their organization. Of significance to

     consumer goods manufacturing group is the loss of skilled hourly talent.

3.   Over two thirds of the HR leaders report that their organizations believe that older workers

     are an important component of their labor force. 81 percent of the leaders agreed/strongly

     agreed that their “organization views older employees as significant contributors to our

     company’s success. In contrast to these positive assessments, only 27 percent thought that

     their organization views retaining older employees as an important part of their

     business/workforce strategy, 18 percent thought that their “organization views the aging

     workforce as a liability that may increase costs or reduce productivity more than a talent

     loss risk”, but none agreed with the statement that “our organization views older employees

     remaining in the workforce longer as an inhibitor to our company’s success.”




                                             23
                                  V.      Concluding Observations

   The population of the United States is aging so that a larger proportion of Americans are aged

55 and older. The aging of the population is causing a corresponding increase in the proportion of

older workers. A major cause of the aging of the population is the increase in life expectancy at

older ages. The increase in the number of years of expected life means that if individuals leave

the labor force at traditional retirement ages they must be prepared to finance additional years of

retirement. The increase in life expectancy is one factor that is driving the increase in labor force

participation rates of older workers. In response to these trends, the proportion of the labor force

aged 55 and older is increasing because of the changes in the population age structure and because

workers are choosing to remain in the labor force until older ages.

   Economist and public policy analysts have devoted considerable research to examining the

work and retirement decisions of employees. Much less effort has been spent on understanding

the concerns and challenges of employers if their workers delay retirement and remain on the job

until older ages. In this study, we report findings from three employer surveys with the objective

of learning how organizations are responding to the aging of their workforces. Is this a cause for

concern or should employers be attempting to develop new policies and reorganize working

conditions to facilitate older workers remaining on the job?

   The surveys provide several important observations. First, employer concerns about workforce

aging vary considerably across the economy. To some firms, these demographic changes are of

immediate concern and are viewed as a significant risk to the organization while other firms remain

more concerned about potential productivity and cost effect of an older labor force. Second, most

employers expect the importance of workforce aging to increase in the next five years. In response,

a significant proportion of organizations are making changes to working conditions and


                                                 24
compensation policies. Third, firms remain reluctant to adopt formal phased retirement policies

but are more willing to offer part-time employment, return to work, and other policies on a case

by case basis.

   Workforces are aging but delayed retirement does not seem to be a significant problem for the

majority of firms; however, the continued aging of the national labor force and expected further

aging of firms could lead to further problems. A few policy themes are apparent in the survey

results indicating that further research is needed to better understand the importance of these issues.

   The cost of employee benefits for older workers is an important concern for many firms. Many

employers point to the high cost of health insurance as a concern of retaining older workers and

HR Managers believe that some workers are staying at work longer to keep access to employer

provided medical benefits. Considering the strong connection between employment and medical

coverage, could public policy changes related to medical coverage drive new trends? Could a

policy change increase the demand for older employees and reduce concerns associated with

delayed retirement? For example, would changes to Medicare which once again made Medicare

the primary payer for employees aged 65 and older increase the demand for older workers? Such

a change would reduce the relative cost of employees over age 65 by 15 to 25 percent by

eliminating the cost of health insurance paid by the employer.

   Another policy change that could reduce the cost of employing older workers would be to

adopt a paid-up status for Social Security and Medicare. The elimination of the employer portion

of payroll taxes for workers who have attained the age of eligibility for these programs would




                                                  25
reduce the cost of effected workers to the employer by 7.65 percent of payroll. 5 To learn more

about how firms might respond to this policy changed, the Willis Towers Watson survey asked

HR managers how they would respond to the lower cost of older employees (see Table 13). The

responses indicated that the lower cost of older employees with the adoption of paid-up status

would influence only a small number of employers to hire more older workers (9 percent indicated

that they were somewhat or highly likely to do so), pay older employees higher salaries (2 percent),

or change employee benefit plans (21 percent).

                                                  [Table 13]

      Another concern for employers is how innovative policies for older workers will be viewed

relative to the Age Discrimination in Employment Act. Some new policies such as phased

retirement and other changes in employment and compensation may seem reasonable but they may

also result in lawsuits. The nuisance of lawsuits even if the probability of winning is high seems

to be a major deterrent to the adoption of some policies.

      Return to work policies are used by many employers but there is concern about how some of

these policies are viewed by federal regulators. Employers walk fine lines with retirees who return

to work as contractors. Based on this observation, should Department of Labor and IRS regulations

that surround contractor status be revisited? One issue that merits some attention is whether

contractors over a certain age could have different rules than those under that age? In summary,

employers are being impacted by the aging of the labor force; however, the importance of aging

varies substantially across firms in different industries.




5
    Clark and Shoven (2019) describe how a paid-up status would affect the cost to employers and higher
take home pay for employees. Their analysis indicates a relatively strong labor supply response to this
type of policy change.

                                                     26
                                          References
Clark, Robert and Melinda Morrill. Extending Worklife: Employer Interests and Concerns,
       Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2016.

Clark, Robert and John Shoven, “Enhancing Work Incentives for Older Workers: Social Security
       and Medicare Proposals to Reduce Work Disincentives,” Economic Studies, The
       Brookings Institution, January 2019.

Quinn, Joseph, Kevin Cahill, and Michael Giandrea. 2015. “Retirement Patterns and the
       Macroeconomy, 1992 - 2010: The Prevalence and Determinants of Bridge Jobs, Phased
       Retirement, and Re-entry among Different Cohorts of Older Americans,” The
       Gerontologist 55(3), pp. 384-403.

Toossi, Mitra. “Labor force projections to 2024: the labor force is growing but slowly,” Monthly
       Labor Review, December 2015.




                                               27
   Table 1. Sample Means in WTW Survey of HR Leaders


                                       Sample Means
               Industry:
             Manufacturing                  24%
          Energy and Utilities              21%
              Health Care                   20%
           Financial Services               12%
            IT and Telecom                   9%
           Wholesale/Retail                  7%
            General Services                 5%
        Public Sector/Education              3%


           Employer Type:
       For Profit Publicly Traded           57%
           For Profit Private               18%
              Non-Profit                    18%
                  Other                      7%

        Number of Employees:
           Less than 5,000                  28%
            5,000 - 9,999                   24%
           10,000 - 24,999                  25%
            Over 25,000                     23%


Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.




                              28
                Table 2. Is the Age of Retirement a Concern to Employers?




                                               To what extent have the following been a
                                            challenge for your organization over the last 5
                                             years and what do you expect over the next 5
                                                                years?



                                                Last 5 Years              Next 5 Years

    Employees retiring earlier than the
     desired retirement age at your
              organization:

             Not at all: 1 or 2                     58%                       53%
            To some extent: 3                       29%                       29%
       To a very great extent: 4 or 5               13%                       17%


    Employees retiring later than the
     desired retirement age at your
              organization:

             Not at all: 1 or 2                     35%                       28%
             To some extent: 3                      34%                       36%
       To a very great extent: 4 or 5               31%                       36%


Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.

.




                                           29
            Table 3. Importance of Loss of Talent Due to Aging of Workforce

                                  To what extent has the loss of talent due to an
                                 aging workforce been a more significant concern
                                   for your organization relative to other labor
                                    market risks (such as turnover of younger
                                    workers, attracting new employees to your
                                 organization, etc.) over the last 5 years? How do
                                  you expect it to change over the next 5 years?
     Last Five Years:
      Not at all: 1 or 2                               32%
     To some extent: 3                                 35%
To a very great extent: 4 or 5                         34%

     Next Five Years:
      Not at all: 1 or 2                               19%
     To some extent: 3                                 27%
To a very great extent: 4 or 5                         54%



 Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.




                                       30
                            Table 4. Impact of Future Retirements




                                                   To what extent has your organization
                                               encountered any of the following challenges
                                              associated with employee retirements over the
                                            last 5 years and what do you expect over the next
                                                                5 years?



                                                  Last 5 Years             Next 5 Years

 Loss of a large number of employees

            Not at all: 1 or 2                        50%                      38%
           To some extent: 3                          30%                      34%
      To a very great extent: 4 or 5                  20%                      28%



  Loss of company specific knowledge


            Not at all: 1 or 2                        34%                      23%
           To some extent: 3                          27%                      29%
      To a very great extent: 4 or 5                  39%                      48%




Difficulty finding workers with similar
          knowledge and skills


           Not at all: 1 or 2                         31%                      24%
           To some extent: 3                          25%                      26%
      To a very great extent: 4 or 5                  44%                      50%


Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.



                                             31
                   Table 5. Challenges Associated with Delayed Retirement
                                                       To what extent has your organization
                                                   encountered any of the following challenges
                                                      associated with older workers delaying
                                                   retirement over the last 5 years and what do
                                                         you expect over the next 5 years?
                                                        Last 5 Years             Next 5 Years
  Blocking promotions of younger employees
               Not at all: 1 or 2                          37%                     35%
           To a moderate extent: 3                         30%                     28%
         To a very great extent: 4 or 5                    33%                     37%

Growing misalignment of the desired workforce
                 structure
               Not at all: 1 or 2                          37%                     32%
           To a moderate extent: 3                         35%                     32%
        To a very great extent: 4 or 5                     28%                     36%

       Increased wage and salary costs
               Not at all: 1 or 2                          27%                     25%
            To a moderate extent: 3                        38%                     34%
         To a very great extent: 4 or 5                    35%                     41%

         Increased costs of benefits
               Not at all: 1 or 2                          21%                     21%
           To a moderate extent: 3                         35%                     30%
         To a very great extent: 4 or 5                    44%                     49%

    Difficulty in transferring knowledge or
        ineffective succession planning
                 Not at all: 1 or 2                        28%                     25%
             To a moderate extent 3                        35%                     32%
          To a very great extent: 4 or 5                   37%                     43%



  Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.




                                              32
    Table 6. Proportion of Organizations Adopting and Planning New Employment Policies


                                                    Implemented   Planned    Considering
                                                       2018       for 2019    for 2020
                Offer Shorter Hours                     20%          4%         13%
               Part-Year Employment                     27%          4%         14%
            Modify Working Conditions                   36%          1%          6%
                Additional Training                     40%          3%          4%
        Alter Job, Reduced Responsibilities             30%          8%         13%
          Blend Volunteer Hours with Job                11%          1%          7%
    Social Benefits During Retirement Transition        11%          6%         14%
    Financial Wellbeing or Retirement Planning          66%         15%          4%
           Consulting/Contingent Workers                49%          3%          7%
            Increase Retirement Benefits                19%          9%          9%
             Early Retirement Window                    13%          1%          8%



Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.

.




                                                   33
Table 7. Reasons Firms Do Not Adopt Formal Phased Retirement Program


         Not Aligned with Workforce Strategy           42%
                Difficult to Administer                32%
                Prefer Informal Policy                 29%
               Compliance Challenges                   26%
                      Too Costly                       15%
              Lack of Employee Interest                11%



     Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.

     .




                                   34
       Table 8. Sample Means by Demographic Types in Risk Management Survey


                                                         Sample Means

                    Type of Organization:
                       Publicly Traded                       36.6%
                      Private Company                        26.1%
                        Not for Profit                       37.3%

                   Number of Employees:
                       Less than 500                         27.0%
                        500 - 4,999                          34.8%
                       5,000 - 9,999                         13.5%
                      10,000 - 20,000                        12.8%
                       Over 20,000                           12.1%

                      Annual Revenues:
                    Less than $100 million                   20.6%
                  $100 million - $500 million                15.6%
                   $500 million - $1 billion                 12.8%
                     $1 billion - $5 billion                 26.2%
                    $5 billion - $20 billion                 10.6%
                       Over $20 billion                      14.2%

                          Industry:
                         Not for Profit                      29.8%
                           Finance                           33.3%
                        Manufacturing                        11.4%
                  Retail/Wholesale/Services                  17.7%
              Construction/Mining/Transportation              7.8%


Source: Enterprise Risk Management: Risk Managers Survey conducted June 2018.




                                            35
                  Table 9. Risk of Losing Talent in Various Time Periods


                         The risk of losing         The risk of losing    The risk of losing
                              talent and                 talent and             talent and
                         knowledge due to           knowledge due to      knowledge due to
                            anticipated                 anticipated           anticipated
                            increases in                increases in          increases in
                              employee                   employee               employee
                          retirements is a           retirements is a      retirements is a
                          significant risk            significant risk      significant risk
                          concern for our            concern for our       concern for our
                        organization in the        organization in the   organization in the
                         near term (one to          intermediate time     longer term (over
                             two years).           horizon (next three         five years).
                                                       to five years).
 Strongly Disagree or         26.1%                         18.3%              13.4%
      Disagree

  Neither Disagree or         16.9%                      10.5%                 16.2%
        Agree
  Strongly Agree or           57.0%                      71.2%                 70.4%
       Agree


Source: Enterprise Risk Management: Risk Managers Survey conducted June 2018.




                                              36
        Table 10. Risk of Talent/Knowledge Loss Compared to Other Labor Market Risks


 Concerns about a loss of talent due to     How would you assess your organization’s
 an aging workforce are:                    exposure to a loss of talent due to an aging
                                            workforce risk relative to other labor market
                                            risks (such as turnover of younger workers,
                                            attracting new employees to your organization,
                                            etc.) facing your company?

 More significant than other labor market   30%
 risks for our organization
 Similar to other labor market risks for    53%
 our organization

 Less significant that other labor market   18%
 risks for our organization




Source: Enterprise Risk Management: Risk Managers Survey conducted June 2018.




                                              37
                           Table 11. Actions Undertaken by Companies


                          Our                 Our                 Our               Our
                    organization is    organization is     organization is    organization is
                       adjusting          modifying       introducing new    not making any
                    compensation        benefits (other      employment       adjustments to
                   (e.g., wages and    than wages and        policies that   impact the pace
                   salary) to entice   salary) to make          increase       and timing of
                     employees to           it more        flexibility and       employee
                      stay longer        attractive to      incentives for      retirements
                                          stay longer       employees to
                                                              stay longer

   Strongly             45.1%              45.1%               40.1%             32.7%
  Disagree or
   Disagree
Neither Disagree        22.9%              27.5%               25.4%             20.5%
    or Agree
 Strongly Agree         32.0%              27.4%               34.5%             46.8%
    or Agree




Source: Enterprise Risk Management: Risk Managers Survey conducted June 2018.




                                             38
                                 Table 12. Risk of Losing Talent

                                 The risk               The risk of
                             of losing talent          losing talent       The risk of
                             and knowledge           and knowledge        losing talent
                                  due to                   due to       and knowledge
                               anticipated              anticipated           due to
                               increases in            increases in        anticipated
                                employee                 employee         increases in
                             retirements is a        retirements is a       employee
                             significant risk        significant risk   retirements is a
                             concern for our         concern for our    significant risk
                             organization in         organization in    concern for our
                              the near term                 the         organization in
                               (one to two            intermediate      the longer term
                                  years).             time horizon          (over five
                                                      (next three to          years).
                                                        five years).
              Strongly            28%                       14%              19%
            Disagree or
              Disagree
          Neither Disagree         8%                       -                27%
              or Agree
          Strongly Agree          64%                     86%                54%
              or Agree




Source: Grocery Manufacturers Association Survey conducted June 2018.




                                                39
                                 Table 13
                                    How would your organization
                                    likely respond if the employer
                                   payroll taxes for Social Security
                                  and Medicare were eliminated for
                                        employees over age 65?
           Hire more older
             employees
         Highly or Somewhat
                                                29%
             Unlikely: 1
              Neutral: 3                        62%
         Somewhat or Highly
                                                 9%
            Likely: 4 or 5

       Change employee benefit
                plans
         Highly or Somewhat
                                                28%
             Unlikely: 1
              Neutral: 3                        51%
         Somewhat or Highly
                                                21%
              Likely: 4

         Pay older employees,
            higher salaries
          Highly or Somewhat
                                                41%
              Unlikely: 1
               Neutral: 3                       57%
          Somewhat or Highly
                                                 2%
               Likely: 4



Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.




                                    40
                      Chart 1. Employee Attitudes and Preferences




Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.




                                           41
Chart 2. Responses to Statements about the Importance of Older Workers and Retirement Policies




Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.




                                             42
              Chart 3. Importance of Orderly Retirement to Organizations




Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.




                                           43
                Chart 4. Use of Informal Policies in Lieu of Phased Retirement




Source: Willis Towers Watson HR Managers Survey conducted July 2018.




                                             44
