                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE FISCAL MULTIPLIER

                                       Marcus Hagedorn
                                       Iourii Manovskii
                                         Kurt Mitman

                                      Working Paper 25571
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25571


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2019

We thank our discussants, Adrien Auclert, Florin Bilbiie, Keith Kuester, Tomasso Monacelli, and
Christian Moser, and participants at CityU Hong Kong, Columbia, Copenhagen, EUI, Frankfurt,
HECER, Konstanz, Maryland, NOVA, NYU, Princeton, Queen Mary, Royal Holloway, Rutgers,
UCSD, Wisconsin, Yale, NBER EFG 2018, NBER SI EFACR, AEA Annual Meeting, Bank of
Finland, CEPR/ADEMU Conference on Fiscal Policy in the EMU, Zurich Mini-Conference on
Heterogeneous Agents Macroeconomics, Greater Stockholm Macro Group, Barcelona Summer
Forum, LAEF/UCSB Conference on Why the Government Does Whatever it is the Government
Does, Minnesota Workshop in Macroeconomic Theory, EIEF Pizzanomics Conference, SED
Annual Meeting, Banco de Espana and Carlos III Workshop on Quantitative Macroeconomics,
ADEMU Conference on the New Macroeconomics of Aggregate Fluctuations and Stabilization
Policy, USC Dornsife INET Conference on Inequality, Globalization, and Macroeconomics,
Bank of Ukraine Conference on Interaction of Fiscal and Monetary Policies, and Fiscal Policy
Workshop at the Richmond Fed. Support from the National Science Foundation Grant Nos.
SES-0922406 and SES-1357903, FRIPRO Grant No. 250617, the Ragnar Soderbergs stiftelse,
and the European Research Council grant No. 759482 under the European Union's Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marcus Hagedorn, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Fiscal Multiplier
Marcus Hagedorn, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman
NBER Working Paper No. 25571
February 2019
JEL No. D31,D52,E21,E62,E63

                                           ABSTRACT

We measure the size of the fiscal multiplier using a heterogeneous-agent model with incomplete
markets, capital and rigid prices and wages. The environment encompasses the essential elements
necessary for a quantitative analysis of fiscal policy. First, output is partially demand-determined
due to pricing frictions in product and labor markets, so that a fiscal stimulus increases aggregate
demand. Second, incomplete markets deliver a realistic distribution of dynamic consumption and
investment responses to stimulus policies across the population. These elements give rise to the
standard textbook Keynesian-cross logic which, and unlike conventional wisdom would suggest,
is significantly reinforced in our dynamic forward looking model.

We find that market incompleteness is key to determining the size of the fiscal multiplier, which
is uniquely determined in our model for any combination of fiscal and monetary policies of
interest. The multiplier is 1.34 if deficit-financed and 0.61 if contemporaneously tax-financed for
a pegged nominal interest rate, with similar values in a liquidity trap. If monetary policy follows a
Taylor rule, the numbers drop to 0.66 and 0.54, respectively. We elucidate the importance of
market incompleteness for our results and contrast them to models featuring complete markets or
hand-to-mouth consumers.

Marcus Hagedorn                                   Kurt Mitman
Department of Economics                           Institute for International Economic Studies
University of Oslo                                Stockholm University
Box 1095 Blindern                                 106 91 Stockholm
0317 Oslo, Norway                                 SWEDEN
marcus.hagedorn@econ.uio.no                       kurt.mitman@iies.su.se

Iourii Manovskii
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
manovski@econ.upenn.edu
1     Introduction
In an attempt to stabilize the economy during the Great Recession, monetary authorities
lowered nominal interest rates to nearly zero and fixed them at that level for several years.
Having reached the limit of traditional monetary policy, U.S. legislators stepped in with the
largest fiscal stimulus since the 1930s. Almost a trillion dollars was to be spent by the gov-
ernment, much of it early on, but also with significant spending budgeted to future years.
Although attempts to stabilize the economy through spending occur in virtually every re-
cession, the questions of how much and through which channels an increase in government
spending affects output, employment and investment are far from being answered.
    The traditional logic describing the effects of these policies is well known. A government
spending stimulus increases aggregate demand which leads to higher labor demand and thus
higher employment and wages. Higher labor income then stimulates consumption, in partic-
ular of poor households, which leads to even higher aggregate demand, and thus higher em-
ployment, higher income, more consumption and so on. The equilibrium impact of an initial
government spending of $1 on output - the fiscal multiplier - is then the sum of the impacts of
the initial increase in government spending and of the induced private consumption response.
    This simple argument is based on two essential elements. The first element is that output
is demand determined that ensures that the increase in government spending stimulates ag-
gregate demand in the first place. The typical underlying assumption is that prices are rigid
so that firms adjust quantities and not only prices in response to increased government de-
mand. Firms increase production to satisfy this demand by raising employment, capital and
wages, which leads to higher household income. This direct effect of an increase in spending
differs from the full equilibrium effect because it keeps prices and taxes unchanged and does
not take into account indirect multiplier effects that arise from higher private consumption
and investment. The second essential element of the argument is a significant deviation from
the permanent income hypothesis, such that households have a high marginal propensity to
consume (MPC) out of the transitory increase in income induced by the stimulus, generat-
ing a nontrivial indirect effect. Higher private consumption directly induced by government
spending then leads to further increase in labor demand, income, consumption and so on.
    A quantitative assessment of a stimulus policy and of the size of the direct and indirect


                                              1
effects requires both elements to be disciplined by the empirical behavior of households and
firms. This requires a model that, first, features the right amount of nominal rigidities, so that
the aggregate demand channel is as in the data. Second, it requires incorporating observed
marginal propensities to consume that imply a substantial deviation from the permanent in-
come hypothesis. However, this is not the path traditionally followed in the literature. Instead,
one strand of the literature (e.g., Baxter and King, 1993; Heathcote, 2005; Brinca et al., 2016;
Ferriere and Navarro, 2018) assumes flexible prices. This framework is limited in its ability to
provide a full assessment as only the supply but not the demand channel is operative—that is,
the first essential element is not present. Another strand of the literature uses Representative
Agent New Keynesian (RANK) models with sticky prices and wages e.g., Christiano et al.
(2011). Nominal rigidities provide a role for the demand channel but now the second essen-
tial element is missing because in these models households are assumed to be representative
agents who behave exactly like permanent-income ones and respond little to a temporary
income shock. This stands in the face of the findings of a large empirical literature that has
documented substantial MPC heterogeneity and large consumption responses to transitory
income and transfer payments.
       In this paper we measure the size of the fiscal multiplier in a dynamic equilibrium model fea-
turing these two elements disciplined by the observed behavior in micro data. Specifically, we
extend the standard Bewley-Imrohoroglu-Huggett-Aiyagari model to include New-Keynesian
style nominal price and wage rigidities.1 Introducing incomplete markets allows the model to
match the rich joint distribution of income, earnings and wealth. Such heterogeneity is crucial
in generating a realistic distribution of MPCs and, more generally, for assessing the effects of
policies that induce redistribution. The nominal rigidities allow for the model to have a mean-
ingful demand channel operating. In addition, the government budget constraint in the model
is specified, as in the data, in nominal terms. This lets us exploit the result in Hagedorn (2016,
2018) that incomplete market models with (partially) nominal fiscal policy imply price level
   1
    See Kaplan and Violante (2018) for a recent review of this emerging literature combining incomplete-
markets models with nominal rigidities. Additional references include, among others, Oh and Reis (2012),
Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017), Gornemann et al. (2012), Kaplan et al. (2018), Auclert (2016), Lütticke
(2015), McKay et al. (2016), Bayer et al. (2019), Ravn and Sterk (2017), Den Haan et al. (2017), Bhandari
et al. (2017a), Auclert and Rognlie (2017), Hagedorn et al. (2019) and Hagedorn et al. (2018b). Dupor et al.
(2018) build on our insights to quantify the size of the fiscal multiplier in the Great Recession in the US
exploiting cross-regional evindence and a multi-region HANK model.



                                                     2
determinacy. This allows us to measure the size of fiscal multiplier for arbitrary combinations
of monetary and fiscal policies of practical interest, including a constant nominal interest rate,
without having to impose restrictions on policy rules to ensure determinacy.
   Introducing these features into the model allows us to move beyond the analysis based
on the theoretically elegant Two Agent New Keynesian (TANK) model where one fraction
of households is hand-to-mouth and the other fraction behaves according to the permanent
income hypothesis (Bilbiie, 2008, 2017). Models in this class can feature a high MPC and the
demand channel, but they exhibit the same determinacy problem as the RANK model and lack
propagation and anticipation effects that we will show are crucial in determining the impact
of a fiscal stimulus. In particular, a TANK model delivers a much smaller multiplier even for
the same MPC - relating current income to current consumption - than our model. The reason
for this stark difference is the different consumption response to future income increases in
the two models. Hand-to-mouth consumers spend the full increase in current income but do
not respond to increases in future income. In contrast, households in our model respond to
both current and future income changes, making the logic underlying the size of the multiplier
dynamic. An increase in fiscal spending leads to higher current income, part of which is saved
to be spent in the future, which raises private consumption demand not only today but also
in all subsequent periods. This higher path of demand leads to a higher income path, relaxing
precautionary savings motives and allowing households to consume even more today. Indeed,
we find that future income increases (as opposed to increases in current income) drive the
contemporaneous consumption response, while only the latter effect is featured by the TANK
model. Finally, agents in our model anticipate and act on their expectations of future policies,
for example, how and when the stimulus will be repaid enabling us to evaluate the entire
policy path of interest.
   To assess the effects of fiscal policies, we also need to include capital accumulation into
the model. A fiscal stimulus affects demand for both consumption and investment, and the
two channels interact significantly in equilibrium. Moreover, if the financing of fiscal spend-
ing involves changes in government debt, it may imply a crowding out of investment, the
consequences of which need to be taken into account in policy evaluation.
   Clearly, “the fiscal multiplier” is not a single number – its size crucially depends on how it
is financed (debt, distortionary taxation, reduction of transfers), how persistent fiscal policy

                                                3
is, what households and firms expect about future policy changes, and whether spending is
increased or transfers are directed to low-income households. These important details can be
incorporated in the model but are difficult to control for in empirical studies. Perhaps it is
due to these difficulties that, despite the importance of this research question, no consensus
on the size of the multiplier has been reached and findings come with substantial uncertainty
(see Ramey, 2011, for a survey).2 Of course, we are not the first to attempt to sidestep these
difficulties faced in empirical work by relying on a more theoretical approach. Instead, our
contribution is to provide a quantitative laboratory that simultaneously features a demand
channel and realistic consumption and investment responses to changes in current and future
incomes, and that allows researchers to assess the fiscal multiplier for any configuration of
realistic monetary and fiscal policies. We also put the laboratory to use by quantifying the
size of the multiplier in several policy scenarios that are of independent interest and allow
to isolate various channels through which fiscal policy operates and to compare them to the
implications of key alternative models in the literature.3
       In our model, fiscal stimulus affects both private consumption and investment demand
and the incompleteness of markets affects how both demand components operate. For private
consumption, the fiscal multiplier operates through two channels — intertemporal substitution
and redistribution — with interesting interactions. The intertemporal substitution channel
describes how government spending affects real interest rates and how this changes private
consumption. The strength of this channels depends on the magnitude of the response of
real interest rates and on the responsiveness of private consumption to changes in real interest
rates. The redistribution channel describes the distributional consequences of changes in prices,
   2
      Most of the empirical studies use aggregate data to measure the strength of the fiscal multiplier, which
range from around 0.6 to 1.8, although “reasonable people can argue, however, that the data do not reject
0.5 or 2.0” (see Ramey, 2011). Another more recent branch of the literature looks at cross-state evidence and
typically finds larger multipliers. However, as Ramey (2011) and Farhi and Werning (2016) have pointed out,
the size of the local multipliers found in those studies may not be very informative about the magnitude of
aggregate multipliers. For example, the local multiplier could be 1.5 whereas the aggregate multiplier is 0.
    3
      In contemporaneous and complementary work, Auclert et al. (2018) also study the size of the multiplier
in a heterogenous-agent model with nominal rigidities. They characterize theoretically the constant-real-rate
multiplier in a version of the model with no redistribution across households. Further, they develop a general
equilibrium sufficient-statistics approach based on a matrix of “iMPCs” - intertemporal marginal propensities
to consume. In contrast to our paper, their approach requires more restrictive assumptions on monetary and
fiscal policy, and focuses on first-order deviations from steady-state, whereas we study a broader class of
monetary and fiscal policies and investigate the importance of state dependence in a liquidity trap. However,
our broad conclusions regarding the effect of different forms on financing on the size of the multiplier and the
differences between heterogenous-agent and two-agent models are congruous.


                                                       4
                     Intertemporal Substitution                                          Intertemporal Substitution


                         r                                                                  r
  Fiscal Stimulus                                   Private C       Fiscal Stimulus                                   Private C

                                                                                          w, T, h


                       Redistribution Effects                                              Redistribution Effects
                    Depend on entire distribution
                        and path of w, T, h
                (a) Incomplete Markets                                                (b) Complete Markets
Figure 1: Channels of Fiscal Stimulus: The response of private consumption (C) to changes
in real rates (r), real wages (w), hours (h) and taxes (T).


income, taxes, etc induced by government spending. The strength of this channel depends
on the magnitude of the redistribution induced by spending, and on how it affects private
consumption. Here it is important that the response of labor earnings is in line with the
data because (1) for asset poor workers income moves basically one-to-one with earnings and
(2) the profits of firms move roughly inversely with wages in response to a demand stimulus.
Introducing wage rigidities—to match the empirical properties of wages—bounds the volatility
of profits in the model, which is crucial for policy evaluation as the distributional effects arising
from the distribution of profits have first order implications. This is why we extend previous
work on Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) models to allow wages to be as rigid
as observed in the data. In addition, these two channels do not operate independently of each
other in general equilibrium, but may reinforce or attenuate each other as changes in the
real interest rate have distributional effects, and redistribution itself affects the equilibrium
real interest rate. Panel (a) of Figure 1 illustrates the two channels in incomplete markets. In
contrast, Panel (b) shows the mechanism in complete markets. In this special but standard
case only the intertemporal channel is operative.
   Our paper is the first to quantify the size of those channels in a model where both are
present in a meaningful way and to compare the results to the standard model with complete
markets. Even qualitatively the comparison is ex-ante unclear. On the one hand, the theoretical
findings in Hagedorn (2016, 2018) suggest that the response of real interest rate to changes
in government spending is smaller in incomplete markets models. Kaplan et al. (2018) show

                                                                5
that a given change in real interest rate has smaller effects in incomplete markets models.
Both arguments together - a smaller response and a smaller impact of real interest rates -
imply that the intertemporal channel is weaker here than if markets were complete. On the
other hand, the redistributional channel is larger in incomplete markets models (as it is absent
in complete markets), suggesting that the multiplier could be larger here than in complete
market models. In terms of investment, the incompleteness of markets implies that Ricardian
equivalence does not hold such that a deficit-financed government spending increase crowds-
out private investment. At the same time higher aggregate demand leads to higher investment
and we use our model to inform us which of the two effects dominates.
   Our quantitative analysis combines all channels and their interaction in equilibrium. To
isolate and measure the effects of fiscal policy as opposed to a convolution of changes in both
monetary and fiscal policies, our benchmark experiments assume that monetary policy does
not respond to the fiscal stimulus and keeps the nominal interest fixed. We find that the impact
multiplier of an increase in government spending is equal to 0.61 if spending is financed by a
contemporaneous increase in taxes and 1.34 if it is deficit-financed. The multiplier is high on
impact but dies out quite quickly so that the cumulative multiplier, which is the discounted
average multiplier over time, falls to 0.43 and 0.55 for tax and deficit-financed spending,
respectively. We then assess the size of the fiscal multiplier in a liquidity trap, a question
that has received renewed interest in the aftermath of the Great Recession. We therefore
engineer a liquidity trap where the natural real interest rate falls below zero and is consistent
with salient aggregate dynamics during the Great Recession. The results from the benchmark
analysis are relatively little changed. For example, the impact multiplier is now about 0.73 for
tax financed and 1.39 for deficit financed spending, implying that the multiplier is only mildly
state-dependent in our non-linear model.
   Two stark differences to the complete markets case require an explanation: the size of
the multiplier depends on how it is financed, and is much smaller in the liquidity trap than
in complete markets models (while being within a reasonable range of empirical estimates
Ramey (2011)). The dependence on the type of financing, specifically deficit-financed spending
being more effective in stimulating the economy than tax-financed, is not surprising in models
where Ricardian equivalence is violated. Increasing spending and taxes at the same time first
stimulates demand but then offsets it through raising taxes that particularly affects high-MPC

                                               6
households. In contrast, with deficit financing, the newly issued debt is mainly bought by low-
MPC households whereas high-MPC households consume a large fraction of their additional
income. Deficit financing thus implicitly redistributes from asset-rich households with low
MPCs who finance their consumption more from asset income to low-asset households with
high MPCs who rely more on labor income so that the aggregate MPC increases. The effect
is partially offset, however, because of the crowding out of investment by the expansion in
government debt.
       The reason why we find smaller, when compared to complete markets, multipliers in a
liquidity trap is that the response of the real interest rate is much smaller in our model than in
complete markets models.4 As a result, the magnitude of the intertemporal channel is smaller
in our model and the sizes of both intertemporal substitution and redistribution channels are
similar in and outside of the liquidity trap. Our decomposition of the strength of the two
channels shows that the intertemporal channel contributes 0.97 (1.1) and the redistributional
channel contributes 0.37 (−0.5) to the multiplier of 1.34 (0.61) if deficit (tax) financed with a
similar decomposition in a liquidity trap.
       Our quantitative analysis shows that the multiplier puzzles that have been documented
for RANK models do not carry over to our model.5 In RANK models, the multiplier increases
if prices become more flexible and is unbounded when price rigidities vanish implying a dis-
continuity at fully flexible prices where the multiplier is smaller than one. The reason is that
the inflation response is larger when prices are more flexible and that the private consumption
response is one-to-one related to the inflation rate since only the intertemporal substitution
channel is operating in RANK models. In contrast, we find that the multiplier in a liquid-
ity trap becomes smaller as prices become more flexible and that the discontinuity at fully
flexible prices disappears. The muted intertemporal substitution channel in combination with
different responses of inflation and real interest rates explains this finding. In particular, we
do not find large deflations as observed in liquidity traps in RANK models.
   4
      Standard RANK models are linear and do not feature state dependence of the size of the multiplier.
Instead, the large differences in the size of the multipliers in and outside a liquidity trap arise only because of
different monetary policies.
    5
      Thus, our model overcomes a Catch-22 of HANK models with fiscal policy fully specified in real terms.
As Bilbiie (2018) shows, some calibrations of these models can resolve the puzzles but then the multiplier is
small. Other calibrations can generate large multipliers but then the puzzles are even aggravated, a Catch-22.
In contrast, government bonds are nominal in our HANK model, which allows us to resolve the puzzles and
at the same time multipliers can be, depending on the distributional channel and the type of financing, large.


                                                        7
    We also show that promises to increase government spending in the future are less effective
than immediate spending increases and that the multiplier decreases in the size of spending.
If we deviate from the benchmark assumption of monetary policy not responding to fiscal
stimulus and assume instead that monetary policy is described by an interest rate feedback
rule, the fiscal stimulus becomes considerably less effective, especially if it is deficit-financed.
We also study the effectiveness and welfare implications of stimulative policies that take the
form of transfers rather that an increase in spending. Although these are commonly used
policies in practice, they cannot be evaluated using the traditional RANK models.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our incomplete markets model with
price and wage rigidities. In Section 3 we quantitatively study the size and properties of the
fiscal multiplier. Section 4 concludes.


2     Model
The model is a standard New Keynesian model with capital with one important modifica-
tion: Markets are incomplete as in Huggett (1993); İmrohoroğlu (1989, 1992); Aiyagari (1994,
1995). Price setting is constrained by costly prices adjustments as in Rotemberg (1982) leading
to price rigidities. As is standard in the New Keynesian literature, final output is produced
in several intermediate steps. Final good producers combine the intermediate goods to pro-
duce and sell their output in a competitive goods market. Intermediate goods producers are
monopolistically competitive. They set the price they charge to the final good producer to
maximize profits taking into account the price adjustment costs they face. The intermediate
goods producer rent inputs, capital and a composite of differentiated labor, in competitive
factor markets. We also allow for sticky wages and assume that differentiated labor is monop-
olistically supplied as well.


2.1    Households

The economy consists of a continuum of agents normalized to measure 1 who are ex-ante
heterogenous with respect to their subjective discount factors, have CRRA preferences over




                                                 8
consumption and additively separable preferences for leisure:
                                                           ∞
                                                           X
                                           U = E0                 β t u(ct , ht ),
                                                            t=0


where                                           
                                                 c1−σ −1 − v(h) if σ 6= 1
                                                
                                                    1−σ
                                  u(c, h) =
                                                log(c) − v(h)
                                                
                                                                                    if σ = 1,

β ∈ (0, 1) is the household-specific subjective discount factor and v(h) is the disutility of labor.
   Agents’ labor productivity {st }∞
                                   t=0 is stochastic and is characterized by an N -state Markov

chain that can take on values st ∈ S = {s1 , · · · , sN } with transition probability characterized
                   R
by γ(st+1 |st ) and s = 1. Agents rent their labor services, ht st , to firms for a real wage
wt and their nominal assets at to the asset market for a nominal rent iat and a real return
               1+ia                       Pt
(1 + rta ) =      t
               1+πt
                    ,   where 1 + πt =   Pt−1
                                                is the inflation rate (Pt is the price of the final good).
                                                                                                   1+it
The nominal return on bonds is it with a real return (1 + rt ) =                                   1+πt
                                                                                                        .   There are two classes of
assets, bonds and capital with potentially different returns, but households can invest in one
asset, A, that a mutual fund (described below) collects and allocates to bonds and capital.
   To allow for sticky wages in our heterogeneous worker economy we need to extend the
literature which models wage rigidities in representative agent models (Erceg et al., 2000).
We follow the representative agent literature and assume that each household i provides
differentiated labor services which are transformed by a representative, competitive labor
recruiting firm into an aggregate effective labor input, Ht , using the following technology:
                                            Z        1                              ww−1
                                                                       w −1
                                    Ht =                  sit (hit )    w     di              ,                                 (1)
                                                  0


where w is the elasticity of substitution across differentiated labor.
   A middleman firm (e.g. a union) sells households labor services sit hit at the wage Wit to
the labor recruiter, which, given aggregate labor demand Ht by the intermediate goods sector,
minimizes costs                                  Z    1
                                                           Wit sit hit di,                                                       (2)
                                                  0




                                                               9
implying a demand for the labor services of household i:
                                                                                    −w
                                                                              Wit
                                         hit = h(Wit ; Wt , Ht ) =                               Ht ,                                (3)
                                                                              Wt

where Wt is the (equilibrium) nominal wage which can be expressed as
                                                     Z      1                     1−1 w
                                             Wt =                sit Wit1−w di              .
                                                         0


       The union sets a nominal wage Ŵt for an effective unit of labor (so that Wit = Ŵt ) to
maximize profits subject to wage adjustment costs modeled similarly to the price adjustment
costs in Rotemberg (1982). These adjustment costs are proportional to idiosyncratic produc-
tivity sit , are measured in units of aggregate output, and are given by a quadratic function of
                                                                                                        w
the change in wages above and beyond steady state wage inflation Π ,
                                                                                       2                                      !2
                                                         θw          Wit     w                          θw    Ŵt         w
Θ sit , Wit = Ŵt , Wit−1 = Ŵt−1 ; Ht               = sit                   −Π                  Ht = sit              −Π            Ht .
                                                            2          Wit−1                               2   Ŵt−1

       Our extension to an heterogeneous agent economy requires to make assumptions on the
aggregation of heterogeneous workers. There is not a unique way to do so and we choose one
that is tractable and delivers the representative agent outcome when all heterogeneity is shut
down. The union’s wage setting problem is assumed to maximize6

                                              sit (1 − τt )Ŵt
                                         Z 
                                                                                 v(h(Ŵt ; Wt , Ht )) 
            Vtw       Ŵt−1       ≡ max                        h(Ŵt ; Wt , Ht ) −                        di
                                     Ŵt              Pt                                 u0 (Ct )
                                    Z                         !2
                                           θw     Ŵt       w                  1     w
                                                                                         
                                  −    sit              −Π        Ht di +          Vt+1  Ŵt ,                                       (4)
                                            2 Ŵt−1                         1 + rt

where Ct is aggregate consumption and τt is a proportional tax on labor income.7
       Some algebra (see Appendix II) yields, using hit = Ht and Ŵt = Wt and defining the real
   6
      Equivalently Rone can think of a continuum of unions each setting the wage for a representative part of the
population with s = 1 at all times.
    7
      Any decision problem in a heterogeneous group requires assumptions on the aggregation of individual
needs and this wage setting problem is no exception. Fortunately, our choices here have virtually no effect
on our findings. We divide v(h(Ŵt ; Wt , Ht )) by u0 (Ct ) but using individual consumption and dividing by
u0 (Cit ) instead has virtually no effect. We discount with 1+r
                                                             1
                                                                t
                                                                                          1
                                                                  but discounting using 1+r a or β instead also has
                                                                                            t
negligible effect our findings.




                                                                   10
             Wt
wage wt =    Pt
                ,   the wage inflation equation

            w                                     v 0 (h(Ŵt ; Wt , Ht ))     1                w  w Ht+1
θw πtw − Π       πtw = (1 − τt )(1 − w )wt + w                           +        θw π w
                                                                                         t+1 − Π   πt+1    .
                                                           u0 (Ct )          1 + rt                     Ht
                                                                                                         (5)
   Thus, at time t an agent faces the following budget constraint:

                            Pt ct + at+1 = (1 + iat )at + (1 − τt )Pt wt ht st + Tt ,

where Tt is a nominal lump sum transfer. Households take prices as well as wages and hours
from the middleman’s wage setting problem as given. Thus, we can rewrite the agent’s problem
recursively as follows:

                                                                 X
                    V (a, s, β; Ω) = max
                                       0
                                         u(c, h) + β                   γ(s0 |s)V (a0 , s0 , β; Ω0 )     (6)
                                    c≥0,a ≥0
                                                                 s∈S

                                   subj. to P c + a0 = (1 + ia )a + P (1 − τ )whs + T

                                               Ω0 = Υ(Ω),

where Ω(a, s, β) is the distribution on the space X = A×S ×B of agents’ asset holdings a ∈ A,
labor productivity s ∈ S and discount factor β ∈ B, across the population, which will, together
with the policy variables, determine the equilibrium prices. Let B(X) = P(A) × P(S) × P(B)
be the σ-algebra over X, defined as the cartesian product over the Borel σ-algebra on A
and the power sets of S and B. Define our space M = (X, B(X)), and let M be the set of
probability measures over M . Υ is an equilibrium object that specifies the evolution of the
distribution Ω.


2.2     Production
2.2.1   Final Good Producer

A competitive representative final goods producer aggregates a continuum of intermediate
goods yjt indexed by j ∈ [0, 1] and with prices pjt :
                                                                          
                                                 Z     1    −1
                                                                        −1
                                          Yt =              yjt dj
                                                              
                                                                               .
                                                    0




                                                            11
where  is the elasticity of substitution across goods. Given a level of aggregate demand Yt ,
cost minimization for the final goods producer implies that the demand for the intermediate
good j is given by                                                           −
                                                                        pjt
                                    yjt = y(pjt ; Pt , Yt ) =                       Yt ,                           (7)
                                                                        Pt
where P is the (equilibrium) price of the final good which can be expressed as
                                                                          1
                                                    Z   1              1−
                                                              1−
                                             Pt =            pjt  dj           .
                                                     0


2.2.2     Intermediate-Goods Firms

Each intermediate good j is produced by a monopolistically competitive producer using the
technology:                             
                                         K α H 1−α − F if ≥ 0
                                            jt jt
                                  Yjt =                           ,                                                (8)
                                         0             otherwise
where 0 < α < 1, Kjt is capital services rented, Hjt is labor services rented and the fixed cost
of production is denoted F > 0.
   Intermediate-goods firms rent capital and labor in perfectly competitive factor markets. A
firm’s real marginal cost is mcjt = ∂Ξt (Yjt )/∂Yjt , where

                       Ξt (Yjt ) = min rtk Kjt + wt Hjt , and Yjt is given by (8).                                 (9)
                                  Kjt ,Hjt


Given our functional forms, we have
                                       α      1−α
                                       1      1
                                mct =                 (rtk )α (wt )1−α                                            (10)
                                       α     1−α

and
                                               Kjt      αwt
                                                   =            .                                                 (11)
                                               Hjt   (1 − α)rtk
   Prices are sticky as intermediate-goods firms face Rotemberg (1982) price adjustment
costs. Given last period’s individual price pjt−1 and the aggregate state (Pt , Yt , Zt , wt , rt ), the
firm chooses this period’s price pjt to maximize the present discounted value of future profits,
satisfying all demand. The intermediate-goods firm’s pricing problem is
                                                                                           2
                        pjt                                     θ                   pjt                1
VtIGF   (pjt−1 ) ≡ max y (pjt ; Pt , Yt )−Ξ(y(pjt ; Pt , Yt ))−                          − Π Yt −F +       V IGF (pjt ) .
                    pjt Pt                                      2                  pjt−1             1 + rt t+1

                                                         12
     Some algebra (see Appendix II) yields the New Keynesian Phillips Curve

                                                                 1                   Yt+1
                        (1 − ) + mct − θ πt − Π πt +                 θ πt+1 − Π πt+1      = 0.
                                                                1 + rt                  Yt

The equilibrium real profit of each intermediate goods firm, fully taxed by the government, is

                                                  dt = Yt − F − Ξ(Yt ).


2.3        Mutual Fund
                                                                          R
The mutual fund collects households savings At+1 /Pt+1 ≡                      ait /Pt+1 di, pays a real return r̃ta ,
and invests them in real bonds Bt+1 /Pt+1 and capital Kt+1 . It maximizes

    MF                                k                                                   a                      V M F (Kt+1 )
V        (Kt ) ≡      max (1 +       rt+1   − δ)Kt+1 + (1 + rt+1 )Bt+1 /Pt+1 − (1 +     r̃t+1 )(At+1 /Pt+1 )   +         a
                         B
                   Kt+1 , P t+1                                                                                   (1 + r̃t+2 )
                           t+1


                   subj. to At+1 /Pt+1 = Kt+1 + Bt+1 /Pt+1 + Φ(Kt+1 , Kt )

for adjustment costs Φ(Kt+1 , Kt ) and taking Kt and Kt+2 as given. Note that we drop ex-
pectation operators for simplicity since we consider perfect foresight experiments only. The
equilibrium first-order conditions are

                                           a
                                  rt+1 = r̃t+1 ,                                                                  (12)
                           k                a
                      1 + rt+1 − δ = (1 + r̃t+1 )(1 + Φ1 (Kt+1 , Kt )) + Φ2 (Kt+2 , Kt+1 ),                       (13)

                        At+1 /Pt+1 = Kt+1 + Bt+1 /Pt+1 + Φ(Kt+1 , Kt ).                                           (14)

     The total dividends of the fund are

              MF          k                                             a
             Dt+1 = (1 + rt+1 − δ)Kt+1 + (1 + rt+1 )Bt+1 /Pt+1 − (1 + r̃t+1 )(At+1 /Pt+1 ),

and after-tax per unit of investment they are dM F             MF
                                               t+1 = (1 − τk )Dt+1 /(At+1 /Pt+1 ). Households

therefore receive (or have to pay) dM F
                                    t+1 At+1 /Pt+1 in period t + 1 per unit invested such that

households’ real return equals

                                                    a           a
                                               1 + rt+1 = 1 + r̃t+1 + dM F
                                                                       t+1




                                                           13
and corresponding nominal return is

                                                                    Pt+1
                                          1 + iat+1 = (1 + rt+1
                                                            a
                                                                )        .
                                                                     Pt

2.4     Government

The government obtains revenue from taxing labor income, profits and dividends and issuing
bonds. Household labor income is taxed progressively with a nominal lump-sum transfer T
and a proportional tax τ :
                                          T̃ (wsh, T ) = −T + τ P wsh.

The government issues nominal bonds denoted by B g , with negative values denoting govern-
ment asset holdings and fully taxes away profits of intermediate goods firms, obtaining nominal
revenue P d. The government also taxes dividend income at the rate τk . The government uses
the revenue to finance exogenous nominal government expenditures, Gt , interest payments on
bonds and transfers to households. The government budget constraint is therefore given by:
                                                                             Z
                 g
                Bt+1   = (1 +   it )Btg   + Gt − Pt dt −   τk Pt DtM F   −       T̃ (wt st ht , Tt )dΩ.        (15)


2.5     Equilibrium

Market clearing requires that the labor demanded by firms is equal to the aggregate labor
supplied by households, that the demand for bonds issued by the government and for capital
equal their supplies and that the amount of assets provided by households equals the demand
for them by the mutual fund:
                                                                   Z                        Z
                                                            Ht =       Hjt dj = Hjt =           hit di = hit   (16)

                                                  Bt = Btg                                                     (17)
                                                       Z
                                                 Kt = Kjt dj                                                   (18)
                                                       Z
                                                           at+1 (at , st , β)
      Kt+1 + Bt+1 /Pt+1 + Φ(Kt+1 , Kt ) = At+1 /Pt+1 =                        dΩt ,                            (19)
                                                                Pt+1

where at+1 (at , st , β) is the asset choice of an agent with asset level at , labor productivity st
and discount factor β.



                                                       14
   The aggregate resource constraint is given by
                            Z
                                                        Gt
     Yt =   Ktα Ht1−α   =       ct (at , st , β)dΩt +      + F + Kt+1 − (1 − δ)Kt + Φ(Kt+1 , Kt )   (20)
                                                        Pt

. It does not include price and wage adjustment costs because we interpret those costs as being
virtual—they affect optimal choices but do not cause real resources to be expended. We make
this assumption to avoid significant movements of these adjustment costs and to avoid them
becoming a non-trivial fraction of output in e.g., the liquidity trap. In a liquidity trap prices
fall, leading to large price adjustment costs, which, if they were actual resource costs, would
lead to a boom in the price adjustment cost industry and may imply an increase in aggregate
output (see Hagedorn et al., 2018a, for details). Assuming that price adjustment costs are as-if
avoids these outcomes and moves our model closer to one with price setting à la Calvo.
   Definition: A monetary competitive equilibrium is a sequence of tax rates τt and τk ,
nominal transfers Tt , nominal government spending Gt , supply of government bonds Btg , value
functions Vt : X × M → R with policy functions at : X × M → R+ and ct : X × M → R+ ,
hours choices Ht , Hjt , hit : M → R+ , capital decisions Kt , Kjt : M → R+ , bond choices
Bt : M → R+ , price levels Pt : M → R+ , pricing functions rt , rta , rtk , r̃ta : M → R and
wt : M → R+ , and a law of motion Υ : M → M, such that:

  1. Vt satisfies the Bellman equation with corresponding policy functions at and ct given
     price sequences rta , wt and hours ht .

  2. Firms maximize profits taking prices Pt , rtk , wt as given.

  3. Wages are set optimally by middlemen.

  4. The mutual fund maximizes profits taking prices as given.

  5. For all Ω ∈ M market clearing conditions (16) - (19) and the resource constraint (20)
     are satisfied.

  6. Aggregate law of motion Υ generated by a0 and γ.




                                                           15
3     The Fiscal Multiplier
In this section we calculate the fiscal multiplier in our model with incomplete markets, con-
ducting the following experiment. Assume that the economy is in steady state with nominal
bonds Bss , government spending Gss , transfers Tss , labor tax rate τss , dividend tax τk,ss ,
and where the price level is Pss . The real value of bonds is then Bss /Pss , the real value of
government expenditure is Gss /Pss and so on. We then consider an M.I.T. (unexpected and
never-again-occurring) shock to government expenditures and compute the impulse response
to this persistent innovation in G. Agents are assumed to have perfect foresight after the shock.
Eventually the economy will reach the new steady state characterized by government spending
Gnew
 ss
                               new
     = Gss , government bonds Bss                     new
                                   = Bss , transfers Tss                     new
                                                          = Tss , tax rates τss  = τss and
 new                                 new
τk,ss = τk,ss , and the price level Pss  .


3.1     The Fiscal Multiplier in Incomplete Market Models

In our model the fiscal multiplier affects both aggregate consumption and investment. In terms
of consumption, the stimulus operates through two interdependent channels — intertemporal
substitution and redistribution. The intertemporal substitution channel describes how gov-
ernment spending changes real interest rates and how this changes private consumption. The
distributional channel describes how government spending changes prices, income, taxes, etc.,
the redistribution induced by these changes and the resulting impact on private consumption.
In terms of investment, the multiplier operates through changes in real interest rates, through
crowding-out of capital when deficit financing is used and through stimulating demand which
makes firms hire not only more labor but also more capital. In addition to capturing the
relevant transmission mechanisms for fiscal policy, our HANK framework also delivers price
level determinacy (Hagedorn, 2016, 2018). This allows us to study arbitrary combinations
of monetary and fiscal policies of interest, in particular a constant nominal interest rate as
prevails at the zero lower bound (ZLB). We do not face the indeterminacy issues with the
representative-agent New Keynesian model at the ZLB raised by Cochrane (2017) and have a
uniquely determined fiscal multiplier at the ZLB, one of the cases where we are most interested
in knowing its size.
    We now explain the role of the two consumption channels in shaping the fiscal multiplier,


                                               16
how they interact with price level determinacy, what determines their strengths, and explain
the differences to complete markets. After that we turn to the investment channel. Finally, we
formally define the fiscal multiplier in our environment as well as the corresponding multipliers
that would arise in RANK and TANK models faced with same dynamics of prices as arising
in our model. This will be helpful in illustrating the role of various features of our model
that lead to quite different conclusions from the ones implied by those prominent alternative
frameworks.

3.1.1   Intertemporal Substitution Channel

To understand the workings of the intertemporal substitution channel in our model it is
instructive to start with the complete markets case where this is the only channel operating.
We then move to incomplete markets to elucidate the differences.
   With complete markets, the size of the multiplier m is determined by the response of the
                                                                                     C 1−σ
real interest rates only. The consumption Euler equation for our utility function,   1−σ
                                                                                             + ..., is

                                     Ct−σ = β(1 + rt+1 )Ct+1
                                                         −σ
                                                             .                                  (21)

Iterating this equation and assuming that consumption is back to the steady-state level at
time T , CT = Css , we obtain for consumption at time t = 1 when spending is increased,
                                             −1
                                           TY                
                              C1−σ    =           β(1 + rt+1 ) CT−σ ,                           (22)
                                            t=1


so that the initial percentage increase in consumption equals
                              T −1            −1              T −1
                                                     Y 1 + r  −1
                     C1    Y                  σ              t+1 σ
                         =      β(1 + rt+1 )      =                 ,                           (23)
                     Css    t=1                       t=1
                                                          1 + rss

where we have used that β(1+rss ) = 1 in a complete markets steady state. The fiscal multiplier
m - the dollar change in output for each dollar increase in g - is one-to-one related to the
percentage change in private consumption
                                                  C         C
                                                       1        ss
                                     m=1+                  −1                                   (24)
                                                   Css        ∆g

and is thus one-to-one related to the accumulated response of the real interest rate which is


                                                     17
induced by the fiscal stimulus,
                                        T −1
                                                          !
                                  Css  Y 1 + rt+1  −1
                                                     σ
                             m=1+                       −1 .                                    (25)
                                  ∆g    t=1
                                             1 + rss

The multiplier is then proportional to the consumption response
                                                          T −1
              C1                    1              X
         log(     )=                                   (log(1 + rss ) − log(1 + rt+1 )),        (26)
              Css                   σ
                                  |{z}             t=1
                                                       |              {z              }
                        Intertemporal Substitution     Change  of  real  interest rates

which can be decomposed in the change in the real interest rate, ≈ rt − rss , and the effect of
this change on consumption, whose strength is governed by the IES, σ1 .
   Both components of the intertemporal substitution channel tend to be weaker in incomplete
markets models. The effect of the real interest rate on consumption is smaller since some
households are credit constrained and thus not on their Euler equation, breaking the tight
link between consumption and real interest rates. In addition, the change in real interest rates
is smaller. To understand the difference, assume for simplicity that the nominal interest rate
is fixed at iss and that the steady state is reached after T periods so that
          T −1                   T −1               T −1                T −1            new
          Y                      Y       1 + iss  Y               PT   Y              Pss
                 (1 + rt+1 ) =                    =     (1 + iss )    =     (1 + iss )      ,   (27)
           t=1                   t=1
                                        1 + πt+1    t=1
                                                                   P1   t=1
                                                                                        P1
                         QT −1                                                         new
i.e., the response of      t=1   (1 + rt+1 ) is one-to-one related to the response of Pss  /P1 . This
response is quite large in complete market models (Christiano et al., 2011) but small here.
   This is a consequence of the result that incomplete markets combined with fiscal policy
specified partially in nominal terms delivers a globally determined price level independently
of how monetary policy is specified. We refer the reader to Hagedorn (2016, 2018) for details
                                                        new
and only provide the intuition for the key result that Pss  = Pss . Define households’ real
steady-state asset demand as S. The asset demand S, the real stock of capital, Kss , and the
                                      new
amount of nominal bonds is the same, Bss  = Bss , in both steady states and therefore both




                                                       18
price levels solve the same asset market clearing condition8

                                                 Bss        B new      B new
                     S(1 + rss , ...) = Kss +        = Kss + ss = Kss + ss
                                                                         new
                                                                             .                             (28)
                                                 Pss         Pss       Pss

       Together these arguments imply that the intertemporal substitution channel is weaker
in our incomplete markets model than in the corresponding complete markets model, where
  new                                                                              new
Pss   > Pss . Note that since P1 typically increases in response to a stimulus, Pss    /P1 < 1,
         QT −1              QT −1
and thus t=1 (1 + rt+1 ) < t=1 (1 + iss ) i.e., the intertemporal substitution channel by itself
implies a multiplier smaller than one, m < 1. The multiplier here is smaller than one whereas
it is equal to one in Woodford (2011) since the real interest rate is constant in the small-open
economy experiment considered in Woodford (2011) but endogenous and time-varying here.9

3.1.2      Distributional Consequences of a Stimulus

An increase in spending, the necessary adjustments in taxes and transfers, and the resulting
responses of prices and hours induce redistribution across economic agents. For example,
changes in the tax code naturally deliver winners and losers. An increase in the price level
and of labor income leads to a redistribution from households who finance their consumption
more from asset income to households who rely more on labor income. Changes in interest
rates redistribute between debtors (the government) and lenders (Erosa and Ventura, 2002;
Doepke and Schneider, 2006).
       These distributional effects matter due to the endogenous heterogeneity in the MPCs in
the data that is replicated in the model. This heterogeneity together with the properties of the
redistribution determine the aggregate consumption response, and, since output is demand
determined due to price rigidities, also affect output. Individual household’s consumption ct
at time t depends on the sequence of transfers T , tax rates τ , labor income wh, prices P and
   8
     Price level determinacy is a consequence of only two empirically well-grounded assumptions, incomplete
markets and nominal government bonds, and in particular does not require any further selection criteria, such
as a price or inflation targeting rule.
   9
     We also overcome an indeterminacy problem in Woodford (2011). He assumes that after a fiscal stimulus
consumption converges back to its pre-stimulus level, ruling out other belief driven steady states. Since the
real interest rate is constant, this implies that consumption is equal to its steady-state level in all periods,
implying a multiplier equal to one. If instead households believe income to change permanently by x%, then
consumption demand increases by x% as well, confirming the initial belief as an equilibrium outcome. There is
a steady state for each x 6= 0, assumed away in Woodford (2011) who focuses instead on the x = 0 equilibrium.
Such assumptions to ensure determinacy are not needed here.



                                                      19
nominal interest rates ia , so that aggregate private consumption satisfies
                                                            Z
              Ct {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , ial }l≥0               ct (a, s, β; {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , ial }l≥0 )dΩt .
                                                    
                                                        =                                                              (29)

In our model hours are a household choice variable but they are demand determined as well. Of
course, consumption and hours worked are jointly determined in equilibrium but to understand
the demand response of the fiscal stimulus it turns out to be useful to consider wh as exogenous
for consumption decisions here. In particular it allows us to distinguish between the initial
impact,“first round” demand impulse due to the policy change and “second, third, ... round”
due to equilibrium responses. Those arise in our model since an initial policy-induced demand
stimulus leads to more employment by firms, and thus higher labor income which in turn
implies more consumption demand, which again leads to more employment and so on until
an equilibrium is reached where all variables are mutually consistent. Denoting pre-stimulus
variables by a bar, we can now decompose the aggregate consumption response,

                 (∆C)t = Ct {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , ial }l≥0 − Ct {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄h̄, P̄ , īa }l≥0 ,
                                                                                               
                                                                                                                       (30)

into its different channels:

              (∆C)t = Ct {Tl , τl , w̄h̄, P̄ , īa }l≥0 − Ct {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄h̄, P̄ , īa }l≥0
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                       (31)
                      |                                   {z                                }
                           Indirect Impact of Transfers and Taxes
                    + Ct {Tl , τl , wl hl , P̄ , īa }l≥0 − Ct {Tl , τl , w̄h̄, P̄ , īa }l≥0
                                                                                             
                                                                                                                       (32)
                      |                                    {z                                 }
                          Indirect Equilibrium Effect: Labor Income
                    + Ct {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , ial }l≥0 − Ct {Tl , τl , wl hl , P̄ , īa }l≥0 .
                                                                                               
                                                                                                                       (33)
                      |                                     {z                                  }
                                Price and Interest Rate Adjustment

Total demand is the sum of private consumption demand C and real government consumption
g = G/P , which both determine output. The private consumption response does not directly
depend on G/P but it does indirectly. First, transfers T and taxes τ have to adjust to balance
the intertemporal government budget constraint. Second, increases in G/P translate one-for-
one into increases in demand. On impact an increase by ∆g increases demand by ∆g and thus
hours worked from h̄ to h̄ + ∆hg , where ∆hg is the amount of hours needed to produce ∆g
while keeping the capital stock unchanged. As before, this increase in labor income stimulates



                                                                 20
private demand which in turn leads to higher employment, then again higher consumption and
so on until convergence. We therefore decompose the total demand effect ∆D of an increase
in government spending by ∆g as

        (∆D)t =                       (∆g)                     +                  (∆C)t                           (34)
                                      | {z }t                                     | {z }
                    Direct Govt’ Spending Response Private Consumption Response
                  = (∆g)t + Ct {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄(h̄ + ∆hg ), P̄ , īa }l≥0 − Ct {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄h̄, P̄ , īa }l≥0
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                  (35)
                              |                                      {z                                    }
                                             Direct Impact on Private Consumption
                  + Ct {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , ial }l≥0 − Ct {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄(h̄ + ∆hg ), P̄ , īa }l≥0 .
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                  (36)
                    |                                      {z                                       }
                                  Indirect Private Consumption Response

A fiscal stimulus, in addition to the immediate impact on government demand, also leads to
higher employment and labor income and thus stimulates private consumption, the Direct
Impact on Private Consumption. The remainder of the private consumption is as above the
sum of the direct impact of transfers and taxes, the indirect equilibrium effects of labor income
and price and interest rate adjustment, such that the full decomposition of the total demand
effect (∆D)t is

        (∆D)t =            (∆g)t                                                                                  (37)
                           | {z }
                      Direct G Impact
                      Ct {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄(h̄ + ∆hg ), P̄ , īa }l≥0 − Ct {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄h̄, P̄ , īa }l≥0
                                                                                                    
                  +                                                                                               (38)
                      |                                       {z                                     }
                                                Direct G Impact on C
                      Ct {Tl , τl , w̄(h̄ + ∆hg ), P̄ , īa }l≥0 − Ct {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄(h̄ + ∆hg ), P̄ , īa }l≥0
                                                                                                             
                  +                                                                                               (39)
                      |                                             {z                                        }
                                                   Indirect Tax/Transfer Impact
                      Ct {Tl , τl , wl hl , P̄ , īa }l≥0 − Ct {Tl , τl , w̄(h̄ + ∆hg ), P̄ , īa }l≥0
                                                                                                      
                  +                                                                                               (40)
                      |                                        {z                                      }
                                           Indirect Labor Income Impact
                      Ct {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , ial }l≥0 − Ct {Tl , τl , wl hl , P̄ , īa }l≥0 .
                                                                                              
                  +                                                                                               (41)
                      |                                    {z                                  }
                                   Indirect Price and Interest Impact

3.1.3   Investment Channel

Investment demand is another component of aggregate demand and the strength of this chan-
nel depends both on the cost of investment – the real interest rate rtk – and the demand
for intermediate goods. Intermediate goods firms set prices subject to Rotemberg adjustment



                                                         21
costs and have to satisfy the resulting demand Yjt for their product through hiring labor Hjt
or buying capital goods Kjt , which leads to the cost minimization condition (11):

                                                     Kjt      αwt
                                                         =            .
                                                     Hjt   (1 − α)rtk

Given prices wt and rtk , a higher demand Yjt leads to an increase both in capital and employ-
ment, the demand channel of investment. Higher capital costs rtk dampen investment demand
but only if they increase more than wages. Since firm have to satisfy demand, the relative costs
of the factor inputs matter. As an example, suppose that rtk increases by 1% but that wages
                                  αwt
increase by 2%, so that         (1−α)rtk
                                           increases. In this case, firms would substitute from labor to
capital although capital costs have increased just because the costs of the other input factor,
wages, has increased even more.10 Two features of our calibration below make this scenario
less likely. High capital adjustment costs imply a strong response of adjustment costs and thus
of rtk to capital changes and wage rigidities dampen the movement of wages in response to
demand fluctuations. In addition to these partial equilibrium considerations, general equilib-
rium requires asset market clearing, that is the real interest rate received by households has
to be such that they are willing to absorb all assets supplied, bonds and capital,

                                                             at+1 (a, s; {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , ial }l≥0 )
                                                             Z
             St+1 {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , ial }l≥0
                                                     
                                                         =                                                  dΩt   (42)
                                                                               Pt+1
                                                         = Kt+1 + Bt+1 /Pt+1 + Φ(Kt+1 , Kt ),                     (43)

such that the change in aggregate savings equals the sum of the change in capital, real bonds
and adjustment costs,

                                                                    Bt+1
                         (∆S)t+1 = (∆Kt+1 ) + (∆                         ) + (∆Φ(Kt+1 , Kt )).                    (44)
                                                                    Pt+1

This asset market clearing condition implies that, if the stimulus is financed by increasing gov-
ernment debt, capital could be partially crowded out since the increase in savings is partially
absorbed by higher government debt. To assess the magnitude of this channel we compute
the sequence of real interest rates ra,Crowding and capital stocks K Crowd which would clear the
   10
      The findings of Rupert and Šustek (2019), derived in a complete markets New Keyneian model with capital,
flexible wages and low adjustment costs of capital, suggest that this is not only a theoretical possibility.




                                                               22
asset market if bonds were fixed at their steady-state level Bss ,

     St+1 {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , rla,Crowding }l≥0 = Kt+1
                                                       Crowd                  Crowd
                                                                                    , KtCrowd ),
                                                   
                                                             + Bss /Pt+1 + Φ(Kt+1                        (45)

such that the difference in capital stocks,

                                                     Crowd
                                             Kt+1 − Kt+1   ,                                             (46)

is the effect of crowding out.
   The asset market clearing condition also has a supply side. Households have to be willing
to increase their savings. We decompose the change in aggregate savings into two channels.
The same redistributive forces that affect consumption behavior in turn affect the savings
behavior of households, the redistributive channel of savings. The second channel describes
the effect of higher real interest rates on savings. The decomposition of aggregate savings is

             (∆S)t+1 = St+1 {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , rla }l≥0 − St+1 {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄h̄, P̄ , r̄a }l≥0
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                         (47)

                     = St+1 {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , r̄a }l≥0 − St+1 {T̄ , τ̄ , w̄h̄, P̄ , r̄a }l≥0
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                         (48)
                       |                                    {z                                     }
                                              Distributional Impact
                     + St+1 {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , rla }l≥0 − St+1 {Tl , τl , wl hl , Pl , r̄a }l≥0 .
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         (49)
                       |                                      {z                                     }
                                                Interest Rate Impact

3.1.4   Multiplier: Definition

We now follow Farhi and Werning (2016) in computing the response of the economy to a fiscal
stimulus. Concretely, we compute the response of the economy to an unexpected increase
in the path of nominal government spending to G0 , G1 , G2 , . . . , Gt , . . . , Gss , where Gss is the
steady-state nominal spending level and Gt ≥ Gss .
   We summarize the effects of spending on output in several ways. The government spending
elasticity of date t real output equals
                                                   Yt −Yss
                                                     Yss
                                                  G0          ,                                          (50)
                                                  P0
                                                     −G  ss
                                                       Pss
                                                     Gss
                                                     Pss



where Pss , Gss , Yss are the steady state price level, nominal spending and real output respec-
             G0
tively and   P0
                  is real government spending at date t = 0.

                                                        23
                                        Yss
   We multiply this elasticity by     Gss /Pss
                                                 to convert it to dollar equivalents, which yields the
path of the incomplete markets multipliers as the sequence of
                                               Yt
                                              Yss
                                                   −1     Yss
                                   mIM
                                    t    =   G0 Pss
                                                                 .                               (51)
                                             P0 Gss
                                                    − 1 Gss /Pss

   We also compute the present value multipliers for a discount factor β̃ as
                                       Pt
                                          k=0    β̃ k ( YYssk − 1)    Yss
                           mPt V   = Pt                                      ,                   (52)
                                               k Gk Pss        − 1) Gss /Pss
                                         k=0 β̃ ( Pk Gss


where the two statistics coincide at t = 0 and represent the impact multiplier. A useful statistic
is then the cumulative multiplier, which represents the discounted percentage change in real
output relative to the discounted percentage change in real government spending for any path
of government spending:
                                            P∞
                                                 t=0   β̃ t ( YYsst − 1) Yss
                         M=    mP∞V   = P∞                                      .                (53)
                                                   t Gt Pss       − 1) Gss /Pss
                                             t=0 β̃ ( Pt Gss


   For comparison with the complete markets case, we also compute the as-if dynamic com-
plete markets multiplier, mCM
                           t  . The objective is not to compute the equilibrium of the com-
plete markets model, but to use the paths of ra , wt and rt obtained from our incomplete
markets model to derive the full consumption and investment paths that would have arisen
in a complete-markets model given those prices. That allows us to isolate the intertemporal
substitution effect on the multiplier as the distribution effect is not present in the complete
markets model. Computing the as-if consumption path is straightforward since intertemporal
substitution is the only channel operating as we discussed in Section 3.1.1 and we use the
incomplete markets path of real interest rates. Following the line of arguments in that section
                                                                        a
and iterating the consumption Euler equation using the real return 1 + rt+1 on households’
assets yields the as-if percentage response of aggregate consumption,
                                                   ∞
                                CtCM     Y 1 + ra
                                                    ss
                                     −1=           a
                                                       − 1.
                                 Css     s=t
                                             1 + rt+1


To compute the as-if investment path we use the as-if path of consumption, wages wt and the
real return on bonds 1+rt+1 as inputs to solve for the paths of Kt+1 as well as of 1+rtk and Ht .



                                                        24
To computese the paths requires solving a system of three equations in each time period: the
cost-minimization condition (11), the mutual fund first-order condition (13) and the resource
constraint (20). Jointly solving this system of equations delivers a path of investment, ItCM ,
hours, HtCM and the return on capital rtk .
   Since the multiplier is in terms of units of consumption and not in percentages, adjusting
for the magnitudes of steady state consumption, output and government spending,

                          CtCM −Css Css       ItCM −Iss Iss       Gt /Pt −Gss /Pss
                             Css    Yss
                                          +      Iss    Yss
                                                              +          Yss           Yss
           mCM
            t      =                            G0 Pss
                                                P0 Gss
                                                       −  1                          Gss /Pss
                          CtCM −Css                    ItCM −Iss
                              Css      Css                Iss       Iss              Gt /Pt − Gss /Pss
                   =      G0 Pss
                                                  +   G0 Pss
                                                                                +                      .
                          P0 Gss
                                 − 1 Gss /Pss         P0 Gss
                                                              − 1 Gss /Pss           G0 /P0 − Gss /Pss

   The as-if complete markets multiplier also allows us to decompose the incomplete mar-
kets multiplier. The incomplete markets multiplier combines three channels – the investment,
the intertemporal substitution and the distributional one – while the as-if complete markets
multiplier captures only the first two channels but shuts down the distributional one. This
allows us to interpret the difference between these two multipliers as the contribution of the
distributional channel,

                                   mDistribution
                                    t            = mIM
                                                    t  − mCM
                                                          t  ,                                             (54)

and the as-if multiplier as the contribution of the intertemporal substitution and the invest-
ment channel.
   We proceed similarly for a comparison with a Two Agent New Keynesian (TANK) model,
that combines a permanent income household with a hand-to-mouth household. The perma-
nent income household behaves like a representative agent so that the full consumption path
can be computed as above using the consumption Euler equation. The consumption of hand-
to-mouth households equals (1 − τ )wt ht + Tt , where we import wt and Tt from our incomplete
markets model. We assume that the demand for hours ht is the same for all households. The
paths of investment and hours are computed as described above in the representative agent
economy. Combining consumption of both groups yields an aggregate consumption path which
we use to compute the as-if TANK multiplier path, mTt AN K .



                                                        25
3.2     Calibration

To quantitatively assess the size of the fiscal multiplier, we now calibrate the model.


Preferences Households have separable preferences over labor and constant relative risk
aversion preferences for consumption. We set the risk-aversion parameter, σ, equal to 1. Fol-
lowing Krueger et al. (2016), we assume permanent discount factor heterogeneity across agents.
We allow for two values of the discount factor, which we choose along with the relative pro-
portions to match the Gini of net worth net of home equity, the ratio of median and 30th
percentile of net worth net of home equity in the 2013 SCF, and the ratio of aggregate savings
net of home equity to quarterly GDP of 11.46.11 This allows us to capture the overall level
of wealth in the economy and important distributional moments. We assume the functional
form for the distulity of labor v:
                                                            1
                                                      h1+ ϕ
                                             v(h) = ψ        .                                          (55)
                                                      1 + ϕ1
We set the Frisch elasticity, ϕ = 0.5, following micro estimates. We choose ψ = 0.6 so that in
steady state h = 1/3.


Productivity Process Krueger et al. (2016) use data from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics to estimate a stochastic process for labor productivity. They find that log income
consists of a persistent and a transitory component. They estimate that the persistent shock
has an annual persistence of 0.9695 and a variance of innovations of 0.0384. The transitory
shock is estimated to have variance 0.0522. We follow Krueger et al. (2016) in converting these
annual estimates into a quarterly process. We discretize the persistent shock into a seven state
Markov chain using the Rouwenhorst method and integrate over the transitory shock using
Gauss-Hermite quadrature with three nodes.


Production Technology We set the capital share α = 0.36. We choose the quarterly
depreciation rate δ = 0.032 to generate the same real return on capital net of depreciation
  11
     We calibrate to a capital to quarterly output ratio of 10.26, and government debt to quarterly GDP ratio
of 1.2.




                                                     26
and on bonds when the capital output ratio is 10.26. We assume the functional form for Φ:
                                                                 2
                                                        K0 − K
                                                    
                                      0     φk
                                 Φ(K , K) =                           K,                  (56)
                                            2             K

and set φk = 17 to match estimates of the elasticity of investment to Tobin’s q from Eberly
et al. (2008). We choose the elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods,  = 10,
to match an average markup of 10%. The adjustment cost parameter on prices and wages is
set to θ = θw = 300 to match the slope of the NK Philips curve, /θ = 0.03, in Christiano
et al. (2011). We set the firm operating cost F equal to the steady state markup such that
steady state profits equal zero (Basu and Fernald, 1997). Profits, which are nonzero only off
steady state, are fully taxed and are distributed to households as lump-sum transfers in the
benchmark.


Government We set the proportional labor income tax τ equal to 25%, and the dividend
tax τk equal to 36% (Trabandt and Uhlig, 2011). We set nominal government spending G in
steady state equal to 6% of output (Brinca et al., 2016). The value of of lump-sum transfers
T is set to 8.55% of output such that roughly 40% of households receive a net transfer from
the government (Kaplan et al., 2018). This generates a government debt to quarterly GDP
ratio of 1.2 in steady state.


Monetary Policy As discussed above, for the benchmark specification we assume that the
monetary authority operates a constant interest rate peg of i = 0. For purposes of comparison,
we will also consider a specification where we assume that the monetary authority follows a
Taylor rule, which sets the nominal interest rate according to:

                                          it+1 = max(Xt+1 , 0),                           (57)

where                            φ (1−ρR )  φ2 (1−ρR )
                            1   Pt 1            Yt
                  Xt+1   =                                   [ζ(1 + it )]ρR − 1.
                            ζ   Pss             Yss
We follow the literature in setting ρR = 0.8, φ1 = 0.5, φ2 = 0.25 and ζ = 1/(1 + rss ).




                                                   27
Steady State Model Fit In the calibrated model 3% of agents have 0 wealth, and 10% of
agents have less than $1, 000. The wealth to annual income ratio is 4.9. The annual MPC out
of transitory income equals 0.4, which is in the middle range of empirical estimates 0.2-0.6
(e.g., Johnson et al., 2006).12


3.3     Households’ Demand and Marginal Propensity to Consume

Before moving to the full general equilibrium analysis, we provide several partial equilibrium
consumption results to build intuition for our general equilibrium findings and to show that
our incomplete markets model is closer to the empirical findings in the micro consumption
literature than standard frameworks. In all of the following experiments, we consider standard
household consumption/savings problems for prices fixed at their steady-state values. To il-
lustrate the properties of the MPC in our model, the experiments differ in the timing and the
amount of transfers households receive.
   Each of the four panels in Figure 2 plots four separate experiments, where each line cor-
responds to the aggregate consumption path in response to finding out at date 0 that all
households will receive a transfer either at date 0, or at date 4, or at date 8, or at date 12
without an obligation to ever repay. The four panels differ in the size of the transfer received,
either $10, $100, $1,000 or $10,000.
   Consider first the experiment of giving a household $10 today. A permanent income house-
hold would save basically all of the money and consume a small fraction. In our model house-
holds face idiosyncratic income risk, inducing a desire to smooth income but also credit con-
straints, preventing perfect smoothing. A borrowing constrained household would consume
the full $10. Unconstrained, but low asset households will also consume a large fraction of
the transfer because it relaxes precautionary savings motives. These arguments together im-
ply an initial MPC significantly larger than in complete markets models. The fraction of the
transfers not spent in the initial period is spent in the following periods at a decaying rate.
If households receive larger transfers, the initial MPC falls, mainly because larger transfers
are more likely to relax the credit constraints. For example, a $10,000 transfer is sufficient to
relax all households’ credit constraints, so that even the borrowing constrained household will
  12
     We compute the annual MPC using the quarterly MPC via the formula: M P Ca = 1 − (1 − M P Cq )4 . The
quarterly MPC in the model is 0.12.


                                                   28
                              $10 Transfer                                   $100 Transfer
             0.15                                            0.15



              0.1                                             0.1



             0.05                                            0.05



               0                                               0
                    0    5        10          15   20               0   5         10          15          20
                               Quarters                                        Quarters

                             $1000 Transfer                                 $10000 Transfer
             0.15                                            0.15
                                                                                       Transfer at t=0
                                                                                       Transfer at t=4
                                                                                       Transfer at t=8
              0.1                                             0.1                      Transfer at t=12




             0.05                                            0.05



               0                                               0
                    0    5        10          15   20               0   5         10          15          20
                               Quarters                                        Quarters

      Figure 2: Propensity to Consume for Transfers of Size $10, $100 $1, 000 and $10, 000.


not consume the full transfer. Now, suppose households do not receive the transfer today but
only learn today that they will receive a transfer in a future period, at date 4, 8, or 12. The
credit constrained households cannot respond until the transfer arrives. The unconstrained
households are able to smooth consumption, but their MPC is lower, so the initial rise in
consumption is smaller than before.
      These model properties are consistent with the data but inconsistent with a complete
markets RANK model.13 They are also inconsistent with a TANK model which deviates from
the RANK model by introducing two types of agents – a permanent income household and
a hand-to-mouth household. The TANK model can match high MPCs and is theoretically
tractable. However, as shown in Figure 3, when we replicate the same experiment in a TANK
model, instead of tent-shaped impulse responses we obtain in our HANK model, the TANK
model delivers spiky responses. The TANK model also misses out on the sensitivity to the size
of the transfer and all of the dynamic anticipation and propagation effects because the response
 13
      For a discussion on the empirical evidence on intertemporal MPCs see Auclert et al. (2018).



                                                        29
                                           $10 Transfer
                     0.15



                       0.1



                     0.05



                         0
                          0           5          10         15          20
                                             Quarters
       Figure 3: Propensity to Consume for Transfers of Size 10$, HANK vs TANK.


of permanent income households is minimal and consumption of hand-to-mouth households
responds to current income only. To understand why this is important we need to think about
how the general equilibrium Keynesian cross multiplier logic works.
   As we saw, if a household receives a transfer in the first period, it is spent over all future
periods. In general equilibrium, that would mean an increase in aggregate demand and also in
income not only today but also in all future periods. Consumption today increases not only
because of the increase in income today but also because of the increases in future income
by relaxing precautionary savings motives. To illustrate this point we now combine the four
previous experiments, so that households learn in period 0 that they will receive a transfer
at all dates 0, 4, 8 and 12. Figure 4 shows that now the impact response of consumption
is nearly twice as high, even though in period 0 the same transfer is received. This is a
partial equilibrium example, but in general equilibrium the demand and income increases at
different times reinforce each other, generating what Auclert et al. (2018) have coined as an
intertemporal keynesian cross. The TANK economy fails to reproduce the dynamic multiplier
path because the anticipation and propagation effects in that model are basically zero.




                                              30
                                 $10 Transfer at t=0,4,8 and 12
                       0.2
                                                                HANK
                                                                TANK
                     0.15


                       0.1


                     0.05


                         0
                          0          5         10         15          20
                                            Quarters
Figure 4: Propensity to Consume for Transfers of Size 10$ that are Received in periods 0, 4,
8 and 12, HANK vs TANK.


3.4    Results

We can now compute the equilibrium response of prices, employment, output and consumption
to a persistent increase in nominal government spending for 20 quarters. Specifically, we
assume that spending increases by one percent in period t and after that the amount of
additional spending decays at rate 1 − ρg per quarter for the subsequent 19 quarters. We
set ρg = 0.9 in the baseline experiments (implying a half-life of 7 quarters) and vary this
parameter later. Balancing the government budget when government spending is increased
requires to adjust taxes or debt or both. As Ricardian equivalence does not hold in our model,
different assumptions on the path of taxes and debt will have different implications for the
path of aggregate consumption and therefore prices and the change in output. We consider
two benchmark scenarios:

  1. Transfer are adjusted period by period to keep nominal debt constant.

  2. Deficit financing and delayed reduction of transfers to pay back debt after 40 quarters.

We will also consider a third scenario,

  3. Deficit financing and delayed cuts in government expenditure after 40 quarters.

For each of these scenarios, we report the dynamic response of hours, consumption, output,
prices, tax revenue and debt as well as the paths of incomplete markets multiplier mIM
                                                                                    t , of


                                             31
                        Table I: Main Results Consumption and Multipliers


        Experiment:       Benchmark            Taylor Rule           Forward    G-Financed Transfer
          Financing:     Tax     Deficit       Tax         Deficit   Deficit       Deficit        Deficit
                          (1)      (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)            (6)           (7)
   Impact Mult.          0.61     1.34        0.54          0.66      0.80           1.30          0.66
   Cumul Mult.           0.43     0.55        0.40          0.29      0.17          -0.15           0.1

   100 × ∆C0             -2.7      1.4         -2.9         -0.4       0.2            1.5           5.2
   100 × ∆I0              0.3      0.6        -0.02         -1.6      -1.4            0.3           0.4
   Decomposition of Consumption (100 × ∆)
   Direct G on C         1.2       1.2          1.2          1.2       0.9            1.1           0.0
   Tax/Transfers         -3.1      0.5         -3.1         -0.2      0.4            0.7            4.6
   Indirect Income       -0.7      0.2         -0.8         -0.7      -0.2            0.2           1.1
   Prices                -0.1      -0.5        -0.2         -0.8      -0.9           -0.6           -0.5

Note - The table contains the impact and the cumulative multiplier M (using definition (58) for the last column
and (59) otherwise) as well as the initial consumption and investment responses, ∆C0 and ∆I0 (as a % of output).
The last four rows show the decomposition of the initial aggregate consumption response (also multiplied by
100) into the direct G impact on C (Eq. 38), the effect of taxes/transfers (Eq. 39), indirect income effects (Eq.
40) and the price and interest rate effects (Eq. 41).



the as-if complete markets multiplier mCM
                                       t  and of the as-if TANK multiplier mTt AN K . The
cumulative multiplier M and various additional statistics across the experiments we conduct
are collected in Table I.

3.4.1    Tax Financing: Constant Nominal Debt

Under the first financing scheme, we assume that the government adjusts lump-sum transfers
period by period to keep the level of nominal debt constant. The four panels of Figure 5 show
the results for the private consumption and output response, the different multipliers, the
decomposition of private consumption, and the evolution of government bonds.
    The bottom right panel plotting the efolution of fiscal policy illustrates that the level of
nominal government bonds is unchanged since the stimulus is tax-financed. The top left panel
shows that on impact G increases by 1% (0.06% of output) and consumption decreases by
0.027% of output. As illustrated in the top right panel, this leads to an impact multiplier of


                                                      32
                                    Output                                                   Multipliers
                0.06                                                         1.2
                                                Private C                                                   HANK
                0.04                            Investment                     1                            RANK As-if
                                                Output                                                      TANK As-if
                                                Government                   0.8
          (%)   0.02
                                                                             0.6
                   0
                                                                             0.4
                -0.02                                                        0.2

                -0.04                                                          0
                        0      20        40             60                          0   5         10          15
                                    Quarters                                                 Quarters

                            Private C Decomposition                                         Fiscal Policy
                0.04                                                           1
                                                                                             Real Gov Spending
                                                                                             Real Transfers
                0.02
                                                                             0.5             Nominal Bonds

                   0




                                                                       (%)
                                                                               0
                -0.02                   Total
                                        Direct G impact on C
                                        Indirect Tax/Transfer                -0.5
                -0.04                   Indirect Labor Inc.
                                        Indirect Price/Interest
                -0.06                                                         -1
                        0      20        40             60                          0   20             40          60
                                    Quarters                                                 Quarters

           Figure 5: Fiscal Multiplier and Aggregate Consumption: Tax Financing


0.61. The incomplete markets multiplier converges to zero since the consumption response,
although negative, slowly dies out and becomes small relative to the initial government spend-
ing increase. The decomposition of the consumption response in the bottom left panel reveals
the quantitative importance of the direct, the indirect and the price effects. The stimulus of
0.06% directly increases households’ labor supply by the same amount, leading to a aggregate
consumption increase of 0.012% of output (Eq. 38). The contemporaneous cut in transfers low-
ers aggregate consumption by −0.031% on impact (Eq. 39), implying a total initial negative
effect of −0.018%. This effect is negative since the government spending increases household’s
income proportional to their productivity and thus benefits high income households more
whereas the transfer cut is uniform across all income groups and thus negatively affects high
MPC households. This decrease leads to lower consumption demand, which in turn leads to
lower labor demand, lower labor income and again lower consumption demand until an equi-
librium is reached. These indirect income effects sum up to −0.007% (Eq. 40) further lowering
the consumption response. Finally, the decomposition shows that the price increase and (the
unchanged) interest rate effects are small (Eq. 41). The investment channel is also contributing

                                                                  33
very little.
   Whereas the incomplete markets multiplier is significantly below one, mIM
                                                                          0  = 0.61, the
as-if multiplier in the complete markets model is, mCM
                                                    0  = 1.11, so that the contribution of
the distributional channel (Eq. 54), mDistribution
                                      0            = −0.5. The results is unsurprising given
the foregoing discussion, as the permanent income representative household responds little to
the cut in transfers. We find similar results for the TANK economy with mT0 AN K = 1.05 and
a negative distributional channel of −0.44. The as-if multiplier decreases slightly, due to the
higher average MPC in the TANK economy relative to RANK. However, while the TANK and
our HANK economies feature the same quarterly MPC, the large difference between them is
due to dynamic anticipation effects arising in the HANK model that are absent in TANK. The
hand-to-mouth agents in TANK respond only to the contemporaneous decrease in transfers,
but not to the anticipated cut in future transfers (as occurs in our HANK economy), leading to
a much smaller drop in private consumption demand. The larger drop in aggregate household
consumption demand in the incomplete markets model then translates through the Keynesian
cross logic into a smaller general equilibrium multiplier of 0.61 relative to 1.05.
   The impulse response of the remaining variables to a 1% innovation in government spending
are plotted in Figure A-1 in the appendix. The cumulative multiplier, in Table I, is 0.43.

3.4.2    Deficit Financing

Under this scenario we assume that real transfers are kept constant during the first 40 quarters
after the innovation to government spending. Then, the government is assumed to adjust
transfers linearly over eight quarters, keep them constant for eight quarters, and then allow
transfers to revert back to the real steady state level with an autocorrelation parameter of
0.8. Thus, under this timing scheme, the government chooses only the level of adjustment to
transfers to guarantee that nominal government debt returns to its original level. The four
panels of Figure 6 summarize the evolution of the key variables of interest.
   Deficit instead of tax financing increases the initial multiplier mCM
                                                                      0  from 0.61 to 1.34
and the initial aggregate consumption response from −0.027% to 0.014%. The decomposition
of the consumption response makes clear why. The direct impact of the spending stimulus
is identical (0.012%) but now there is no initial offsetting effect from contemporaneously
higher taxes/lower transfers. The indirect income effects now accumulate to 0.002% and the

                                               34
                                        Output                                                    Multipliers
                  0.1                                                         1.5
                                                      Private C                                                  HANK
                                                      Investment                                                 RANK As-if
                                                      Output                    1                                TANK As-if
                0.05                                  Government
          (%)
                                                                              0.5

                   0
                                                                                0


                -0.05                                                         -0.5
                        0        20            40           60                       0      5          10          15
                                       Quarters                                                   Quarters

                            Private C Decomposition                                             Fiscal Policy
                0.04                                                            1

                0.02
                                                                              0.5

                   0




                                                                        (%)
                                                                                0
                -0.02       Total
                            Direct G impact on C
                            Indirect Tax/Transfer                             -0.5       Real Gov Spending
                -0.04       Indirect Labor Inc.                                          Real Transfers
                            Indirect Price/Interest                                      Nominal Bonds
                -0.06                                                          -1
                        0        20            40           60                       0       20             40          60
                                       Quarters                                                   Quarters

         Figure 6: Fiscal Multiplier and Aggregate Consumption: Deficit Financing


deficit financing leads to an increase in government bonds and the consumption response
becomes negative only from period 9 onwards. However, the increase in government spending
is ultimately financed through a future reduction in transfers, which results in a contraction in
future output. Thus, the cumulative multiplier, reported in Table I is only 0.55, significantly
smaller than the impact multiplier. The impulse responses of the remaining variables are
plotted in Figure A-2 in the appendix.
   Since the as-if multipliers mCM
                                0  = 0.97 and mT0 AN K = 1.10 are still close to one, the
contribution of the distributional channel, is now positive mDistribution
                                                             0            = 0.37 for complete
markets and 0.24 for the TANK model. The fiscal expansion increases employment and thus
labor income but because of deficit financing there is no offsetting effect through higher taxes.
This benefits high MPC households, who primarily rely on labor income and not asset income,
and allows them to increase consumption demand. The additional government debt on the
other hand is bought by low MPC households which reduce their consumption. In total,
this redistribution towards high MPC households increases aggregate consumption demand,
implying mDistribution
          0            > 0.

                                                                   35
                                  Capital Decomposition                                                  Factor/marginal cost Decomposition
                       0.7                                Savings, A                               0.2
                                                                       t                                             k
                                                          Savings, rt =r ss                                         r /w, Spending
                       0.6                                                                                          rk/w, No crowd out
                                                          Capital, No crowd out
                                                          Capital, K t
                       0.5                                                                       0.15

                                     Intertemporal
                       0.4            Substitution
                                            rt




                                                                                    100
                       0.3                                                                         0.1
          %Deviation




                                                                                    %Deviation
                       0.2

                                       Income
                       0.1             (w t ,Tt ,h t )                                           0.05


                         0

                       -0.1                                                                         0
                                   Crowd out
                                       Kt
                       -0.2

                       -0.3                                                                      -0.05
                              0   20             40      60       80          100                        0    20     40        60        80   100
                                                  Quarters                                                               Quarters

          Figure 7: Fiscal Multiplier and Aggregate Investment: Deficit Financing


   Another difference between deficit and tax financing is a negative impact of investment
demand on the multiplier with deficit financing. Figure 7 illustrates why this is the case. The
right panel shows that rk /w increases, making firms substitute from capital towards labor.
The left panel shows that total savings increase (the blue line “Savings, At ”) by more than
they would have increased if the real interest rate ra were to remain constant (the red line
“Savings, rt = rss ”), reflecting the “Interest Rate Impact” on savings (Eq. 49). The red line
is however not zero, indicating that savings would have increased due to the distributional
effects even if the real interest rate did not change. This “Distributional Impact” on savings
(Eq. 48) is reflected by the difference between the red line and the solid black horizontal line
through zero.
   But while total Savings increase, capital still falls below its steady-state level since the
increase in savings is smaller than the increase in additional government debt, K −K Crowd < 0
(Eq. 46). This crowding out of capital (the difference between the yellow “Capital, No crowd
out” and the black dotted line “Capital, Kt ”) with deficit financing explains the drop in
investment and its negative contribution to aggregate demand and the multiplier. The right
panel also shows that rk /w in the counterfactual crowding out experiment where debt is held

                                                                                36
constant (Eq. 45) is lower than in the benchmark, since aggregate savings have to increase
less as no additional debt needs to be absorbed in this experiment.


3.5     Further Analysis

We now extend the analysis in various directions. First, we use a Taylor interest rate rule to
describe monetary policy instead of a fixed nominal interest rate in Section 3.5.1. While the
literature has primarily focused on studying the effects of an increase in government spending,
another commonly used stimulus policy is to increase transfers. Our framework allows us to
study the effects of such policies and we do so in Section 3.5.2. Following that, we return to
considering spending multipliers and ask how the size of the fiscal multiplier depends on the
timing of spending (“forward spending”), on the scale of spending and on the persistence of
the stimulus in Sections 3.5.3, 3.5.4 and 3.5.5. In Section 3.5.6 we assess the consequences of
cutting government spending G instead of transfers to pay back the debt. Finally, we consider
spending and transfer policies in a liquidity trap in Sections 3.5.7 and 3.5.8. We also investigate
how the size of the multiplier depends on the degree of price and wage rigidities.

3.5.1   Taylor Rule

We now measure the fiscal multiplier when monetary policy follows a Taylor rule instead of an
interest rate peg. Figures 8 and A-3 summarize the main results and the impulse responses,
respectively, for deficit-financed spending. Figures 9 and A-4 do so for tax-financed spending.
   We find that if monetary policy follows a Taylor rule, the impact multiplier with deficit
financing drops to 0.66 and the cumulative multiplier to 0.29. The lower multiplier is a result
of a drop in output due to tighter monetary policy. A higher nominal interest rate contracts
consumption demand and thus reduces income, which in turn reduces savings and investment.
Lower investment reduces income and thus contracts consumption which again reduces income
and so on. The consumption and investment responses reinforce each other and together
determine an effect of monetary policy on output in our experiment: a 25 base point increase
in the real rate (i.e. annually 100 base points) leads on impact to a 1% drop in output. This is
an expected magnitude for the drop in output in response to an increase in the real return on
bonds and is in line with the findings in e.g., Kaplan et al. (2018). Combining the expansionary
output effects of the fiscal stimulus and the contractionary effects of monetary policy yields a

                                                37
                                        Output                                                Multipliers
                0.06                                                          0.8
                                                      Private C                                              HANK
                0.04                                  Investment              0.6                            RANK As-if
                                                      Output                                                 TANK As-if
                                                      Government
          (%)   0.02                                                          0.4

                   0                                                          0.2

                -0.02                                                           0

                -0.04                                                         -0.2
                        0        20            40           60                       0   5         10           15
                                       Quarters                                               Quarters

                            Private C Decomposition                                          Fiscal Policy
                0.04                                                            1
                            Total                                                                       Real Gov Spending
                            Direct G impact on C                                                        Real Transfers
                0.02        Indirect Tax/Transfer                                                       Nominal Bonds
                            Indirect Labor Inc.                               0.5
                            Indirect Price/Interest




                                                                        (%)
                   0

                                                                                0
                -0.02


                -0.04                                                         -0.5
                        0        20            40           60                       0   20             40           60
                                       Quarters                                               Quarters

Figure 8: Fiscal Multiplier and Aggregate Consumption: Taylor Rule and Deficit Financing


multiplier of 0.66.
   The same arguments apply to tax instead of deficit financing, in which case the multiplier
falls to 0.54. The Taylor rule induced decline in the size of the multiplier is smaller with tax
than with deficit financing not because monetary policy is less effective but because monetary
policy responds less if tax financing is used. Indeed, the real interest rate elasticity of output is
unchanged but the smaller price responses with tax financing require a much smaller increase
in interest rates.
   As a result, while the impact multipliers are very different between financing schemes
with fixed nominal interest rates, they become quite similar when a Taylor rule is used. With
deficit financing, fiscal stimulus leads to a strong response of monetary policy, which largely
undoes the stimulus. With tax financing, fiscal policy is not very stimulative to begin with
and monetary policy remains largely unchanged.




                                                                   38
                                    Output                                                    Multipliers
                0.06                                                         1.2
                                                Private C                                                    HANK
                0.04                            Investment                     1                             RANK As-if
                                                Output                                                       TANK As-if
                                                Government                   0.8
                0.02
          (%)                                                                0.6
                   0
                                                                             0.4
                -0.02                                                        0.2

                -0.04                                                          0
                        0     20         40             60                          0   5          10            15
                                   Quarters                                                   Quarters
                            Private C Decomposition                                          Fiscal Policy
                0.04                                                           1
                                                                                             Real Gov Spending
                                                                                             Real Transfers
                0.02
                                                                             0.5             Nominal Bonds

                   0




                                                                       (%)
                                                                               0
                -0.02                   Total
                                        Direct G impact on C
                                        Indirect Tax/Transfer                -0.5
                -0.04                   Indirect Labor Inc.
                                        Indirect Price/Interest
                -0.06                                                         -1
                        0     20         40             60                          0   20              40            60
                                   Quarters                                                   Quarters

  Figure 9: Fiscal Multiplier and Aggregate Consumption: Taylor Rule and Tax Financing


3.5.2   Transfer Multiplier

In this section we consider the multiplier in response to a one percent increase in govern-
ment transfers, again for 20 periods and with persistence ρT = 0.9. We assume that nominal
government spending adjusts to keep real government spending constant in response to the
innovation in transfers. We allow the government to deficit-finance the increase in transfers
following the same financing scheme as above by first increasing government debt, then by
decreasing transfers starting 40 quarters later to pay back the debt.
   The impulse responses plotted in Figure A-5 are qualitatively and quantitatively similar
to the impulse responses to a deficit-financed increase in government spending. Private con-
sumption rises more, however, when transfers increase than when spending increases. This can
be understood because, an increase in transfers benefits low income, high MPC households
since their disposable income increases more (in percentage terms) than that of high income,
low MPC households. This implies an impact multiplier of 0.66 using the definition (51) of
mIM
 0  but with G replaced by T . Aggregate consumption, the sum of private and government
consumption, however, increases less when transfers increase than when spending increases,



                                                                  39
                                    Output                                                       Multipliers
                0.06                                                           1
                                                Private C                                                       HANK
                0.04                            Investment                                                      RANK As-if
                                                Output                                                          TANK As-if
                                                Government                   0.5
          (%)   0.02

                   0
                                                                               0
                -0.02

                -0.04                                                        -0.5
                        0      20        40             60                          0      5          10          15
                                    Quarters                                                     Quarters

                            Private C Decomposition                                            Fiscal Policy
                0.15                                                           1
                                        Total
                                        Direct G impact on C
                  0.1
                                        Indirect Tax/Transfer                0.5
                                        Indirect Labor Inc.
                0.05                    Indirect Price/Interest




                                                                       (%)
                                                                               0
                   0

                                                                             -0.5       Real Gov Spending
                -0.05                                                                   Real Transfers
                                                                                        Nominal Bonds
                 -0.1                                                         -1
                        0      20        40             60                          0       20             40          60
                                    Quarters                                                     Quarters

                            Figure 10: Transfer Multipliers (Deficit Financed)


simply because government spending is unchanged in the former case. As a result, income
increases by more in the latter case, implying higher savings and investment such that the
output increase is larger.
   The cumulative multiplier is now defined as
                                                      P∞     t Yt
                                                       t=0 β̃ ( Yss − 1)    Yss
                                M=     mP∞V     =    P19 t Tt Pss                ,                                           (58)
                                                                          T /Pss
                                                      t=0 β̃ ( Pt Tss − 1) ss


where in the denominator we sum only over the first 20 periods since summing to infinity would
take the repayment period into account and thus would render the denominator equal or close
to zero. Note that this definition does not change the numbers for the cumulative multiplier
reported for other experiments. The cumulative multiplier ends up being quite small around
0.1 because the future decrease in transfers needed to return nominal government debt to its
steady state level is sufficiently contractionary to almost offset the contemporaneous gains.
Measuring the welfare implications of this policy, we find that welfare falls by −0.00067% in
consumption equivalents because the welfare gain in the initial periods is eventually (slightly)


                                                                  40
outweighed by the later welfare losses.14
       Increasing transfers is purely redistributional and thus has no direct effects in the RANK
model. The as-if RANK multiplier is, however, negative due to an increase in real interest rates.
The TANK model features a redistributional channel, implying a larger multiplier than in the
RANK case. The TANK multiplier is much smaller than our incomplete markets model’s one
since the TANK model lacks the anticipation and propagation effects operating in a HANK
model as we explained in Section 3.3. Figure 10 shows the results.

3.5.3      Forward Spending

Farhi and Werning (2016) show that in complete markets New Keynesian models the further
the spending is in the future the larger is the impact, suggesting that “forward-spending” is an
effective fiscal policy tool. In contrast, our analysis implies that the multiplier becomes smaller
if the spending is pre-announced to occur at a future date. For concreteness, in Figure 11 we
assess the effects of stimulus pre-announced to occur 4 quarters ahead (the corresponding
impulse responses are plotted in Figure A-6 in the appendix). The additional spending is
deficit financed. The price level now increases gradually in anticipation of the future increase
in government spending implying that initially output and consumption fall before increasing
at the time of the spending increase 4 quarters in the future. However, the initial drop in
output makes households shift consumption to these earlier periods which dampens the fall
in consumption initially but at the same time lowers their demand at the time of the actual
spending increase in quarter 4. As a result, the increase in consumption as well as the multiplier
at that time are smaller than the corresponding multiplier in the case when the stimulus occurs
immediately and is deficit financed. The investment response is, however, larger since debt
only starts to increase when spending actually happens, implying that there is no crowding
out and thus higher investment in the first periods with future spending.
  14
     For completeness we report the welfare losses for an increase in government spending: −0.0065% for
deficit financing and −0.0063% for tax financing. Note that these numbers set the welfare gains from higher
government consumption to zero and one should therefore be cautious about using these numbers to assess
the welfare consequences of a fiscal stimulus.




                                                    41
                                       Output                                                    Multipliers
               0.06                                                            1
                                                     Private C                                                  HANK
               0.04                                  Investment                                                 RANK As-if
                                                     Output                                                     TANK As-if
                                                     Government              0.5
         (%)   0.02

                  0
                                                                               0
               -0.02

               -0.04                                                         -0.5
                       0        20            40           60                       0      5          10          15
                                      Quarters                                                   Quarters

                           Private C Decomposition                                             Fiscal Policy
               0.02                                                            1


                  0                                                          0.5




                                                                       (%)
               -0.02                                                           0
                           Total
                           Direct G impact on C
               -0.04       Indirect Tax/Transfer                             -0.5       Real Gov Spending
                           Indirect Labor Inc.                                          Real Transfers
                           Indirect Price/Interest                                      Nominal Bonds
               -0.06                                                          -1
                       0        20            40           60                       0       20             40          60
                                      Quarters                                                   Quarters

                Figure 11: Future (4 Quarters Ahead) Spending: Deficit Financing


3.5.4   Scale Effects

We now assess the dependence of the size of the multiplier on the scale of the government
spending or transfer stimulus. Panel (a) of Figure 12 shows the government spending multiplier
for one percent intervals between 1% and 10% increase. Panel (b) of Figure 12 shows the same
for the transfer multiplier again for one percent intervals between 1% and 10% increases.
   The fall in the multiplier as we increase the scale of spending or transfers is expected in
light of our results in Figure 2 in Section 3.3. Those partial equilibrium experiments showed
that the propensity to consume falls in the size of the transfer households receive, implying
that a larger scale of spending or transfer leads to lower MPCs. The Keynesian cross logic
implies that in equilibrium these lower MPCs translate into a lower multiplier.

3.5.5   More Persistent Spending

In this section we study how the persistence of government spending affects the multipliers. As
before, we consider a persistent increase in nominal government consumption by one percent


                                                                  42
                                Multipliers                                                                    Multipliers
       1.5                                                                            0.7
                                                       Impact Multiplier                                                              Impact Multiplier
                                                       Benchmark                                                                      Benchmark

      1.45



       1.4                                                                           0.65



      1.35



       1.3                                                                            0.6



      1.25



       1.2                                                                           0.55
             0   1   2   3     4      5     6      7   8        9          10               0   1   2   3     4      5     6      7   8        9          10
                             Percent Change in G                                                            Percent Change in T

                     (a) Scale of Spending                                                          (b) Scale of Transfers

   Figure 12: Multiplier as a Function of Scale of Spending/Transfers (Deficit Financing)


that decays over the subsequent 19 quarters at varying rates of 1 − ρg , where ρg ∈ [0, 1], per
quarter and then reverts to its steady-state level. Thus, if ρg = 0, stimulus is purely transitory
and takes place in one period only, while if ρg = 1, nominal government spending is increased
by the same amount for all 20 quarters. Regardless of the persistence of spending, the policy
is deficit financed according to the same scheme as before with repayment starting 40 quarters
after the initial increase in spending.
   Figure 13 shows the impact and the cumulative multiplier for various degrees of persistence.
As our previous analysis of household demand in Section 3.3 suggests, the impact multiplier
mIM
 0  is increasing in ρG . A higher persistence means higher government spending and thus
higher income in future periods. This relaxes households’ precautionary savings motives and
increases their period 0 consumption demand, implying a higher initial multiplier, mIM
                                                                                    0 . When

the spending becomes temporary, ρG → 0, these dynamic interactions are minimized and
the multiplier approaches 1. The dynamic effects are maximized when the spending becomes
almost permanent, ρG → 1, and the multiplier reaches 1.65. Note, however, that the cumulative
multiplier moves in the opposite direction as the persistence of spending increases. As the
spending becomes almost permanent, the cumulative multiplier falls significantly to a value
of less than 0.4. This finding of a deceasing cumulative multiplier is a combination of the two
previous results. First, our analysis in Sections 3.3 and 3.5.4 shows that the multiplier is falling


                                                                                43
                                                     Multipliers
                          2
                                Impact
                         1.8    Cumulative
                                Benchmark
                         1.6

                         1.4

                         1.2

                          1

                         0.8

                         0.6

                         0.4

                         0.2

                          0
                          0.1    0.2     0.3   0.4    0.5       0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                            G


                      Figure 13: Multipliers: Persistence ρG of Spending


in the scale of government spending. As a higher ρG translates into a larger increase in total
government spending, the multiplier decreases. Second, a higher ρG means more spending
in future periods while spending in the initial period is unchanged. As Section 3.5.3 shows,
future spending is less effective than current spending, making the multiplier smaller again.
This effect is reinforced here since a spending increase in, say, period 20 is already paid back
starting in period 40. That is the repayment starts 20 periods after the stimulus whereas it
starts 40 periods after the stimulus in the benchmark and in Section 3.5.3. Since an earlier
repayment is more contractionary, the multiplier falls.

3.5.6   Repayment through G

In this section we consider the multiplier in the deficit-financed case, but instead of cutting
transfers in order to bring nominal debt back to its steady-state value, we instead cut govern-
ment spending G following the same scheme that was previously used for transfers.
   The results of this experiment are plotted in Figure 14. They are qualitatively and quan-
titatively similar to those obtained in Section 3.4.2 for when the deficit-financed increase in
government spending is paid back by eventually cutting transfers. Output rises more, however,
when spending is used to repay the debt than when transfers are used. The reason is that
repayment through G or T has different distributional consequences. A reduction in G reduces
labor income and thus hurts workers proportionally to their productivity whereas a reduction
in transfers hurts workers independently of their productivity. Since high productivity workers

                                                      44
                                      Output                                                       Multipliers
                 0.1                                                           1.5
                                                  Private C                                                       HANK
                                                  Investment                                                      RANK As-if
               0.05                               Output                         1                                TANK As-if
                                                  Government
         (%)
                  0                                                            0.5


               -0.05                                                             0


                -0.1                                                           -0.5
                       0         20        40             60                          0      5          10          15
                                      Quarters                                                     Quarters

                              Private C Decomposition                                            Fiscal Policy
               0.03                                                              1

               0.02
                                                                               0.5
               0.01




                                                                         (%)
                  0                                                              0
                                          Total
               -0.01                      Direct G impact on C
                                          Indirect Tax/Transfer                -0.5       Real Gov Spending
               -0.02                      Indirect Labor Inc.                             Real Transfers
                                          Indirect Price/Interest                         Nominal Bonds
               -0.03                                                            -1
                       0         20        40             60                          0       20             40          60
                                      Quarters                                                     Quarters

                           Figure 14: Spending Multipliers (Deficit Repaid Using G)


have high income and low MPCs while low productivity workers have low income and high
MPCs, a reduction in T hurts high MPC households more than a reduction in G does. At
the time when the repayment starts, these arguments imply that consumption is higher with
repayment through G than through T . The flip side is that the low MPC households are the
savers and fewer resources in their hands means a fall in savings and investment at the time
when repayment through G instead of T starts. Since a reduction in G reduces aggregate
demand one-for-one, the negative output effect is much larger when repayment is through G.
The differences between the two financing schemes at the time of repayment feed back into
earlier periods. The same arguments explain why consumption is again higher but investment
is again lower with repayment through G. Combining the effects on consumption and invest-
ment leads to a slightly smaller impact multiplier when the repayment is through G. Figure
A-7 shows the impulse responses.




                                                                    45
                        Real Gov Spending                                Output                           Discount Factor
                1                                       0.2                                   1.005

                0                                         0                                      1

               -1                                      -0.2                                   0.995
                    0     10      20      30    40            0     10      20      30   40           0    5     10     15    20   25
                               Quarters                                  Quarters                               Quarters
                           Price level                                Real Rate                            Nominal Rate
             0.05                                     0.02                                       1

                0                                         0                                      0

            -0.05                                     -0.02                                      -1
                    0     10      20      30    40            0     10      20      30   40           0    10      20        30    40
                               Quarters                                  Quarters                               Quarters
                        Govnment Bonds                            Real Tax Revenues                       Real Transfers
                1                                       0.2                                     0.5

                0                                         0                                      0

               -1                                      -0.2                                    -0.5
                    0     10      20      30    40            0     10      20      30   40           0    10      20        30    40
                               Quarters                                  Quarters                               Quarters
                         Nominal Wages                               Real Wages                       Private Consumption
              0.1                                       0.1                                     0.1

                0                                         0                                      0

             -0.1                                      -0.1                                    -0.1
                    0     10      20      30    40            0     10      20      30   40           0    10      20        30    40
                               Quarters                                  Quarters                               Quarters
                                          Figure 15: Economy in a Liquidity Trap


       Analogously to transfer multipliers, the cumulative multiplier is defined as
                                                              P∞  t Yt
                                                            t=0 β̃ ( Yss − 1)    Yss
                                       M=      mP∞V   =   P19 t Gt Pss                .                                                 (59)
                                                                               G /Pss
                                                           t=0 β̃ ( Pt Gss − 1) ss


where in the denominator we again sum only over the first 20 periods. The larger output
drop at the time of repayment explains why the cumulative multiplier is negative −0.15 when
repayment is through G while it is positive for repayment through T .

3.5.7      Liquidity Trap

In this section we explore the extent to which the size of the multiplier may vary with other
shocks hitting the economy. In particular, we measure the government spending multiplier
when economy suffers a large demand shock. Therefore, we generate a liquidity trap in the
model, where the ZLB on nominal interest rates is binding. In doing so we follow Cochrane
(2017) and increase the quarterly discount factor {βt }9t=0 by 50 basis points for 10 quarters.15
  15
    In a linearized complete-markets model this would generate a fall in the natural real rate of interest —
the real interest interest rate in a world with flexible prices and wages — of 2 pp (annualized) for 10 quarters


                                                                         46
                               Output                                               Multipliers                                             Output                                             Multipliers
           0.08                                                    1.2                                                    0.1                                                 1.5
                                             Private C                                              HANK                                                   Private C                                           HANK
           0.06                              Investment              1                              RANK As-if                                             Investment                                          RANK As-if
                                             Output                                                 TANK As-if                                             Output               1                              TANK As-if
           0.04                              Government            0.8                                                  0.05                               Government

     (%)




                                                                                                                  (%)
           0.02                                                    0.6                                                                                                        0.5

              0                                                    0.4                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                0
           -0.02                                                   0.2

           -0.04                                                     0                                                  -0.05                                                 -0.5
                   0   10     20        30        40                      0    5          10          15                        0   10      20        30           40                0    5          10          15
                              Quarters                                              Quarters                                               Quarters                                            Quarters

                       Private C Decomposition                                     Fiscal Policy                                    Private C Decomposition                                   Fiscal Policy
           0.04                                                    1.5                                                  0.04                                                  1.5
                                                                                   Real Gov Spending                                     Total                                                Real Gov Spending
                                                                                   Real Transfers                                        Direct G impact on C                                 Real Transfers
           0.02                                                      1                                                                                                          1
                                                                                   Nominal Bonds                        0.02             Indirect Tax/Transfer                                Nominal Bonds
                                                                                                                                         Indirect Labor Inc.
              0                                                    0.5                                                                   Indirect Price/Interest              0.5




                                                             (%)




                                                                                                                                                                        (%)
                                                                                                                           0
           -0.02                   Total                             0                                                                                                          0
                                   Direct G impact on C
                                   Indirect Tax/Transfer                                                                -0.02
           -0.04                   Indirect Labor Inc.             -0.5                                                                                                       -0.5
                                   Indirect Price/Interest
           -0.06                                                    -1                                                  -0.04                                                  -1
                   0   10     20      30         40                       0   10     20        30       40                      0   10     20        30            40                0   10     20        30       40
                              Quarters                                              Quarters                                               Quarters                                            Quarters


                   (a) Spending Multiplier (Tax Financed)                                                                  (b) Spending Multiplier (Deficit Financed)

                                                        Figure 16: Fiscal Multipliers in a Liquidity Trap


In addition, we introduce an investment wedge, τtI , to the mutual fund problem, and set
the size of the wedge to 3.6% for 10 quarters, following Christiano et al. (2011).16 All other
parameters are unchanged.
    We then feed the {βt , τtI }9t=0 series into our model and calculate the response of the econ-
omy, which is shown in Figure 15. The resulting recession is quite large as output initially
drops by about 7 percent. We assume that the government keeps real value of government
spending and the nominal value of government debt constant and adjusts lump-sum transfers
period-by-period to satisfy its budget constraint.
    Under this scenario, we compute the effect of a simultaneous (at the same time as the
liquidity trap starts) 1% increase in nominal government spending under the same balanced-
budget and deficit financed schemes outside the liquidity trap. Thus, we can compute the fiscal
multiplier as the percent increase in output under this scenario, relative to the benchmark with
no increase in spending, divided by the relative percent differences in government spending.
The multipliers are plotted in Figure 16. Figure 17 shows the transfer multiplier, where only
deficit financing is meaningful. The corresponding impulse responses are reported in Figures
A-8 through A-10.
    Both the spending and the transfer multipliers in a liquidity trap are not very different from
their counterparts in the benchmark experiments outside the liquidity trap when we keep the
and then a return to zero afterwards.
  16                                                                                                      I      k
     In the liquidity trap if the mutual fund invests in Kt+1 units of capital it will receive (1 + (1 − τt+1 )(rt+1 −
δ))Kt+1 .


                                                                                                                 47
                                     Output                                                    Multipliers
                 0.06                                                           1
                                                   Private C                                                   HANK
                 0.04                              Investment                                                  RANK As-if
                                                   Output                                                      TANK As-if
                                                   Government                 0.5
                 0.02


           (%)      0
                                                                                0
                 -0.02

                 -0.04                                                        -0.5
                         0   10     20        30       40                            0    5          10           15
                                    Quarters                                                   Quarters
                             Private C Decomposition                                          Fiscal Policy
                   0.1                                                          1
                                         Total
                                         Direct G impact on C
                 0.05                    Indirect Tax/Transfer                0.5
                                         Indirect Labor Inc.
                                         Indirect Price/Interest




                                                                        (%)
                    0                                                           0


                 -0.05                                                        -0.5            Real Gov Spending
                                                                                              Real Transfers
                                                                                              Nominal Bonds
                  -0.1                                                         -1
                         0   10     20     30         40                             0   10     20        30       40
                                    Quarters                                                   Quarters

                 Figure 17: Transfer Multiplier in a Liquidity Trap (Deficit Financed)


nominal interest rate constant. For deficit financing, the impact spending multiplier, mIM
                                                                                        0  =
1.39 (1.34 in the benchmark) and the cumulative one M̄ = 0.51 (0.55 in benchmark). For tax
financing, the impact multiplier, mIM
                                   0  = 0.73 (0.61 in the benchmark) and the cumulative
one M̄ = 0.48 (0.43 in the benchmark). The transfer multiplier, mIM
                                                                 0  = 0.86 (0.66 in the
benchmark) and the cumulative one M̄ = −0.11 (−0.1 in benchmark). The welfare loss of
the transfer stimulus remains quite low, −0.0058% (−0.00067 in benchmark) in consumption
equivalents.
   Since values are close in a demand-induced liquidity trap and outside a liquidity trap
and monetary policy is the same across the two experiments, our findings imply that there
is not much state-dependence in the multiplier. However, when outside the liquidity trap a
Taylor rule is implemented, we find a much smaller multiplier for deficit financing, on impact
mIM
 0  = 0.66 and cumulative M̄ = 0.29 (see Section 3.5.1). But if one contrasts these multipliers
to those obtained in the liquidity trap, this substantial difference is due to a different monetary
policy and not due to model non-linearities that could imply state-dependence.




                                                                   48
                                                           Multiplier
                           2

                          1.8

                          1.6

                          1.4

                          1.2

                           1

                          0.8

                          0.6

                          0.4

                          0.2

                           0
                                0   50   100   150   200        250     300   350   400   450   500
                                                            p
                                                                and w


 Figure 18: Liquidity Trap and Degree of Rigidities θp = θw : Spending Multiplier at t = 0.


3.5.8   The Degree of Price and Wage Rigidities

In New Keynesian complete markets models, the size of the multiplier increases if prices
become more flexible. There is, however, a discontinuity at fully flexible prices. The multiplier
is smaller than one if prices are fully flexible, but is arbitrarily large if the degree of rigidity
is close to but not equal to zero. The reason is the response of inflation and thus real interest
rates when prices are rigid. The more flexible prices are, the larger is the deflation in a liquidity
trap and the larger is the inflation increase in response to the stimulus. Since the inflation
response is one-to-one related to the output gain, the multiplier is decreasing while and the
inflation response is increasing in θp = θw .
   In contrast, with fully flexible prices, an increase in the discount factor stimulates savings
and thus implies a fall in the real interest rate or equivalently an increase in inflation. A fiscal
stimulus raises the real interest rate in a fully flexible price economy that is the inflation rate
falls and the multiplier is smaller than one.
   Figure 18 shows the multiplier in our HANK economy when we vary θp = θw between 0
(flexible prices and wages) and 500 (very rigid wages and prices). Two stark differences to
the complete markets version emerge. The multiplier is now decreasing instead of increasing
when rigidities are reduced, i.e. θp = θw falls. And the multiplier converges to the flexible
price outcome when rigidities vanish, i.e. θp = θw converges to zero. The discontinuity and
the associated exploding multipliers which characterize the standard complete markets model


                                                           49
disappear. The reason for these different findings is price level determinacy in our model which
implies that for small but non-zero rigidities the real interest rate and inflation responses are
close to the flexible price outcome.


4     Conclusions
This paper develops a quantitative laboratory which contains the essential elements needed
to evaluate the effects of fiscal stimulus on the economy. At its core is a dynamic Heteroge-
neous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) model with incomplete markets, capital, price and wage
rigidities, and the government budget constraint specified at least partially in nominal terms.
These features interact in important ways, but their primary roles are as follows.

    1. Market incompleteness gives rise to large and heterogeneous across households MPCs
      as observed in the data. As Ricardian equivalence does not hold, government policies
      have distributional consequences, which are important in determining their impact.
      Moreover, the incomplete markets model allows to conduct a meaningful analysis of
      transfer multipliers, which is important because many stimulus policies take the form of
      transfers rather than an increase in spending.

    2. Matching the empirically relevant degree of price rigidities ensures that the model
      captures the stimulative effect of additional spending on aggregate demand.

    3. The model is fully dynamic so that demand is also governed by intertemporal motives
      which has important consequenses for assessing the equilibrium impact of policies. For
      example, household save some of the additional income induced by current fiscal stimulus
      for future consumption. This implies higher aggregate demand and thus higher income
      in the future which relaxes households’ precautionary savings motive and allows them
      to consume even more today. The dynamic model not only captures the equilibrium
      magnitude of these effects but also allows households to take into account that e.g., a
      deficit-financed spending stimulus leads to either lower transfers, higher taxes or lower
      government expenditure in the future.

    4. Introducing nominal government bonds ensures that the model delivers a uniquely
      determined price level (Hagedorn, 2016, 2018), implying a unique fiscal multiplier for

                                               50
      arbitrary combinations of monetary and fiscal policies of interest, including an interest
      rate peg. This significantly expands the set of policies that can be evaluated.

  5. Modeling capital accumulation is important to capture an investment channel of fiscal
      stimulus which complements the consumption demand channel. A stimulus increases
      demand for both employment and investment. A higher investment demand stimulates
      the production of investment goods which leads to more demand for employment and
      investment and so on until prices adjust and an equilibrium is reached. Having capital in
      the model also allows to capture the consequences of crowding-out of investment through
      higher government debt under deficit-financed stimulus.

  6. Introducing wage rigidities into the model is important for three reasons. First, it
      allows us to match the empirically relevant dynamics of labor incomes, important for
      measuring the dynamics of demand. Second, rigid wages constraint the volatility of
      firms’ profits the distribution of which has first order effects. Finally, the equilibrium
      increase in investment depends on the elasticity of interest rates and wages as those
      prices determine firms’ substitution between labor and capital.

   We then use the laboratory we developed to conduct a number of controlled experiments
that shed light on the size of the fiscal multiplier and allow to decompose the economic forces
that give rise to it. Specifically, in evaluating the fiscal multiplier it is important to control
for the response of monetary policy and for how the fiscal stimulus is financed. Although the
effects of any monetary polcy response can be evaluated using our framework, the benchmark
experiments are conducted under the assumption that monetary policy holds the nominal
interest rate fixed. This helps in isolating the consequences of fiscal policy only and facilitates
the comparison of the fiscal multiplier outside and in a liquidity trap so that the comparison
reveals the state-dependence of the multiplier and is not obscured by the differential response of
the monetary policy. With respect to financing, our baseline analysis considers two benchmarks
of (1) contemporaneously financing the expansion in spending through higher taxes or lower
transfers and (2) using deficit financing where repayment occurs in the future. The difference
in results between these financing benchmarks helps highlight the important role of the timing
of expected repayment on the multiplier. For every experiment conducted in our lab, we also
perform a parallel experiment using a Representative Agent and Two Agent New Keynesian

                                                51
(RANK and TANK) models to clarify why the richness of our framework leads to often very
different conclusions.
   The key lessons that we learned about fiscal stimulus from our experiments are as follows.

  1. The deficit-financed government spending multiplier is significantly larger
      than the tax-financed one, 1.34 vs. 0.61, respectively.

  2. In the liquidity trap the multipliers are similar, 1.39 and 0.73, respectively, im-
      plying the lack of strong state-dependence.

  3. Distributional effects are important as they contribute 0.37 to the 1.34 multiplier
      when spending is deficit financed and contribute a negative number, −0.5, to the mul-
      tiplier of 0.61 in the case of tax financing.

  4. The response of monetary policy is crucial for the effectiveness of fiscal stim-
      ulus. When we consider the monetary policy following the Taylor rule and thus trans-
      lating output and price increases induced by fiscal stimulus outside of the liquidity trap
      into higher nominal and real rates, the effectiveness of fiscal stimulus falls considerably,
      with multipliers of 0.54 and 0.66 in cases of tax and deficit financing, respectively. This
      happens because higher rates contract demand through the intertemporal substitution
      channel and because they redistribute towards asset-rich low MPC households, implying
      a further contraction in aggregate demand. Thus, if monetatry policy is described by
      the Taylor rule, the difference in the size of the multiplier in and outside of the liquidity
      trap is driven largely by the different response of the monetary policy.

  5. Liquidity trap puzzles documented in RANK models disappear. Hagedorn
      et al. (2018a) find that these puzzles carry over to the fully nonlinear RANK model as
      well as to a HANK model with real debt. We conclude that it is not the nonlinearity of
      our model which overcomes the puzzles but it is the combination of nominal government
      debt and market incompleteness. Specifically, we show that in contrast to RANK models,
      the multiplier in a liquidity trap becomes smaller as prices become more flexible and
      there is no discontinuity at fully flexible prices.

  6. A pre-announced future spending increase is less effective than an unex-
      pected stimulus. This is in contrast to RANK models, in which the further the spend-

                                                52
  ing is in the future the larger is its impact today.

7. The multiplier is decreasing in the size of the spending stimulus. One should
  be cautious about proposals that for government spending to be effective it has to be
  large. Interpreting higher effectiveness as a higher multiplier, we find that scaling up the
  stimulus decreases its effectiveness.

8. Transfer multipliers can be assessed. We find that a deficit-financed increase in
  lump-sum transfers by 1 dollar increases output on impact by 66 cents. Our framework
  also allows to measure the welfare consequences of temporary increases in transfer pay-
  ments which generate winners and losers. We find that the transfer policy leads to a
  small welfare loss since the initial gains in welfare are outweighed by the losses later
  on. The same transfer experiment in complete markets does not alter welfare due to
  Ricardian equivalence.

9. The intertemporal trade-off of a stimulus: Potentially large initial gains come
  with potentially larger cost later on. In addition to reporting the impact multiplier,
  a standard statistic reported in the literature, we also assess the effectiveness of spending
  using the cumulative multiplier, i.e., the discounted average multiplier. The two measures
  do not always point in the same direction. For example, while the impact multiplier
  increases from 1.06 to 1.65 when we increase the persistence of stimulus spending from
  0.1 to 1, the cumulative multiplier falls from 1.18 to 0.33. This difference reflects the
  short-run/long-run trade-off of a stimulus, which are absent from the standard Keynesian
  cross logic but which are present and can be measured in our dynamic model. A short-
  run multiplier larger than one suggests that a fiscal stimulus could be an effective policy
  tool in a recession and the long-run results suggest that this policy is costly but that
  these costs only occur when the economy has already recovered. While our paper has
  focused primarily on the positive dimension of such fiscal policy trade-offs, it can help
  guide normative analyses as conducted, for example, in Bhandari et al. (2015, 2016,
  2017a,b) in a model closely related to ours.




                                            53
References
Aiyagari, S. R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 109, 659–84.
——— (1995): “Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets, Borrowing Con-
 straints, and Constant Discounting,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, 1158–1175.
Auclert, A. (2016): “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, forthcoming.
Auclert, A. and M. Rognlie (2017): “Inequality and Aggregate Demand,” Working Paper
 24280, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Auclert, A., M. Rognlie, and L. Straub (2018): “The Intertemporal Keynesian Cross,”
 Working Paper 25020, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Basu, S. and J. G. Fernald (1997): “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
 Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 249–283.
Baxter, M. and R. G. King (1993): “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” The American
 Economic Review, 83, 315–334.
Bayer, C., R. Lütticke, L. Pham-Dao, and V. Tjaden (2019): “Precautionary Savings,
 Illiquid Assets, and the Aggregate Consequences of Shocks to Household Income Risk,”
 Econometrica, 87, 255–290.
Bhandari, A., D. Evans, M. Golosov, and T. J. Sargent (2015): “Taxes, Debts, and
 Redistributions with Aggregate Shocks,” Working paper.
——— (2016): “Fiscal Policy and Debt Management with Incomplete Markets,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 132, 617–663.
——— (2017a): “Optimal Fiscal-Monetary Policy with Redistribution,” Working paper.
——— (2017b): “Public Debt in Economies with Heterogeneous Agents,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 91, 39 – 51.
Bilbiie, F. O. (2008): “Limited Asset Markets Participation, Monetary Policy and (Inverted)
  Aggregate Demand Logic,” Journal of Economic Theory, 140, 162 – 196.
——— (2017): “The New Keynesian Cross: Understanding Monetary Policy with Hand-to-
 Mouth Households,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 11989.
——— (2018): “A Catch-22 for HANK Models: No Puzzles, No Amplification,” CEPR Dis-
 cussion Paper No. 12601.
Brinca, P., H. A. Holter, P. Krusell, and L. Malafry (2016): “Fiscal Multipliers
 in the 21st Century,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 77, 53 – 69.


                                            54
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011): “When Is the Government
 Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 78–121.
Cochrane, J. H. (2017): “The New-Keynesian Liquidity Trap,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 92, 47 – 63.
Den Haan, W. J., P. Rendahl, and M. Riegler (2017): “Unemployment (Fears) and
 Deflationary Spirals,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 16, 1281–1349.
Doepke, M. and M. Schneider (2006): “Inflation and the Redistribution of Nominal
 Wealth,” Journal of Political Economy, 114, 1069–1097.
Dupor, B., M. Karabarbounis, M. Kudlyak, and M. Mehkari (2018): “Regional
 Consumption Responses and the Aggregate Fiscal Multiplier,” Working paper.
Eberly, J., S. Rebelo, and N. Vincent (2008): “Investment and Value: A Neoclassical
 Benchmark,” Working Paper 13866, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000): “Optimal Monetary Policy
 with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 281 – 313.
Erosa, A. and G. Ventura (2002): “On Inflation as a Regressive Consumption Tax,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 761–795.
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2016): “Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency
  Unions,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor and H. Uhlig, Elsevier, 2417
  – 2492.
Ferriere, A. and G. Navarro (2018): “The Heterogeneous Effects of Government Spend-
 ing: It’s All About Taxes,” Working paper.
Gornemann, N., K. Kuester, and M. Nakajima (2012): “Monetary Policy with Het-
 erogeneous Agents,” Working paper 12-21, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (2017): “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
 Liquidity Trap,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1427–1467.
Hagedorn, M. (2016): “A Demand Theory of the Price Level,” CEPR Discussion Paper No.
 11364.
——— (2018): “Prices and Inflation when Government Bonds are Net Wealth,” CEPR Dis-
 cussion Paper No. 12769.
Hagedorn, M., J. Luo, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2018a): “The Liquidity Trap
 in Nonlinear Models,” Working paper.
——— (2019): “Forward Guidance,” Journal of Monetary Economics, in press.
Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2018b): “Monetary Policy in Incomplete-
 Markets Models: Theory and Evidence,” Working paper.


                                           55
Heathcote, J. (2005): “Fiscal Policy with Heterogeneous Agents and Incomplete Markets,”
 The Review of Economic Studies, 72, 161–188.
Huggett, M. (1993): “The Risk-free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
 Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 953 – 969.
İmrohoroğlu, A. (1989): “Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liquidity Con-
   straints,” Journal of Political economy, 97, 1364–1383.
——— (1992): “The Welfare Cost of Inflation under Imperfect Insurance,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Dynamics and Control, 16, 79–91.
Johnson, D. S., J. A. Parker, and N. S. Souleles (2006): “Household Expenditure
  and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, 96, 1589–1610.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2018): “Monetary Policy According to
 HANK,” American Economic Review, 108, 697–743.
Kaplan, G. and G. L. Violante (2018): “Microeconomic Heterogeneity and Macroeco-
 nomic Shocks,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32, 167–194.
Krueger, D., K. Mitman, and F. Perri (2016): “Macroeconomics and Household Hetero-
 geneity,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. Taylor and H. Uhlig, Elsevier, 843–921.
Lütticke, R. (2015): “Transmission of Monetary Policy with Heterogeneity in Household
  Portfolios,” Working paper.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2016): “The Power of Forward Guidance
 Revisited,” American Economic Review, 106, 3133–58.
Oh, H. and R. Reis (2012): “Targeted Transfers and the Fiscal Response to the Great
 Recession,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, Supplement, 50 – 64.
Ramey, V. A. (2011): “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?” Journal of
 Economic Literature, 49, 673–85.
Ravn, M. O. and V. Sterk (2017): “Job Uncertainty and Deep Recessions,” Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 90, 125 – 141.
Rotemberg, J. J. (1982): “Sticky Prices in the United States,” The Journal of Political
 Economy, 1187–1211.
Rupert, P. and R. Šustek (2019): “On the Mechanics of New-Keynesian Models,” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, in press.
Woodford, M. (2011): “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,”
 American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 1–35.




                                            56
                           APPENDICES FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


I      Figures
I.1     Impulse Responses: Baseline Experiments, Section 3.4.

Figure A-1: Impulse Response to a 1% Increase in Nominal Government Spending.
Tax Financing (Constant Nominal Debt).

                          G/P                       10-4         Y                   10-4         I
       0.01                                                                     1
                                                3
                                                2
      0.005                                                                     0
                                                1
         0                                      0                               -1
               10          20        30   40          10        20    30   40          10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                         Quarters
                   -4       H                            -5      P                        -5     W/P
              10                                    10                               10
                                                6                               5
         4                                      4
                                                2                               0
         2                                      0
                                               -2
         0                                                                      -5
               10          20        30   40          10        20    30   40          10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                         Quarters
              10
                   -6   r k /(W/P)                  10
                                                         -6      rk                  10
                                                                                          -5     B/P
        10                                     20
                                                                                 2
                                                                                 0
         5                                     10
                                                                                -2
                                                                                -4
         0                                      0                               -6
               10          20        30   40          10        20    30   40          10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                         Quarters




                                                               57
Figure A-2: Impulse Response to a 1% Increase in Nominal Government Spending.
Deficit Financing.

                       G/P                       10-4         Y                    10-4         I
    0.01                                    10
                                                                               0
   0.005                                     5
                                                                              -5
                                             0
       0                                                                     -10
            10          20        30   40          10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                              Quarters                          Quarters
                -4       H                            -4      P                         -4     W/P
           10                                    10                                10
                                                                               4
      10                                     4
                                             2                                 2
       5
                                             0                                 0
       0                                    -2
            10          20        30   40          10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                              Quarters                          Quarters
           10
                -5   r k /(W/P)                  10
                                                      -5      rk                   10
                                                                                        -3     B/P
       2                                     5
                                                                               5
       1

       0                                     0                                 0
            10          20        30   40          10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                              Quarters                          Quarters




                                                            58
I.2     Impulse Responses: Taylor Rule, Section 3.5.1.

Figure A-3: Impulse Response to a 1% Increase in Nominal Government Spending.
Taylor Rule, Deficit Financing.

                          G/P                       10-4         Y                   10-4         I
       0.01                                    4                                0
                                               2                                -2
      0.005                                                                     -4
                                               0
                                                                                -6
         0
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40          10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                         Quarters
              10-4          H                       10-4         P                   10-4        W/P
         6                                     0                                1
         4
                                               -2                               0
         2
                                               -4                               -1
         0
                                                                                -2
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40          10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                         Quarters
              10
                   -6   r k /(W/P)                  10
                                                         -5      rk                  10
                                                                                          -3     B/P
        10
                                               2                                5

                                               1
         5
                                               0                                0
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40          10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                         Quarters




                                                               59
Figure A-4: Impulse Response to a 1% Increase in Nominal Government Spending.
Taylor Rule, Tax Financing (Constant Nominal Debt).

                       G/P                        10-4         Y                    10-5         I
    0.01                                      3
                                              2                                 0
   0.005
                                              1                                -5
                                              0
       0                                                                      -10
            10          20        30   40           10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                               Quarters                          Quarters
                -4       H                             -5      P                         -5     W/P
           10                                     10                                10
                                                                                2
       4                                      0                                 0
       2                                     -5                                -2
       0                                                                       -4
                                            -10
            10          20        30   40           10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                               Quarters                          Quarters
           10
                -6   r k /(W/P)                   10
                                                       -6      rk                   10
                                                                                         -5     B/P
                                            20                                10
       6
       4                                                                        5
                                            10
       2                                                                        0
       0                                      0
            10          20        30   40           10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                               Quarters                          Quarters




                                                             60
I.3     Impulse Responses: Transfer Multiplier, Section 3.5.2.

Figure A-5: Impulse Response to a 1% Increase in Nominal Government Transfers.
Deficit Financing.

                          T/P                       10-4         Y                      10-4      I
       0.01
                                                                                   0
                                               4
      0.005                                    2                                   -5
                                               0
         0                                                                       -10
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40             10     20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                         Quarters
              10-4          H                       10-4         P                      10-4     W/P
        10                                     5
                                                                                   4
         5                                     0                                   2
                                                                                   0
         0
                                               -5
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40             10     20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                         Quarters
              10
                   -5   r k /(W/P)                  10
                                                         -5      rk                              B/P
                                               4                                 0.01
         1
                                               2                                0.005
        0.5

         0                                     0                                   0
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40             10     20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                         Quarters




                                                               61
I.4     Impulse Responses: Forward Spending, Section 3.5.3.

Figure A-6: Impulse Response to a Future (4 Quarters Ahead) 1% Increase in Nominal Gov-
ernment Spending. Deficit Financing.

                          G/P                      10-4         Y                    10-4         I
       0.01
                                               4
                                                                                 0
      0.005                                    2
                                                                                -5
                                               0
         0                                                                     -10
                10         20        30   40         10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                             Quarters                          Quarters
              10-4          H                      10-4         P                    10-4        W/P
         6                                     4                                 2
         4                                     2                                 1
         2                                                                       0
                                               0
         0                                                                      -1
                10         20        30   40         10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                             Quarters                          Quarters
              10
                   -6   r k /(W/P)                 10
                                                        -5      rk                   10
                                                                                          -3     B/P
                                               4
        10                                                                       6

         5                                                                       4
                                               2
                                                                                 2
         0
                                               0                                 0
                10         20        30   40         10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                             Quarters                          Quarters




                                                              62
I.5     Impulse Responses: Deficit Repaid using G, Section 3.5.6.

Figure A-7: Impulse Response to a 1% Increase in Nominal Government Spending.
Deficit Financing, Deficit Repaid using G.

                          G/P                       10-4         Y                    10-4         I
       0.01                                    10                                 0

      0.005                                     5
                                                                                 -5
                                                0
         0                                                                      -10
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                          Quarters
              10-4          H                       10-4         P                    10-4        W/P
                                                                                  4
        10                                      4
                                                2                                 2
         5
                                                0                                 0
         0                                     -2
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                          Quarters
              10
                   -5   r k /(W/P)                  10
                                                         -5      rk                   10
                                                                                           -3     B/P
         2                                      5

                                                                                  5
         1

         0                                      0                                 0
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40           10        20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                          Quarters




                                                               63
I.6     Impulse Responses: Liquidity Trap, Section 3.5.7.

Figure A-8: Impulse Response to a 1% Increase in Nominal Government Spending.
Liquidity Trap, Tax Financing (Constant Nominal Debt).

                          G/P                       10-4         Y                     10-5      I
       0.01                                     4                                 5
                                                                                  0
      0.005                                     2
                                                                                 -5
                                                0                               -10
         0
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40            10     20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                        Quarters
              10-4          H                       10-5         P                     10-5     W/P
                                               10
         6                                                                        5
         4                                      5
                                                                                  0
         2                                      0
         0                                     -5                                 -5
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40            10     20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                        Quarters
              10
                   -6   r k /(W/P)                  10
                                                         -6      rk                             B/P
        10                                     20
                                                                                0.03
                                                                                0.02
         5                                     10
                                                                                0.01
                                                                                   0
         0                                      0
                10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40            10     20    30   40
                        Quarters                              Quarters                        Quarters




                                                               64
Figure A-9: Impulse Response to a 1% Increase in Nominal Government Spending.
Liquidity Trap, Deficit Financing.

                       G/P                       10-4         Y                     10-4         I
    0.01                                    10
                                                                                0
                                             5                                 -2
   0.005
                                                                               -4
                                             0                                 -6
       0
            10          20        30   40          10        20    30   40            10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                              Quarters                           Quarters
                -4       H                            -4      P                          -4     W/P
           10                                    10                                 10
                                             4                                  3
      10
                                                                                2
                                             2
       5                                                                        1
                                             0                                  0
       0                                    -2                                 -1
            10          20        30   40          10        20    30   40            10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                              Quarters                           Quarters
           10
                -5   r k /(W/P)                  10
                                                      -5      rk                                B/P
       2                                     5
                                                                             0.03
       1                                                                     0.02
                                                                             0.01
       0                                     0                                  0
            10          20        30   40          10        20    30   40            10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                              Quarters                           Quarters




                                                            65
Figure A-10: Impulse Response to a 1% Increase in Nominal Government Transfers.
Liquidity Trap, Deficit Financing.

           10-3         T/P                      10-4         Y                     10-4         I
                                            4                                  0
       5
                                            2
                                                                               -5
                                            0
       0                                                                     -10
             10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40            10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                              Quarters                           Quarters
                -4       H                            -4      P                          -4     W/P
           10                                    10                                 10
      10                                                                       4
                                             4
       5                                     2                                 2
                                             0
                                                                               0
       0                                    -2
             10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40            10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                              Quarters                           Quarters
           10
                -5   r k /(W/P)                  10
                                                      -5      rk                                B/P
       1                                                                     0.04
                                            2
     0.5                                                                     0.02
                                            1

       0                                    0                                  0
             10         20        30   40          10        20    30   40            10        20    30   40
                     Quarters                              Quarters                           Quarters




                                                            66
II      Derivations
II.1     Derivation Pricing Equation
The firm’s pricing problem is
                                                                                     2
                          pjt                             θ                   pjt             1
       Vt (pjt−1 ) ≡ max y (pjt ; Pt , Yt ) − Ξt (Yjt ) −                          − Π Yt +        Vt+1 (pjt ) ,
                      pjt Pt                              2                  pjt−1          1 + rt
                                                                                                 −
                                     α 1−α                                                  pjt
subject to the constraints yjt = Zt Kjt Hjt and y(pjt ; Pt , Yt ) =                         Pt
                                                                                                         Yt .
Equivalently,
                                             −                                      2
                          pjt           pjt                          θ        pjt                          1
       Vt (pjt−1 ) ≡ max                            Yt − Ξt (Yjt ) −               −Π        Yt +               Vt+1 (pjt ) .
                      pjt Pt            Pt                           2       pjt−1                       1 + rt

     The FOC w.r.t pjt is
                               −                                   
                          pjt         Yt                        pjt       Yt     1
            (1 − )                      + mcjt − θ                 −Π       +      V 0 (pjt ) = 0                             (A1)
                          Pt          Pt                       pjt−1     pjt−1 1 + rt t+1

and the envelope condition is
                                                                     
                                            0                 pjt+1     pjt+1 Yt+1
                                          Vt+1      = θ             −Π             .                                            (A2)
                                                               pjt       pjt pjt

Combining the FOC and and the envelope condition,
                                               −
                                    Yt    pjt
                    (1 − )            + mcjt
                                    Pt    Pt
                                                         
                         pjt        Yt      1       pjt+1     pjt+1 Yt+1
                  − θ         −Π        +       θ         −Π             = 0.                                                   (A3)
                        pjt−1      pjt−1 1 + rt      pjt       pjt pjt

Using that all firms choose the same price in equilibrium,

                                                                   1                   Yt+1
                (1 − ) + mct − θ πt − Π πt +                           θ πt+1 − Π πt+1      = 0.                              (A4)
                                                                  1 + rt                  Yt

II.2     Derivation Wage Equation
                                                                                            !2
                                                                  θw         Ŵt        w
                                Θ (sit , Wit , Wit−1 ; Yt ) = sit                  −Π             Ht .
                                                                   2     Ŵt−1




                                                                 67
   The middleman’s wage setting problem is to maximize
               
      Vtw Ŵt−1
                                                                                                                !2
              sit (1 − τt )Ŵt
         Z                                                                 Z
                                                   v(h(Ŵt ; Wt , Ht ))          θw             Ŵt         w
  ≡ max                        h(Ŵt ; Wt , Ht ) −       0
                                                                        di − sit                       −Π            Ht di
     Ŵt             Pt                                 u (Ct )                   2            Ŵt−1
       1     w
                     
  +        Vt+1    Ŵt ,                                                                                             (A5)
    1 + rt
                                            −w
                                       Wit
where hit = h(Wit ; Wt , Ht ) =        Wt
                                                     Ht .
   The FOC w.r.t Ŵt is
                                       !−w                                           !−w −1
                                 Ŵt             Ht      v 0 (h(Ŵt ; Wt , Ht )) Ŵt          Ht
           (1 − τt )(1 − w )                       + w          0
                                                                                                                (A6)
                                 Wt              Pt              u (Ct )          Wt          Wt
                                                               !
                                                   Ŵt              Ht          1    0
                                       −θw              − Πw              +       Vt+1 (Ŵt ) = 0
                                                  Ŵt−1           Ŵt−1 1 + rt

and the envelope condition is
                                                                         !
                                  0                     Ŵt+1                Ŵt+1 Ht+1
                                Vt+1 = θw                         − Πw                    ,                     (A7)
                                                            Ŵt               Ŵt   Ŵt
                       R
where we have used that s = 1.
  Combining the FOC and the envelope condition,
                                                 !−w                                         !−w −1
                                           Ŵt         Ht        v 0 (h(Ŵt ; Wt , Ht )) Ŵt          Ht
                (1 − τt )(1 − w )                        + w
                                           Wt          Pt                u0 (Ct )          Wt         Wt
                                       !                                            !
                       Ŵt                   Ht          1            Ŵt+1            Ŵt+1 Ht+1
            − θw              − Πw                   +        θw             − Πw                 = 0.          (A8)
                      Ŵt−1                Ŵt−1       1 + rt          Ŵt              Ŵt Ŵt

                                        Wt            Ŵt
   Using that Ŵt = Wt , πtw =         Wt−1
                                                 =   Ŵt−1
                                                             and hit = Ht :

                                         Wt       v 0 (h(Ŵt ; Wt , Ht ))
                        (1 − τt )(1 − w )   + w
                                          Pt              u0 (Ct )
                                               1                        w Ht+1
                              πtw − Πw πtw +               w
                                      
                    − θw                             θw πt+1    − Πw πt+1       = 0.                            (A9)
                                             1 + rt                         Ht




                                                              68
