                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            COSTS OF FINANCIAL DISTRESS, DELAYED CALLS OF CONVERTIBLE BONDS,
                            AND THE ROLE OF INVESTMENT BANKS




                                     Dwight Jaffee

                                    Andrei Shleifer




                                Working Paper No. 2558




                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April   1988




Princeton University and University of Chicago, respectively. We are grateful
to Ben Bernanke, Fischer Black, George Constantinides, Merton Miller, Kevin M.
Murphy, John Oros of Goldman, Sachs, Larry Summers, Rob Vishny and especially
Bruce Grundy for helpful suggestions. The research reported here is part of the
NBERs research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2558
                                                April 1988




         Costs of Financial Distress, Delayed Calls of Convertible
                                                                   Bonds,
                          and the Role of Investment Banks




                                     ABSTRACT



           In a frictionless market with
                                          perfect information, a shareholder-wealth.
     maximizing firm should force conversion of its convertible bond issue into
     stock as soon as the bond comes
                                       in-the-money. Firms however appear to
     systematically delay forced conversion, sometimes for years,
     time.   We show that the observed                                beyond this
                                        delays can be plausibly explained in terms
     of costs to shareholders of a failed   conversion and the ensuing financial
     distress. Firms delay the forced conversion to avoid
                                                              the self-fulfilling
     outcome that bondholders expect the conversion to
                                                         fail, tender their bonds
     for cash, and the stock price falls to account for the
                                                               costs of financial
     distress, in which case tendering for cash is in fact               Unlike other
                                                             optimal.
     explanations of delayed forced conversion, we can
     investment banks to underwrite these                explain the common use of
                                            transactions, since the banks can
     eliminate the self-fulfilling bad outcome.




Professor Andrei Shleifer                       Dwight Jaffee
Graduate School of Business                     Princeton University
University of Chicago                           113 Dickinson Hall
llDl E 58th Street
                                                Department of Economics
Chicago, IL 60637                               Princeton, N.J. 08544
                                           2




1.   INTRODUCTION

      Convertible bonds are distinguished from straight debt securities by a

conversion otio that allows bondholders to convert the bonds into a fixed

number of common shares, and by a call ovtion that allows firms to call the

bonds for cash redemption at the call price.       Rational bondholders will

voluntarily convert bonds to stock only when the bond's yield advantage (the

Interest coupon on the bond less the dividend on the converted shares) is

negative.   But even if the bond's yield advantage is positive, a firm can

still exercise its call option and force conversion by bondholders if the

bonds are in-the-money,     i.e. the bond's conversion value (the market value of

converted stock) exceeds its call price.       In a forced conversion, the firm
calls the bonds for cash redemption, and the bondholders are given a notice

period, usually 30 days, to decide whether to convert the bonds to stock or

to tender them for cash.     Rational bondholders would convert to stock if the

bond is in-the-money at the end of the notice period.      Forced conversion thus

eliminates the yield advantage and expropriates the conversion option from

bondholders. As shown by Ingersoll (1977a) and Brennan and Schwartz (1977),

shareholder interest requires a firm to force conversion as soon as the bond

comes in-the-money.

     Firms appear to systematicallydelay bond calls that force conversion,

often for months and sometimes for years, beyond the time at which the bond

first comes in-the-money.     Ingersoll   (1977b) reports that the median company

waited until the conversion value of bonds was 44% in excess of the call

price.   Similar findings are analyzed by Constantinides and Crundy (1986) in

their painstaking study of forced conversions.      Explanations of this puzzling
                                         3


                                                     a
delay of forced conversion of in-the-money bonds with positive yield
                                              of the conversion option
advantage include the signalling of the value
                                               increases                         and
(Harris and Raviv, 1986) or of future dividend               (Constantinides

                                                        of debt (Mikkelson, 1981
Grundy,   1986) through delay, interest deductibility

and 1983), and the irrationality    of "sleepy" bondholders -- who fail     to


convert honda that even have a negative yield advantage (Ingersoll, l977b).

     This paper offers an alternative explanationof delay based on the risk
                                                                    distress
that forced conversion fails and thereby creates costs of financial
                                                                           the
for the firm.    A forced conversion fails if the stock price falls during

notice period so that the bond is out-of-the-moneyat the end of that

period)     Bondholders   then tender for cash, and che firm must proceed to

raise the cash to pay them.     Coats of financial distress are associated with

                                                       the firm to borrow in
raising this cash if, for example, it is expensive for
                                          is regulated and cash disbursements
imperfect capital markets, or if the firm
                                                                      -- such
conflict with its capital requirements. Costs of financial distress
                                                                   -   - are often
as bankruptcy costs or even the costs of accomodating lenders

used to explain ocher aspects of corporate financing decisions- like the
                                                               -



limited use of debt financing tax shield (see Miller, 1987 for a survey). In
                                                                       of the
this spirit, we consider costs of financial distress as an explanation

forced conversionpuzzle.


     1There are two examples of a failed forced conversion unrelated to       of
control activity that we have been able to identify, based on the samples
           (1977b), Constantinides and Grundy (1986), and reading of the Wall
Ingersoll                                                                      to
Street Journal. In 1973, a forced conversionby Echelin failed subsequent
                              the      oil  price  increase.   Based on our
the market decline following      Opec
                                               bankers underwriting the
calculations, Kidder Peabody, the investment
                                                  In 1987, a call by IBM of its
conversion, lost over $5 million on the deal.
           the conversion value of which was  tied to the price of Intel stock,
Eurobond,
failed after the October 19 market crash. According to December      14, 1987
                    over 12 million dollars  from  having  to pay bondholders in
Barron's, IBM lost
cash rather than in Intel stock that IBM was holding at the time.
                                         4

     There is some reluctance among economists to rely on the costs of

financial distress in explaining corporate behavior,           since these Costs are

not perceived to be "high enough."2     Below we suggest that these costs might

be reasonably high for firms calling Convertible bonds.            But one should also

recognize    that the cost of delayed conversion - -     to   which the cost of

financial distress must be compared --       is   in most cases quite small.

     To see this, consider a hypothetical firm with a convertible bond issue

representativeof the samples in available empirical studies.             The

convertible    issue of this firm is about 15% of the value of equity (Dann and

Mikkelson,    1984).   While the available data do not allow us to gauge the

median length of the delay, in Constantinides/Grundy           sample it is probably

under 2 years as long as the bond is continuously in-the-money.            So suppose

that the hypothetical firm delays the forced conversionby 2 years.             Finally,

suppose that the difference between the yield on the convertible and on the

corresponding stock is 6%, which is an unusually high positive yield

advantage.    After tax, then, the firm is paying convertible bondholders 3%

more on their securities then it would have to pay if it forced them to

convert.      Since the bond issue is 15% of equity, over 2 years this

hypothetical firm is giving up .l5*.03*2      —    .009 or .9% of the market value of

its equity as a result of delaying the forced conversion.            Although for some
firms this can be a large amount of money in absolute value (Constantinides

and Grundy, 1986), the delay is clearly not a costly problem as a fraction of

the value of equity.     This observation is important to keep in mind in


     2Warner (1977) finds that bankruptcy costs can be a very small fraction
of assets. On the other hand, Cutler and Summers (1987) suggest that
financial distress has been very costly to Texaco shareholders in its legal
dispute with Pennzoil.
                                         5


evaluating the plausibility of the costs of a failed conversion as an

explanation of the puzzle.

        In our model, when financial distress is costly, the fundamental value

of the firm falls when conversion fails.     Analogously to Diamond and Dybvig's

(1983) bank runs, two equilibria can then exist: forced conversion succeeds

if bondholders expect it to succeed, and fails if bondholders expect it         to
fail.    To see this, suppose that a firm, following Ingersoll's (l977a)

advice, forces conversion when its bond is just at-the-money,       i.e. just when

choosing stock rather than cash first becomes in the interest of bondholders,

and suppose also that the notice period is zero.       If bondholders expect

conversion to succeed, they convert to stock, the firm retains its

fundamental value, and conversion succeeds.      If,   in contrast, bondholders

expect conversion to fail, they expect the fundamental value of the firm to

fall reflecting    the costs of financial distress.    The decline in fundamental

value depresses the stock price so that the bond, which is initially at-the-

money, falls out-of-the money.     Bondholders   then rationally tender their

bonds for cash and the conversion indeed fails, justifying the depressed

price of the stock.
        The prospect of failed conversion reduces the expected benefits to the

firm of forcing conversion.     In addition, the firm's managers may be

extremely averse to this prospect.     An obvious response is to delay

conversion until the firm's value and stock price rise enough that the bond

will remain in-the-money even after subtracting the costs of distress.

Rational bondholders could then only expect the forced conversion to succeed,

and it would unambiguously succeed.     Since as we suggested earlier the cost

of continuing to pay more bond interest than the implied dividends on
                                         6

converted stock is not very high, the costs of financial distress need not be

implausibly large to explain why firms delay forced conversions.

     As an alternative to delay, an investment bank can provide a standby

facility that eliminates the distress cost associatedwith a failed

conversion.     In a standard underwriting agreement, the investment bank

essentially sells to the firm a put option with a strike price equal to the
stock price at which the firm wants to force conversion.       This arrangement

transfers   to the bank the cost of a failed conversion.     Should the bond fall

out-of-the-moneyduring the notice period, the investment bank buys the bonds

tendered for cash, converts them to stock, and sells the stock in the open

market.     In this event, the firm is fully sheltered from the risk and cost of

a failed conversion, while the investment bank suffers a loss when it pays

more for the bonds than it receives from selling the stock.

     This use of an underwriter eliminates the distress cost of a failed

conversion as a reason for delay.     The investment bank protects the firm from

a self-fulfilling"bad" equilibrium - - where bondholders expect the forced

conversion to fail and therefore it does fail - -    in   the same way that deposit

insurance provides protection against bank runs (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983).

With an investment bank, the firm's fundamental value is unaffected by a

failed conversion.    In the case without the notice period, bondholders

correctly anticipate that conversionmust succeed, and it does succeed in

equilibrium.    Moreover,   since conversion always succeeds in this case, there

is no risk for the investment bank, and its fee (option premium) is therefore

zero, reflecting the zero time premium of an at-the-money put option when the

notice period (time until expiration) is zero.      This logic explains why some

firms use investment banks to underwrite     a forced conversion.   But it also
                                              7

implies,    at least in the simple case of no notice period, that firms using

investment banks should not delay conversion.

     The role of the investment bank becomes more complicated when the 30 day

notice period is taken into account.          A   positive option premium is then

required,      for if the stock price falls during the notice period for

fundamental      reasons independent of the forced conversion, the investment         bank

suffers    a   loss if the bond falls out-of-the money.         Still, if the investment

bank is either risk neutral or can replicate the option it writes with other

securities,      it will charge the firm the arbitrage        (Black-Scholes)   price of

the option.      In this case, the firm will as before call the bond as soon as

it comes at-the-money,      as in Ingersoll       (l977a).   Such a perfect investment

bank eliminates the need to delay a forced conversion, with or without the

notice period.      Unfortunately,   in this case, the observed delays of forced

conversions     remain puzzling.

     Unlike the perfect underwriters who charge the arbitrage price of the

option, real world investment bankers apparently             refuse even to offer option

contracts when the bond is at-the-money; equivalently,             their fees for

at-the-money conversion far exceed the normal time premium cost of providing

the option.       Instead, they will participate       only if forced conversions are

delayed until the bond is deep in-the-money.             While this practice explains

why even underwritten forced conversions are delayed, it opens the question

of why investmentbanks insist on the delay.

     Our answer is that underwriting at-the-money             forced conversions is risky

and that investment bankers are averse to the particularkind of risk this
                                                              In uderWritimg a
                 a small probability  of a very large loss-3
entails, namely
                                                                 the bank has
                           in many other similar transactions,
forced conversion, unlike
                                    is exposed to risk for a considerable
relatively large amounts at stake,
                                                      on its ability to engage
                             and faces legal limits
period (the notice period),
                                                                      insiStS on
                                         For these reasons, the bank
 in hedging and market stabilization.
                                                                            price
                                        fee much higher than the arbitrage
 a delay and requires an underwriting

of the option.
                                                        two parts.   A firm
                                 conversion then has
      Our explanation of delayed
                                                          to avoid the risk
                           own will delay the conversion
 forcing conversion on its
                                                            A firm using an
                            on costly financial distress.
 that a failure would bring
                                             from this risk, and so it should
                     contrast, is protected
 investment bank, in
                                                  fairly priced insurance
                           delay if it could buy
 force conversion without
                                                       the notice period. The
         the decline of its fundamental value during
 against                                                                  the
                                                 be considerablyhigher if
  actual price of this insurance will, however,
                                                               writes with other
                               or cannot hedge the option it
  underwriter is risk averse
                                                                             will
                                              a risk averse investment bank
  securities.   With a notice period then,
                                                                   With plausible
                                          its forced conversion.
  still insist on the firm's delaying
                                                                and of underwriting,
                      costs of delay, of financial distress,
  magnitudes of the
                                                                 to proceed.
                                  seems to be the cheapest way
   delay of a forced conversion
                                                                         usual case
                                            with a simple model of the
         Section 2 continues the analysis
                                                                  of the firm going
                                    Section 3 considers the case
   of a perfect capital market.
                                                            in the presence of
                               the two equilibria arising
    it alone, and illustrates
                                                                       of the
                                 Section 4 shows how an underwriter
    costly financial distress.
                                   bad equilibriufli. Section 5 then examines why
    conversion can eliminate the
                                                                      of risk
                                         is only one of many examples
        3underwritthg forced conversions Other examples include spot to future
                                 banks.
   averse behavior by investment underwriting of initial public
                                                                offerings.
   stock index arbitrage and the
                                           9
    the investmentbank would nonetheless insist
                                                 on delayed conversion.
                                                                         Section
   6 presents some
                   implications of the
                                       argument, while Section 7 concludes.


   2.    A   Sfl(PLE (OPEL.


          The results in this
                              paper are easiest to demonstrate
                                                                using a discrete
   time two period model,
                           rather than the more
                                                 elegant continuous time model of
   Ingersoll (1977a). Moreover, much of our
                                              analysis can be done without
   reference to the
                    uncertainty of stock returns or to the notice
                                                                    period.   While
  this  ignores the put option that shareholders
                                                  expropriate from bondholders
  when they force
                   conversion, it allows us to focus
                                                      on the yield
                                                                    advantage
  effects (interest
                     higher than dividends), the
                                                  paramount importance of which
  has been documented by
                          Constantinidesand Crundy (1986). We
                                                                 return to the
  valuation of the put option in
                                  Section 5.
       We consider a firm with
                                 stock that is not
                                                   paying dividends, and bonds
  that are paying interest
                           R, so that the
                                            yield advantage of bonds is
                                                                          clearly
  positive.  We abstract from
                               taxes, so that the
                                                   shareholders' discount rate is
  also R. Let V be the value of
                                  the firm's assets at the
                                                              initial dote 1. To
 contrast our theory with the
                                asymmetric information
                                                         explanations, we assume
 that V is publicly known.
                             Under certainty, it is
                                                      natural to assume that the
 value of the firm
                   grows at the rate R between dates 1 and
                                                               2, although this
 assumption is made only for convenience.
                                             Suppose that the firm's
                                                                       outstanding
 securities include b
                      convertible bonds and a shares
                                                        of stock, Without loss
of generality, we can
                       assume that the bond's call
                                                     price is equal to its face
value, K, and that the conversion
                                    ratio is 1. The value of the firm
                                                                          per
fully diluted share then is
                             V/(b+s), which is also the stock
                                                                  conversion value
of a bond.
                                              10

    At date 1, the firm decides whether to force conversion.               If it

proceeds, bondholders either convert to 1 share of stock or they take the

face value of their bond, K, in cash.          When all bondholders take cash, we say

that conversion fails; when all take stock we say that it succeeds (we shall

comment on intermediate cases).         If the firm decides not to force conversion,

then bondholders wait until date 2, when they collect KR in interest per bond

and also decide whether voluntarily to convert their bonds into shares or to

take cash.    Because of the positive yield advantage of bonds assumed in our

model, bondholders never convert voluntarily at date 1.

     To begin, we prove a simple version of the standard result, under the

assumption of zero notice period:


Proposition   I:    The firm wants to force conversion if      V   >   K(b+s).

       If the      firm forces conversion, each bondholder will take a share worth

V/(b+s) rather than cash worth K.         Each shareholder then also gets V/(b+s).

If the firm does not force conversion, then at date 2 bondholders collect KR

per bond, and then choose between K and (V(l+R)-bKR)/(b+s).               Under our

assumption,   it is easy to verify that they will take stock.             In this case,

the date 1 wealth of stockholders         if the firm does not force conversion is

given by V/(b+s)      -
                          bKR/((b+s)(l+Rfl.    In other words, if the firm does not

force conversion,         the value of each shareholder' claim is diluted by the

present value of interest payments per fully diluted share.               Hence the firm

clearly wants to force conversion.


Remark: In this discrete time framework,           the firm sometimes wants to force

conversion even if        V < K(b+s).In   this case, bondholders take K in cash,

conversion fails, but shareholders save all the interest.               This result is
                                           11

purely a consequence of the assumption that between dates 1 and 2, the amount

of interest payments is large and discrete.          If time is continuous, and the

bond is out of the money (i.e.      V <   K(b+s)),   it always pays to delay

conversion until V      K(b+s)   just as proved by Ingersoll (1977b) and Srennan

and Schwartz (1977).     In this paper, we only consider the puzzle of

in-the-money convertibles and hence Proposition 1 is all we need.

     The logic of Proposition I in our nodal is very simple, as has been

explained in the more general context by previous researchers.           With a

positive yield advantage for bonds, which certainly obtains when the stock is
not paying dividends, stockholders use forced conversions to deprive

bondholders   of the present value of their excess interest payments.          In this

world of the Modigliani-Miller     theorem, the total size of the pie to be

divided between bondholders and shareholders is fixed.          Forced conversion is

a redistributionof that pie toward shareholders relative to the no forced

conversion division.


3.   THE CASE OF COSTLY FAILED CONVERSION


      Suppose we now amend the model to allow for the possibility        of costly

failed conversion.     That is, when each bondholder chooses to take K in cash,

and the firm must dispense bK in cash to satisfy them, we assume the firm as

a whole incurs a cost C of failed conversion.         This Cost C may be significant

for the firm for a variety of reasons.

     First, capital regulations and other debt covenants may prohibit the

cash redemption of convertible bonds.       Banks, for example, are frequent

issuers of convertible bonds because convertible debt is included in the

capital computations made for regulatorypurposes.          A   failed conversion
                                        12

removes the debt from the capitalization, without replacing it with stock,

which may cause the bank to violate its capital requirements.      For the same

reason, failed conversions can cause firms to violate bond and loan covenants

associated with their other debt issues.

     Second, it may be expensive    and even impossible for firms with failed

conversions    to raise cash immediately for the redemption payment.    It is

important to recognize in this regard that the median convertible bond issue

is around 15% of the value of the firm's equity and that convertibles are

often issued by firms with modest credit ratings precisely because these

firms had difficulty issuing straight debt in the first place.

     The upshot is that the cost C of failed conversionneed not be small

relative to the firm's value V.     Conversion failure costs are analogous to

bankruptcy costs in that both arise from the firm's financial structure in

the world of imperfect capital markets.      Just as the Modigliani-Miller

theorem fails in the case of bankruptcy costs, so does Proposition 1 fail in

the case of failed conversion costs.     This is formalized in Proposition2.


Protosition 2: Suppose that K(b+s) < V < K(b+s) + C and that the notice

period is zero.    Then the forced conversion succeeds or fails as bondholders

expect it to succeed or to fail.


       Suppose that bondholders expect the conversion to succeed.       Then the

value of the share, V/(b+s) exceeds K, and they take shares.       As a result,

conversion succeeds.     Suppose instead that bondholders   expect the conversion
to fail.   Then each share they get is worth (V -   C)/(b+s)   which we assumed is

less than K.     In this case, each bondholder takes cash and conversion fails.
                                            13

Remark: There is also an equilibrium in which each bondholder            expects

conversion to succeed with probability f such that he is indifferent between

taking shares or cash (assuming risk-neutrality).         In this equilibrium, each

bondholder plays a mixed strategy of taking a share with probability f.              This

equilibrium,      however,   is unstable, since if one extra bondholder takes cash,

then everybody would strictly prefer taking cash and conversion fails.


        Proposition 2 implies that, even in the absence of the notice period,

if a firm      forces   conversion before its value net of fully diluted costs of

failure exceeds the call value of the bond,        then conversion might fail.       To

the extent that expectations are autonomous, either equilibrium can obtain in

this range.       On the other hand, still assuming the notice period to be zero,

if the forced conversion is delayed until        V — K(b+s)   + C, then the firm has

enough assets that conversion succeeds even if the bondholders expect it to
fail.       The bad equilibrium then no longer exists.

        A   firm's managers can try to force conversion of the firm's bonds when

the stock price P is in the range K < P < K +        C/(b+s),   in which case the

conversion might fail, or they can wait until the price P exceeds K +

C/(b+s),      in which case the conversionwill succeed.       The managers' decision

depends on the size of the yield advantage, on their estimates of the

probability that the bad equilibrium occurs, and on any additional costs that

they themselves face when conversion fails.         The more risk averse are the

managers,      the more they will dread the possibility of      a   failed conversion,

and the longer they will delay.         Plausibly, managers more so than

shareholders are the source of such risk-averse preference for delay, since

managers are the ones who have to deal with regulatory authorities, other

debt holders, or the capital market if conversion fails.
                                         14

        An assured success of forced conversion thus requires that the bond's

conversion value exceed its call price by some margin at the announcement

date.     With a zero notice period, this margin must at least equal the cost of

financial distress C/(b+s)    to eliminate the bad equilibrium.       With a discrete

notice period, the fundamental value of the firm could also fall for reasons

unrelated to the conversion, so an even larger margin may be necessary.

        The question then is whether the costs of failure, including the effects

of unrelated stock movements during the notice period, adequately account for

the observed delays and 44% conversion premia.         We think the answer is yes,

both because the costs of delayed conversion are relatively small, and

because the costs of financial distress can be nontrivial.          Regarding the

costs of delay, recall from the introduction        that for a typical firm they are

likely to be below 1% of the market value of equity,          It does not take a high

expected cost of a failed conversion to justify delay in these circumstances.

P.ut   it is also the case that the expected costs of a failed conversion are

not negligible,    especially in the presence of the notice period.

         First, even if the bond is called at a premium exceeding C/(b+s), the

stock price can fall during the notice period.         In this case, even if the

"bad' equilibrium does not exist at the stock price at which the bond is

called, it might still obtain if the stock price falls.          If the manager are

extremely averse to the possibility of a failed conversion, they will wait

until the stock price is well above     K   +   C/(b+s).   In this case, the cost of

financial    distress is only a lower bound on the conversion premium.

        Perhaps more importantly,   the stock price is likely to fall during the

notice period if there is adverse news about the firm or about the market as

a whole.     But these are precisely the times when credit markets are in
                                       15

disarray,   and the costs of financial distress are the highest       That is, the

cost C might unexpectedly rise precisely when the share price falls, making

the conversion more likely to fail.    The desire to avoid dealing with credit

markets precisely at the time when credit rationing might be most severe is,

of course, yet another reason to extend the delay.

     The importance of costs of financial distress in explaining other

patterns of corporate choice is a useful point of comparison.        These costs,

for example, are commonly used to explain why firms adopt low debt-equity

ratios despite the significant tax advantages   of leverage.     Firms maintain

excess debt capacity because they fear that adverse shocks will reduce their

ability to meet interest payments, even if current cash flows are compatible
with a much larger level of debt (Donaldson, 1969)   .   Moreover,   firms realize

that the costs of a failure to meet interest payments are the highest

precisely at the times when this failure is most likely.       Just as firms carry

only the debt they can service in almost all events, they delay the forced

conversion until certain that it will succeed in virtually every contingency.

Moreover,   unlike in the case of debt, where the cost of avoiding leverage can

be substantial, the cost of delaying a forced conversion is not very large.


4. The   Use of Investment Bankers When the Notice Period is Zero


     We next consider an alternative mechanism that allows firms to force

conversion efficiently and promptly.    The basic difficulty with forcing

conversion-when   the bond is just at-the-money is the dependence of the firm's

fundamental value on the outcome of the forced conversion.       Like bankruptcy

costs, the costs of a failed conversion create a dependence of value on

capital structure that is inconsistent with the Modigliani-Millertheorem.           -
                                            16

To solve this problem, the firm must separate its fundamental value from the

outcome of the forced conversion.

         This can be accomplished by an investment bank.     Under the standard

"standby' underwriting agreement,        the investment bank stands ready to buy

bonds from bondholders     at a price that just exceeds the call price of the

bond.      Bondholders who wish to obtain cash then tender to the investment bank

rather than to the firm.      The standard agreement further requires the

investment bank to convert all the bonds it buys into stock and to sell the

stock in the open market.      The investment bank will suffer a loss on bonds

tendered to it because rational bondholders tender for cash only when the

cash price of a bond exceeds its stock conversionvalue. The investment bank

is compensated for this risk by an upfront fee paid by the firm.         This

arrangement     essentially represents   a put option written by the investment

bank and sold to the firm.

         With such an agreement,   the firm never incurs the cost of a failed

conversion.      Even when the investment bank bears the costs, the value of the

firm is V regardless of the outcome of the forced conversion. Consequently,

if   V   is at least equal to K, bondholders take shares even if they expect

conversion to fail, and the failed conversion equilibrium disappears.           The

investment bank gives the firm access to a perfect capital market and so

eliminates the bad equilibrium.       The model thus explains why firms use

investment banks to intermediate forced conversions and to eliminate

inefficiencies     that arise from capital market imperfections.

         If we also assume that the investment bank writing the put option does

so at the arbitrage (i.e., Black-Scholes)        price of that option, we get the

further result that firms using underwriters should not delay a forced
                                        17

conversion.    Since the costs of a failed conversion are no longer relevant,

we are back to Ingersoll's (1977a) result that the bond should be called at-

the-money if the notice period is zero, or even earlier with a positive

notice period.    If the investment bank is risk neutral, or if it can mimic

the option it sells to the firm using other securities and thereby hedge the

risk, it will charge the competitive arbitrage price for this underwriting

contract.     The firm will buy the contract at that price, and call the

convertible bond as if the costs of financial distress were zero,    i.e.


slightly before it is at the money.     Without the notice period, the forced

conversion always succeeds, and so the conpecitive arbitrage price of the put

option and underwriting contract is zero.
     The analysis thus far explains why firms forcing conversion would choose

to use underwriters.     However, it also predicts that as long as investment

banks price these underwriting contracts at their arbitrage value, firms

should not delay conversion, with or without the notice period.     The puzzle

of delayed conversion therefore still remains to be solved.



5.   THE NOTICE PERIOD AND RISK AVERSE INVESTMENT BANKERS4


      Empirically,   the delays observed on bond calls underwrittenby

investmentbanks are as long as the delays observed when firms operate on

their own.     Investment banks are apparently unwilling to provide standby

agreements    unless the stock sells at a substantial premium; equivalently, the

banks would demand very high underwriting fees when the bond is at-the-money.


     4The discussion in this section is more tentative than in the previous
sections, and is based to some extent on interviews of investment bankers in
charge of underwriting calls of convertible bonds at Goldman Sachs and
Salomon Brothers.
                                          18

Faced with a price of the put option that is much above its competitive

arbitrage value, a firms using an investment bank delays the forced

conversion.     This, of course, only shifts the issue to why the investment

banks insist on delay or charge very high fees.     We now discuss why this

behavior of investment banks can be interpreted as a risk averse response to

various events that might occur during the thirty day notice period.

     With the thirty day notice period, the price of the underwriting

contract will reflect the chance that the firms fundamental value (and stock

price) per share falls below K, conversion fails, and the investment bank

suffers a loss from buying the bonds, converting them to stock, and selling

the stock at a relatively    low price.   The price of the stock can fall

significantly during the thirty day notice period if a) the market falls

sharply, b) the market revalues the stock for idiosyncratic       reasons not

related to bad news from the company, c) bad news comes from the company, or

d) the price is manipulated.      Investment banks do not seem to be concerned

with item c)--the company releasing bad news during the notice period--

because they claim that the due diligence process, used when underwriting a

forced conversion, is sufficiently thorough to preclude such developments

while the bank has a position in the stock.

     In contrast,    investment banks worry that the stock price will fall over

the notice period because the general market falls, the stock's industry

group falls, or the stock price is manipulated.      In principle, the risk of

general market, and even industry, movements can be largely hedged with

option and futures contracts.     One should remember, however,    that both the

Echelin and the IBM cases of a failed conversion occured subsequent to a

market crash.     We do not know if either Kidder Peabody or IBM was hedging the
                                          19

market risk, although Barron's (Dec. 14, 1987) account of IBM's losses

implies that 1MB   was   not.   In practice, hedging of market risk in

underwriting contracts seems much less common than one might have thought.

The failure of major investment banks to hedge the new issue of British

Petroleum stock that they held during October, 1987 and their resulting

losses in hundreds of millions of dollars is only the most dramatic example

of this anonomalous behavior.

     Like the general market risk, stock manipulations      could in principle

also be hedged if the bank could buy traded put options on the stock.

Underwriters could also hedge some of the risk by syndicating the forced

conversionwith other bankers, but the transaction costs of doing so

(including the cost of sharing a customer relationship)      are apparently high

relative to the cost of delayed conversion5      .   While stock price movements

during the notice period create serious risks for investmentbanks, a further

explanation is necessary to understand why these risks are not hedged.

     Imperfect market liquidity      is a primary factor in understanding the

behavior of investment banks.       If conversion fails, they have to sell an

often substantial fraction of the firm's shares on the open market.       If they

do so quickly, the sale exerts substantial pressure on the price of the

stock, as documented in a variety of economic studies (e.g., Shleifer (1986)

Harris and Gurel (1986)).       Imperfect liquidity also explains why investment

banks cannot hedge their risk in traded put options on the stock, since the




     5Syndication is practiced in new stock and bond issues, but the amounts
collected by investment banks in these transactions are much larger than the
amounts collected from underwriting forced conversion.  It might be much
cheaper for a firm to delay a forced conversion than to pay for the costs of
syndication.  Importantly, delay as a way to reduce the risk of failure is
not possible in the case of stock and bond issues.
                                      20

liquidity of these markets is inadequate for a demand of the magnitude

necessary to hedge a forced conversion.    Investment banks are also concerned

that the prospect of failed conversion can attract short sellers to the

stock, who drive its price down to ensure a failed conversion, while planning

to cover their position in the depressed market that results when the

underwriter liquidates its long position.6

     The magnitude of the price and liquidity risk for investment banks

during forced conversions is much greater than that faced even in such risky

activities as block trading, underwriting new issues, and distributing new

Treasury bond issues.   The dollar amounts at risk in most forced conversions

equal or exceed the amounts in all but the largest of these other

transactions.   And the duration of the risk of a forced conversion (30 days)

vastly exceeds that of these other activities.     In underwriting a new issue,

for example, investment banks line up investors ahead of time, Set the exact

price on the deal after the market closes on the desired day, and then try

hard to sell out the issue before the market opens the following day.

Investment banks are also allowed to carry out market stabilization

activities following a new issue, whereas these operations are prohibited

during the notice period of a forced conversion.

     These risks suggests why investment banks are unlikely to accept the

price and liquidity risks of a forced conversion as if they were risk

neutral.   First, investmentbanks have limited capital, so they are reluctant

to put a good part of it at risk in situations with no opportunities    for



     6
      Models of such price manipulation have not yet been developed,
although Kyle (1985) proves that manipulation is impossible for a simpler
model.
                                        21

hedging.     Second, investment banks might be unwilling to enter contracts

offering a small gain with high probability at the cost of a large loss with

low probability.      Third, clients observing the big loss will he unsure

whether the loss reflects bad luck, poor skill, or even fraud.

     Also,    if the low probability disaster does in fact happen, the bank will

have to incur a large cost of internal investigation into what went wrong.

Just like the outside observers,    the management of the bank will want to

determine whether the problem was luck, skill, or fraud.      Thus the costs of

dealing with such contracts    might make them not worth the trouble.   Finally,

what is a cost of internal investigstion to the bank might be a cost of a

ruined career to its employee who supervised the underwriting.      His integrity

and skill are now in doubt.     This suggests that even if the bank itself were

prepared to underwrite conversion at-the-money, its employees who have to

take responsibility    for the deal might be reluctant to do so.

     These informational problems explain the risk averse behavior of

investment banks.     As a result, the underwriting contracts will be priced

well above the arbitrage price of the put option.      And firms facing these

high underwriting fees will then rstionslly delay forcing conversion until

the bond is well in-the-money.

     This description of the behavior of investment bsnks completes our

argument for the delay of forced conversions.      Without an investmentbank,

firms must delay forced conversions or bear the risk of a self-fulfilling       bad

equilibrium in which conversion fsils.       With an investment bank, firms must

still provide a safety margin of in-the-money bond value because of the

banker's reluctance to bear the risk of price declines over the notice

period.    In either csse, forced conversions are delayed.    While empirical
                                        22

confirmation is, of course, still required to show that our explanation can

account for the observed delays, it is important to recall that in most cases

the delay is not very costly.     It is easy to believe therefore thay delaying

the call is cheaper than forcing conversion at-the-money and bearing the

expected costs of a failure or the underwriting fees.



6.   IMPLICATIONS



      Any reasonable theory of delayed conversion must be Consistent with the

Constantinides and Grundy (1986) hypothesis that the incentives for forcing

conversion are positively related to the yield advantage.      In our model,

actions to force conversion are considered only under the assumption of a

positive yield advantage,   so our results are intrinsically   consistent with
the yield advantage hypothesis.

      Our theory has the important advantage that it explains the use of

investment banks to underwrite some forced conversions.      It also implies that

the higher are the distress costs of failed conversion, the more likely the

firm is to hire an investment bank,     In particular, regulated firms are more

likely to use underwriters than unregulated firms, as are firms with a

variety of restrictive covenants on the disposition of their cash-flows,
These implications are not available with other theories.

     One of the important aspects of forced conversions    is Mikkelson's   (1981

and 1983) finding that share prices decline approximately 2% when convertible

bonds are called to force conversion.    Various interpretations   have been

provided for this result.   Mikkelson explains the decline in firm value by

the tax shield that is lost when the bond is called.      He recognizes, however,

that firms could readily replace the convertible bond with straight debt if
                                        23

they wished to regain the tax shield.

    Harris and Raviv (1985) interpret the share price decline as negative

information about future dividends.     The idea is that firms force conversion

only if they do not expect future dividends to exceed interest payments,

which other things equal is bad news for the stock.       Both Mikkelson and

Constantinidesand Crundy provide some evidence concerning this information

theory.     Mikkelson shows that share prices decline much less (and

insignificantly)    when convertible preferred shares, in contrast to

convertible bonds, are called to force conversion.       This favors his tax

shield explanation and appears contrary to the information theory.

Mikkelson's    results also show some recovery in the stock price during the 30

days that follow the announcement.     Constantinides   and Grundy report several

findings that bear on the information theory, some positive and some

negative.     They find no evidence that longer delays cause larger price

declines, contrary to an implication of the information theory.        They do find

evidence, however,    that firms increase dividends by a greater extent when

they delay forced conversion, consistent with the information theory.

    Since the positive yield advantage of bonds is an integral part of our

explanation, we are comfortable with the idea that the forced conversion

conveys bad news about future dividend increases.       However,   it seems much

less plausible that delays are actively used aa a signaling device, if for no

other reason than the difficulty of rationalizing       the concern of managers

with the current share price.     In a similar vein, it is much easier to accept

the view that dividend increases convey information about future earnings

than to believe that the reason dividends are paid is to signal.

     Share price declines are also consistent with price pressure on the
                                        24

stock that reflects the increase in supply from conversion.     Evidence for

downward sloping demand curves for individual stocks has been provided by

Shleifer (1986), Harris and Gurel (1986) and several other studies.

Consistent with this explanation, Constantinides and Grundy (1986) find that

the share price reaction is greater when the increase in the number of shares

from conversion is larger.     Since they also find that the forced conversion

is largely unanticipated,    the price pressure hypothesis is consistent with

price declines on the announcements of forced conversions,

     Share price declines might also be based on our financial distress

theory, although we have not extended our model to address this issue.

Suppose that when a bond is called, some shareholders believe that conversion

will succeed and some believe that it will fail.    Suppose also, although this

is hard to justify with completely rational agents, that shareholders ignore

the equilibriummarket price right after the bond is called and do not update

their priors about the success or failure of conversion.     Equilibriumprice
will then be a blend of valuations of those who expect conversion to succeed

and those who expect it to fail.    Hence the stock price might fall on the

announcement of the call to reflect the decline in value if conversion fails.

This theory, unlike other explanations of the price decline, makes the

prediction that the share price should recover when it becomes clear during

the notice period that the conversion will succeed.    Mikkelson's   data are

suggestive that this is the case.

     The decline of share prices on the announcement of the call is also

consistent with Jensen's (1986) free cash flow theory.     In so far as

conversion substitutes equity for debt, it enhances the freedom of managers

to dispose of corporate cash flows.    If managers waste some of the resources
                                        25

that they have not committed to pay Out, then the value of the firm will

decline when managers get more leeway.       The advantage of Jensen's theory is

that it explains a wide variety of other price reactions      to changes in the

capital structure   in terms of the same basic idea.

     The risk of failure explanation of delayed forced conversions has

several additional implications that remain to be tested.       It predicts that

firms with ample cash or with easy access to the capital markets will force

conversion promptly because their cost of failed conversion is small.       In

contrast,    firms with poor bond ratings or with other capital market on

regulatory costs of cash disbursements,      are likely to delay conversion much


longer.     The strongest predictionof the theory here is this positive

association between the distress cost of failed conversion and the conversion

premium.     The theory also predicts that companies with more volatile stocks

and with higher market betas will delay conversion further.       Other things

equal, the probability of failure is higher for these firms.



7.   CONCLUSIONS


      In this paper we have presented an explanation of delayed forced

conversion of convertible bonds that relies on the risk of failure.       Without

underwriters,    firms delay forced conversions to avoid a self-fulfilling

                                                          costs of financial
equilibrium in which conversion fails and they suffer the

distress.     Underwriters can eliminate the costs of financial distress, but

                                                                     of a
they, in turn, insist on a delay because they are averse to the risk

substantial share price decline that can result from either rapidly changing

market conditions or price manipulation.

      Our explanation of delayed forced conversion is properly placed within
                                         26

the large set of models that explain puzzles in corporate   finance on the

basis of bankruptcy costs or, more generally, costs of financial distress.

Corporate decisions on the debt-equity ratio are the premier case, but many

examples exist.   In all such cases, deadweight costs, in one form or another,

account for the observed deviations of behavior from that expected under

conditions of perfect capital markets.
                                       27

REFER.ENCES


Brennan, M. J., and E. S.    Schwartz, 1977, "Convertible Bonds: Valuation and
Optimal Strategies of Call   and Conversion," Journal of Finance 32, 1699-1-715.

Constantinides, G. M. and B. D. Grundy, November 1986, "Call and Conversion
of Convertible Corporate Bonds: Theory and Evidence," mimeo.

Cutler, D. and L. H. Summers, 1987, "The Costs of Conflict Resolution and
Financial Distress: Evidence from the Texaco - Pennzoil Litigation," working
paper, Harvard University.

Darn L. Y.  and W. H. Mikkelson, 1984, "Convertible Debt Issuance, Capital
Structure Changes and Financing-Related Information: Some New Evidence,"
Journal of Financial Economics, 13, 157-186.

Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig, 1983, "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance,     arid
Liquidity, Journal of Political Economy, 91, 401-419.

Donaldson, Cordon, 1969, Stratesy for Financial Mobility, Boston, Ma:
Division of Research, Harvard Business School.

Harris, Lawrence, and Eitan Gurel, "Price and Volume Effects Associated with
Changes in the S&P 500: New Evidence for the Existence of Price Pressure,"
Journal of Finance, 41, 815-830.

Harris, M. and A. Ravjv, 1985, "A Sequential Signalling Model of Convertible
Debt Call Policy" Journal of Finance, 40, 1263-1281.

Ingersoll, J. E., 1977a, "A Contingent-Claims Valuation of Convertible
Securities," Journal of Financial Economics 4, 289-322.

Ingersoll, J. E. , 1977b, "An Examination of Corporate Call Policies on
Convertible Securities," Journal of Finance 32, 463-478.

Jensen, Michael C., 1986, "The Agency Cost of Free Cash Flow, Corporate
Finance, and Takeovers," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
323-329.

Kyle, Albert S. , 1985, "Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading,"
Econometrica, 53.

Mikkelson, W. H., 1981, "Convertible Calls and Security Returns," Journal of
Financial Economics, 9, 237-264.

Mikkelson, W. H. , 1983, "Capital Structure Change and Decreases in
Stockholders' Wealth: A Cross-Sectional Study of Convertible Security Calls,"
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper Number 1137.

Miller, Merton, M., 1987, "The Modigliani-Miller   Propositions,"   forthcoming,
Journal of Economic Persoectives,
                                      28


Shleifer, Andrei, 1986,   Do Demand Curves for   Stocks Slope DoWn?." Journal of
Finance, 41, 579-590.

Warner, Jerold, B., 1977, "Bankruptcy Costs: Some Evidence,'   Journal of
Finance, 32, 337-347.
