NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PAYING FOR KIDNEYS? A RANDOMIZED SURVEY AND CHOICE EXPERIMENT
Julio J. Elias
Nicola Lacetera
Mario Macis
Working Paper 25581
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25581

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019
We are grateful to Roland Bénabou and three reviewers for their comments and guidance. We
benefited from conversations with Sandro Ambuehl, Lanier Benkard, Tom Buchmueller, Leo
Bursztyn, Jon de Quidt, Liran Einav, Christine Exley, Claudine Gartenberg, Martin Gaynor, Ori
Heffetz, Alessandro Iaria, Alex Imas, Jeffrey Kahn, Nancy Kass, Judd Kessler, Matt Mitchell,
Matt Osborne, Gerard Padro i Miquel, Devin Pope, Iyad Rahwan, Jim Rebitzer, Alejandro
Rodriguez, Al Roth, Heather Royer, Itai Sher, Stefanie Stantcheva, Cass Sunstein, and Justin
Sydnor, as well as from comments by attendees of presentations at several universities and
conferences. The study received ethics approval from the Research Ethics Board at the University
of Toronto (protocol 30238) and the Homewood Institutional Review Board at Johns Hopkins
University (protocol 00001991); the registration number at the American Economic Associationâ
€™s Registry for Randomized Controlled Trials is AEARCTR-0000732. We gratefully
acknowledge the financial support of the Johns Hopkins University “Catalyst Award,” a subgrant
from the research program “The Economics of Knowledge Contribution and
Distribution” (funded by the Sloan Foundation), a Research and Scholarly Fund grant
from the University of Toronto Mississauga, and the Dean’s Research Funds at Johns Hopkins
Carey Business School. Nicola Lacetera is thankful to the Center for Economic Studies in
Munich and the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance in Rome for their hospitality
during the writing of part of this paper. Gilda Assi and Daphné Baldassari provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Julio J. Elias, Nicola Lacetera, and Mario Macis. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Paying for Kidneys? A Randomized Survey and Choice Experiment
Julio J. Elias, Nicola Lacetera, and Mario Macis
NBER Working Paper No. 25581
February 2019
JEL No. D01,D47,D63,D64,I11
ABSTRACT
Legislation and public policies are often the result of competition and compromise between
different views and interests. In several cases, strongly held moral beliefs voiced by societal
groups lead lawmakers to prohibit certain transactions or to prevent them from occurring through
markets. However, there is limited evidence about the specific nature of the general population’s
opposition to using prices in such contentious transactions. We conducted a randomized survey
with 2,666 American residents to study preferences for legalizing payments to kidney donors. We
found strong polarization, with many participants supporting or opposing payments regardless of
potential transplant gains. However, about 18 percent of respondents would switch to favoring
payments for sufficiently large increases in transplants. Preferences for compensation have strong
moral foundations; participants especially reject direct payments by patients, which they find
would violate principles of fairness. We corroborate the interpretation of our findings with a
choice experiment of a costly decision to donate money to a foundation that supports donor
compensation.
Julio J. Elias
Universidad del CEMA
Av. Córdoba 374
(C1054AAP) Ciudad de Buenos Aires
Argentina
je49@cema.edu.ar
Nicola Lacetera
University of Toronto
Institute for Management and Innovation
3359 Mississauga Road, Room KN 235
Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6
CANADA
and NBER
nicola.lacetera@utoronto.ca

Mario Macis
Johns Hopkins University
Carey Business School
100 International Drive, Office 1333
Baltimore, MD 21202
and IZA
and also NBER
mmacis@jhu.edu

A data appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25581
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/732/history/7482

“We need to understand better and engage more with the phenomenon of ‘repugnant transactions,’ which
often serves as an important constraint on markets. As economists, we have to understand folk ideas about
what we can do in the market better than we do. They’re a big issue. And that’s not to say that economists
are the ones who are necessarily right.” Alvin Roth (in Lagace 2007).

1. Introduction
In 2018, more than 58,000 patients in the United States were added to the transplant waiting list; yet,
only about 37,000 transplants were performed that year. Currently, about 95,000 patients are waiting
for a kidney, the most commonly transplanted organ (UNOS 2018). The average wait is around 4.5
years while receiving dialysis, and several thousands people die each year because they cannot find
a donor. Recent estimates indicate that the kidney shortage has an economic cost of approximately
$3 billion annually.1 There are many discussions in policy and academic circles about how to
increase organ donations and transplants. In particular, there have been debates in the past few years
about legalizing kidney donor compensation, which is currently illegal virtually everywhere (Becker
and Elías 2007; Held-McCormick et al. 2016; Satel 2006).2
Ethical concerns regarding the exploitation of participants, coercion, undue influence, and unfair
allocation of organs are often indicated as main determinants of the opposition to paying donors.3 A
further worry is that compensation would violate human dignity and other sacred values.4 According
to Spital et al. (2002), for example, payments are “ethically unacceptable […] despite the
purported benefits of such a sale for both the buyer and the seller,” and “fundamental truths of
our society, life and liberty, should not have monetary price.” These words characterize organ
donor payments as “repugnant transactions,” i.e., exchanges in which the parties want to engage but
which third parties think should not be allowed (Roth 2007).
We designed a randomized survey and choice experiment to provide, to our knowledge, the first
investigation into the nature of preferences of Americans toward paying organ donors. First, we
explore the nature of these preferences and document their heterogeneity; in particular, we ask
1

This figure includes only direct monetary savings, whose estimate is of $150,000-$200,000 (mainly covered by Medicare)
per patient. The total economic benefits of a kidney transplant reach over $1 million per recipient if one adds the value of
increased life expectancy and quality for the organ recipients (Held-McCormick et al. 2016).
2
Remuneration is illegal in all countries except in the Islamic Republic of Iran. In the United States, the 1984 National
Organ Transplant Act (NOTA) prohibited the transfer of human organs for “valuable consideration,” punishing violators
with fines and prison time. Certain countries have introduced or are considering some types of incentives and mechanisms
to enhance donations, such as allocation priority, kidney exchanges, and symbolic awards (Kessler and Roth 2012; Leider
and Roth 2010; Niederle and Roth 2014; Roth et al. 2004; Stoler et al. 2016).
3
See Basu (2007); Halpern et al. (2010); Kerstein (2009); Radin (1996); Rippon (2012); Satz (2010). Ambuehl (2018)
and Ambuehl et al. (2015) provide experimental evidence of whether remuneration leads to undue influence.
4
See Council of Europe (2015); Delmonico et al. (2002); Grant (2011); Sandel (2012); WHO (2004).
2

whether attitudes toward paying donors are influenced by the increase in transplants such a system
may generate, or whether instead they reflect deontological views or sacred values that are
unaffected by considerations about kidney supply gains. Second, we assess how preferences depend
on different institutional features according to which paid-donor systems may be organized. Finally,
we explore the moral foundations of preferences for paid-donor systems. We then draw implications
for policy and institutional design based on our findings.
Our sample consisted of 2,666 American residents recruited online through a survey firm. It was
constructed to match the US population on sex, age, race, and education, and was fairly
representative also on other socio-demographics. Our design included two main sources of
experimental variation. First, we randomly assigned each respondent to one hypothetical paid-donor
kidney procurement and allocation system, and asked them to consider it as an alternative to the
current system. The features that characterized a system were the nature of compensation (cash or
noncash), the amount of the payment ($30,000 or $100,000), and the identity of the payer (a public
agency or the organ recipient). Each individual made multiple binary choices to indicate whether
they would support the proposed system or if they would prefer to keep the current one, under five
hypothesized increases in the number of transplants generated by the paid-donor system. This
combination of between- and within-subject variation allowed us to characterize respondents’
preferences toward transplant effects (number of kidneys procured) on the one hand, and institutional
features of paid-donor procurement and allocation systems on the other hand.
The second source of variation is that we randomly assigned half of the participants within each
system to express their moral judgments about both the current system and the paid-donor system at
each hypothesized supply level. We considered six principles: autonomy of choice, undue influence,
exploitation of the donor, fairness to the donor, fairness to the patient, and human dignity. In addition
to allowing us to assess whether attitudes toward supply effects and design features of paid-donor
systems have moral roots and which principles are more relevant, the random assignment of the
morality assessment module meant we could also determine to what extent making ethical issues
salient affects support for paying donors.
We find that on average across all conditions, 57 percent of respondents would support a paiddonor system in case of no transplant gains, and about 70 percent would favor compensation when
the system is assumed to satisfy 100 percent of demand. The relationship between rate of support and
transplant increases is roughly linear, with a 10 percentage-point hypothesized increase in transplants
leading to a 2-3 percentage point increase in support for compensating donors (similar across the
3

different systems). The level of support, however, varies significantly depending on the payer’s
identity. Systems with payments from organ recipients receive support that is about 15 percentage
points lower than systems where payment is from a public agency, at all levels of supply. In other
words, although most respondents are in favor of donors being paid, there is strong opposition to
patients paying. The nature and amount of compensation did not have an effect on support for
compensating donors.
These aggregate responses are the results of wide heterogeneity in preferences. In particular,
there is strong polarization, with about 21 percent of respondents opposing payment to donors
regardless of its effects on transplants, and 46 percent in favor of paid-donor systems at all supply
gains. About 18 percent of participants, however, display tradeoff-sensitive attitudes, going from
opposing to favoring payments if supply gains are sufficiently large.
Moral judgments vary widely in the population and correlate strongly with attitudes toward using
prices in this context. A regression specification with the systems’ features, hypothesized transplant
gains, and sociodemographic variables on the right-hand side accounted for 5 percent of the variance
in support for paying donors; this proportion rose to 30 percent when we included respondents’
morality judgments. The identity of the payer and the type of payments particularly affected moral
considerations, with payments by the organ recipient and in cash raising higher concerns than
payments by a public agency and noncash compensation, respectively; the payment amount did not
affect moral concerns. Respondents were especially worried about the fairness of the organ
allocation; this was the main reason for opposition to systems with payments by the organ recipient.
The patterns of support for paid-donor systems were similar among respondents with and without the
morality assessment module. Although we cannot exclude that other manipulations of salience (e.g.,
emotional appeals) may influence responses, this finding allays the concern that prompting
respondents to think about morality would make those issues artificially salient.
Attitudes toward payments for kidney donors correlate with broader ethical views that we
obtained using Graham et al. (2011)’s “moral foundations” assessment tools; individuals with more
deontological beliefs are more likely to oppose payments regardless of transplant gains, whereas
those who place high importance on consequentialist or utilitarian values are more likely to support
legalization of payments.
Finally, we strengthened the findings and their interpretation by adding an incentivized choice
module to the survey. We gave the respondents the opportunity to gain (or incur a cost) from having
the researchers donate (or not) money to a foundation that supports expanding allowable payments to
4

organ donors. Participants who opposed payments regardless of transplant gains in the statedpreferences survey were substantially less likely to donate to the pro-compensation foundation than
other respondents (21.4 percent vs. 42.9 percent, respectively), thereby showing a willingness to
sacrifice monetary gain in order to express their opposition. Moreover, respondents who did not
agree to donate to the pro-compensation foundation had stronger moral concerns toward paying
donors in the stated preference survey than those who agreed to donate. We found opposite patterns
of donations and concerns among those who donated to the anti-payment foundation.
Our study contributes to several literatures in economics. In recent years, numerous studies have
focused on how fairness concerns, identity, religious beliefs, political ideology, dignity, and social
status influence utility and decisions.5 Calls for economists to consider ethical forces as guiding
decisions have a long history (Smith 1822; Marshall 1890; Sen 1999). Shleifer (2004) discusses the
effect of market forces on the diffusion of certain morally censurable behaviors; Bartling and
Özdemir (2017), Bartling et al. (2015), Falk and Szech (2013, 2017) and Sutter et al. (2016) study
whether market interactions erode morals or social responsibility. Evidence on whether individuals
perceive trade-offs between moral beliefs and supply considerations in the case of repugnant
transactions is, however, virtually nonexistent.
Other studies analyze whether economic returns affect an individual’s decision to adopt a
morally unacceptable behavior, such as lying or cheating on school tests.6 These investigations focus
on activities that are (plausibly) universally considered morally wrong, are illegal everywhere, and
for which legalization is not considered a policy option. Our interest is in transactions that are
morally contentious but that can be (and indeed often are) contemplated as actual policies. Moreover,
we focus on individuals’ attitudes toward activities that others (not necessarily they themselves)
undertake. This is, in principle, a decision process that differs from choosing between an illegal or
universally unethical act and a private economic or social gain. Many other morally controversial
transactions have features similar to payments for organ donors; examples include gestational
surrogacy, prostitution, abortion, eating meat from certain types of animals, and so on. Some of these
activities are legal in certain countries but not in others, and opinions about their morality vary
widely (Healy and Krawiec 2017; Satz 2010).
5

See e.g., Akerlof and Kranton (2000); Bénabou and Tirole (2009, 2011); Bénabou et al. (2015); Bénabou et al. ( 2018);
Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball and Rees-Jones (2012); Benjamin, Choi and Fisher (2016); Bursztyn, Callen, Ferman, Gulzar,
Hasanain and Yuchtman (2015); Kuziemko, Norton, Saez and Stantcheva (2015).
6
Among studies of preferences for truthfulness and economic incentives, see e.g., Gibson, Tanner and Wagner (2013) and
Gneezy (2005). Jacob and Levitt (2003) and Martinelli et al. (2018) show that monetary rewards induce teachers and
students to cheat on tests.
5

Finally, some of the concepts that influenced our research design come from outside of
economics, in particular from studies in moral foundation theory and experimental ethics.7 We see
great value in connecting disciplines to enhance our understanding of the ethical constraints to
economic transactions.
Section 2 outlines the simple framework that guided our empirical investigation. Section 3
describes the research design and the subject pool. We describe our findings in Section 4 and discuss
their implications for scholarship and policy in Section 5.

2. Motivating Framework
We describe a basic framework that guided our design of the choice experiment. Consider an
individual who evaluates an alternative way for society to organize the procurement and allocation
of kidneys for transplantation, and compares her utility from such a policy to the utility she receives
from the current system. The individual’s utility depends on the number of transplants that the
alternative system would generate, and on the institutional details that characterize the transaction.
Setting the utility from the current system to zero, and assuming the benefit that an individual “voter”
i derives from an alternative procurement and allocation system s to have a linear form, we have
Π

..

represents the change in the number of transplants with respect to the current

system, and Π represents the utility derived from the characteristics that define the procurement
and allocation rules of a particular system as they differ from those of the current one. An individual
supports the introduction of an alternative system s with system features Π and an expected kidney
supply change

if

The coefficient

0.
(possibly individual- and system-specific) indicates how utility responds to

increases in supply, and Π represents the reaction to specific characteristics of a system (regardless
of transplant effects) relative to the current one. The agent will choose the alternative system
regardless of the size of the system’s supply effects if both Π and
individual reacts positively to transplant increases, but Π

are positive. If, instead, the

0, then she will oppose the alternative

system regardless of the transplant gains if the absolute value of Π

is large enough (indicating

strong opposition to the institutional features of the alternative system); for moderate aversion to the
design aspects of the alternative system (lower absolute values of Π

7

, there will be a level T1 of

See e.g., Birnbacher (1999); Bonnefon, Shariff and Rahwan (2016); Doris and Stich (2005); Graham et al. (2013); Grant
(2011); Haidt (2007); Knobe et al. (2012); Molewijk et al. (2004); Tanner, Medin and Iliev (2008); Tetlock et al. (2000).
6

within the range of feasible increases that will make the voter support the alternative system for
. An individual with Π

0 and

0 (e.g., because her disutility increases if more and

more individuals engage in what she considers an undesirable transaction), would always oppose the
0 may have a preference for the system features of

alternative system. Yet other agents with
the alternative system (Π

0), in which case they may support the system up to an increase in

supply of T2 but oppose it for any

.

The next section provides the details of our randomized survey and choice experiment. We
designed them to investigate the impact of system features (Π

and organ supply effects (

, and

we explore whether respondents’ different reactions to the systems’ features and transplant outcomes
have roots in moral values.

3. Research Design and Subject Pool
3.1 Experimental design
We designed a randomized survey and an incentivized choice experiment, and administered them
online through a survey firm (Qualtrics) to a sample of 2,666 adult American respondents. The
survey ran from November 15 to December 7, 2017.8 Figure 1 outlines the flow of the experiment.
After informing participants that we would collect their (anonymous) opinions regarding
alternative kidney procurement and distribution systems, we provided a description of several
aspects related to the procurement and allocation of kidneys in the United States. The description
outlined the nature of kidney failure; various types of kidney donations (i.e., deceased and living,
directed and undirected donors); the living kidney donation process (including information regarding
the surgery and the associated risks for and recovery of the donor); and the features of the current
procurement and distribution system, including the size of the kidney shortage and the prohibition
of compensation to donors by the 1984 National Organ Transplant Act (NOTA). This part of the
survey was somewhat lengthy, but we wanted to ensure all participants had the same initial
information about the topic. Giving details about the context of interest is frequent and in fact
encouraged in contingent valuation studies—for example, in the valuation of natural resources—to
enhance the reliability of respondents’ expression of willingness to pay in the absence of market
information (Carson 2012).
8

Survey materials (including texts and snapshots from the actual survey) are in the Appendix. The survey itself is available
at this web address: https://jhubusiness.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_1NypHI8IT20GYap
7

3.1.1 Assignment to different alternative kidney procurement and allocation systems
We then randomly assigned participants to one of eight alternative procurement and allocation
systems. Each system included compensation to donors and was a combination of the following
attributes (Table 1 summarizes the features of each system):
(1) Nature of the payment: cash or noncash. In the cash systems, donors would receive a deposit to
their bank account, whereas in the noncash systems, donors could choose between “tax credits,
tuition vouchers, loan repayment, or contributions to a tax-free retirement account.”
(2) Identity of the payer: the organ recipient or a public agency. In the “public agency pays” systems,
donors would receive compensation from an agency coordinated by the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, and kidney allocation would follow priority rules based on medical urgency,
blood and tissue match with the donor, time on the waiting list, age, and distance to the donor. In the
“recipient pays” systems, donors would receive compensation directly from the recipient; we
specified that a public agency, coordinated by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
would regulate and oversee the process.
(3) Size of the payment: $30,000 or $100,000.
The variation in the identity of the payer allows the determination of whether respondents object
to payments per se, or if their aversion depends on who is paying and the resulting distributional
consequences. Payments may be more ethically acceptable if they are not in the form of direct cash.
Noncash forms of compensation could lessen the concern that vulnerable individuals might be
induced to give away their kidney because they are in urgent need of cash (Satel 2006). However,
in its strong form, opposition to payments appeals to deeper reasons (e.g., violation of human
dignity) that make any form of payments unacceptable, irrespective of regulation, public
intervention, and type of payment (Delmonico et al. 2002; Sandel 2012). Our design also allows
discerning whether attitudes towards payments depend on the amount of compensation. One could
argue that concerns such as exploitation of the participants would be less relevant if donors received
a relatively large sum. Conversely, substantial sums may increase worries about undue influence
(Ambuehl et al. 2015). We chose the amount of $30,000 because it is in the middle of various
proposals about payments. Becker and Elías (2007), for example, determine that payments between
$15,000 and $30,000 ($18,000 – $36,000 in 2018 dollars) would eliminate the waitlist within a few
years and, more recently, Held-McCormick et al. (2016) consider a payment of $45,000. The larger

8

amount, $100,000, is purposely out of the considered range on the high end, but still within the range
of cost-effective amounts (Held-McCormick et al. 2016).
3.1.2 Transplant increases and support for alternative systems
After describing the alternative organ procurement system assigned to each respondent, we asked
them to indicate whether they would support the proposed system or prefer to keep the current one.
We did so under five scenarios, where each scenario asked the respondent to assume that the
alternative system would result in a certain number of kidney transplants per year (and the
corresponding fraction of the annual demand for kidneys), ranging from 19,000 (roughly the number
of kidney transplants currently performed in the United States, or about 50 percent of the annual
demand)9 to 38,000 (corresponding to roughly 100 percent of the annual demand, according to
estimates from Held-McCormick et al. 2016). For each of the five choices, which we presented in
ascending order in separate pages, we provided a table summarizing the characteristics of the
alternative system, together with the features of the current system. We asked respondents to
consider each of the five scenarios separately; that is, to take each level as the best available estimate
of the number of kidney transplants performed annually. Choices were thus binary “referenda”
between the alternative and current system (Vossler et al. 2012). This within-subject component of
the design lets us better characterize each individual’s preferences.
3.1.3 Moral views about procurement and allocation systems
Within each system, we further randomized participants (with 50 percent probability) to a module
where we asked them to report their assessment of whether the system (1) benefits or exploits the
donors, (2) respects or limits individual autonomy, (3) allows individuals to make fully informed
choices or exerts undue influence, (4) is fair or unfair to the patients, (5) is fair or unfair to the donors,
and (6) whether it promotes or violates human dignity. In selecting these principles, we followed the
literature in philosophy and bioethics.10 Respondents could choose any integer number on a slider
in the [-10, +10] interval. To guide interpretation of the different numbers, we added seven verbal
expressions above the sliders; we wrote, for example, “very unfair to donors” above the -10 mark,

9

According to UNOS, 17,878 kidney transplants were performed in 2015; 19,060 in 2016; and 19,851 in 2017. See
https://unos.org/data/transplant-trends/.
10
See Council of Europe (2015); Nuffield Council on Bioethics (1995); Radin (1996); Satz (2010); United States Task
Force on Organ Transplantation (1986); WHO (2004).
9

“neutral” above the 0 mark, and “very fair to donors” over the +10 mark (screenshots of the questions
are in the Appendix).
Participants provided their morality assessments prior to expressing support for the alternative
system in each of the five kidney supply scenarios. We therefore can test whether the morality
valuations are purely assessments of the institutional features of a system, or whether also the
hypothesized transplant increases influenced the respondents’ morality judgments. Before showing
the subjects their assigned alternative system, we also asked those in the “morality assessment”
subgroups to evaluate the current organ procurement and distribution system on the same six features
and with the same scale. This gave us a reference set of assessments that would allow us to construct,
for each individual, morality valuations of the alternative system relative to the current one. This
part of the survey permitted us to determine to what extent ethical considerations explain participant
support for the alternative systems. Moreover, including these questions only for a subset of
respondents lets us assess whether making ethical issues more salient affects support for paid-donor
systems or responses to supply gains.
3.1.4 Quality of responses
Because the law does not currently allow the policy options we consider, one cannot run an actualchoice experiment. We adopted several strategies to enhance the reliability of responses to the
hypothetical scenarios we considered as well as the ensuing quality of our data.11
At the beginning of the survey, we asked respondents to commit to provide truthful answers.
Prior research has shown that even simple prompts or soft commitments help to motivate participants
to give complete and accurate responses (Cibelli 2017). We then introduced modules that would
increase the perceived consequentiality of answers, measured whether participants perceived the
topics of the survey as important, and collected their beliefs on whether their responses should or
would have some impact on policy. Finally, we added an incentivized choice experiment. We
describe these modules below.
Consequentiality. One critique of hypothetical surveys is that the opinions participants express
might not represent their true preferences. To increase the perceived consequentiality of our survey,
before prompting respondents to make their choices, we told them that we would send a letter to US
11

For other studies that rely on hypothetical scenarios, see for example Benjamin et al. (2014) on the analysis of subjective
well-being and the relationship between happiness and choice; Kuziemko et al. (2015) on preferences for
redistribution; Andreoni and Sprenger (2012) on time and risk preferences; and Kessler and Roth (2014) on priority
rules and organ donor registration.
10

congressional representatives and the secretary of health and human services reporting the
distribution of the study respondents’ preferences, and showed them an example of such a letter (see
Section A of the Appendix).12 We then included questions to gather information about the key
requirements that the literature on contingent valuation identifies to assess respondents’ perceived
consequentiality in hypothetical surveys (e.g., Carson and Groves 2007; Vossler et al. 2012): first,
individuals should regard the topic as important; second, respondents should perceive their responses
as having a potential effect on actual policy choices.
Immediately following the set of five Yes-No choices regarding the alternative organ
procurement system, we asked respondents to rate how strongly they felt about the choices they had
just made. They could choose one of four answers: “very confident” (about my answers), “somewhat
confident,” “somewhat unsure,” or “very unsure.” Then, to measure the extent to which participants
cared about the topic and perceived their answers to have some chance of influencing policy, we
asked them whether they believed that public authorities should take their answers into
consideration, and whether they believed the authorities would take their answers into consideration
(we randomized the order of these two questions). For these questions, the answers from which to
choose were: “not at all,” “very little,” “little,” “somewhat,” and “very much.” Finally, we asked
respondents to express their beliefs about the probability that Congress would pass legislation
allowing various types of organ donor compensation. Taken together, these elements of our survey
provide complementary ways to assess whether respondents considered the topic policy relevant,
and whether they expected that the survey could have some impact on policy. We also assessed
whether these beliefs affected the results of our analyses.
Social influence. To assess whether participants were concerned about other people’s opinions,
we asked if their choices were affected by considerations about how others might be choosing. We
also asked them what share of people in the United States they believed would favor various types
of compensation to organ donors.13 We used the responses to these questions to determine whether
participants’ responses were affected by the perceived popularity of payments to organ donors in the
general population.

12

Kuziemko et al. (2015) included respondents’ willingness to send a letter to their congresspersons as an outcome
variable in their study of attitudes toward redistribution.
13
We included cash payments, reimbursement of lost wages and other expenses related to the donation process, health
insurance for organ donors, and tax credits. Details are in the Appendix.
11

3.1.5 A donation experiment
We also added an incentivized choice experiment to gauge revealed preferences for compensating
organ donors. We offered all participants an extra $1 if they authorized us to make a $1 donation on
their behalf to a foundation that supports the expansion of allowable forms of organ donor
compensation. This gave respondents the opportunity to benefit financially from allowing us to
donate to a pro-compensation organization or, conversely, to express a costly message of opposition
to organ donor payments if they chose not to authorize us to make the donation. This module thus
introduces an element of incentive compatibility that we do not have in the hypothetical survey.14
We study the consistency between stated preferences and donation behavior in two ways. First, we
test whether the costly donation choices are consistent with respondents’ stated support for paying
donors in our survey experiment. Second, we assess the correlation between the donation choice and
the moral views respondents expressed in the survey. Following Bursztyn et al. (2017), we told
participants they would be randomly assigned to one of two different organizations—one that
favored payments to organ donors and one that opposed such payments; doing so ensured that
participants would not make inferences about the researchers’ preferences.15
3.1.6 Moral foundations
The survey included a module that obtained information on participants’ moral foundations. We
used questions from Graham et al. (2011) to measure the importance each respondent placed on such
values as equality, freedom, spirituality, justice, tradition, approval by others, compassion, giving,
pleasure, purity, and pragmatism, and to assess whether a respondent held deontological or
consequentialist preferences.16 This information allows us to explore any correlation between
participants’ choices in our survey and their general moral views.
3.1.7 Socio-demographics
The final part of the survey included sociodemographic questions (gender, age, income, education,
religious beliefs, political orientation on social and economic matters, relationship status, and if the

14
Whereas the donation to a foundation allowed us to obtain an incentive-compatible indicator of participants’ attitudes
toward organ donor compensation, we could not use it to measure their attitudes toward specific features of possible organ
donor compensation systems or whether and how their preferences depended on supply gains.
15
Again following Bursztyn et al. (2017), to maximize statistical power we assigned respondents to the pro-compensation
organization (the American Transplant Foundation) with 80 percent probability, and to the organization opposing
payments (the National Kidney Foundation) with 20 percent probability.
16
We obtained the questions at this website: http://www.yourmorals.org/. Details are in Section A of the Appendix.

12

respondents had children) as well as questions on whether the respondents made donations or
volunteered in the recent past, had had a blood transfusion or knew anyone who did, had had an
organ transplant, were waiting for a transplant, or knew anyone in those conditions.

3.2 Subject pool
3.2.1 Socio-demographic characteristics of the respondents
Column 1 of Table 2 below shows characteristics of the 2,666 survey participants. The survey firm
constructed the sample to match the composition of the adult US population by gender, age,
education, and ethnicity. The statistics in column 2 confirm that we achieved this goal; other features
of the respondents (including marital status, employment, and income) are also fairly similar to those
of the US population.17
3.2.2 Perceived consequentiality and confidence in one’s responses
The vast majority of participants had a perception of consequentiality of their responses. About 80
percent said policymakers should “somewhat” or “very much” take their responses into account;
only 3.3 percent said policymakers should not. Moreover, only about 13 percent stated that there
was no chance that policymakers would consider their answers, and only between 3 percent and 4.2
percent attributed zero probability to the event that Congress would legalize some form of
compensation to donors. Furthermore, 55.6 percent of respondents declared themselves “very
confident” while 37.9 percent were “somewhat confident” about their answers.

4. Findings
4.1 The effect of kidney transplant gains and system characteristics on support for
compensating donors
Figure 2 shows that the aggregate support for a paid-donor system increases with the level of
assumed gains in transplants, in a roughly linear fashion and with a similar slope for all eight
17

Table B1 in the Appendix reports estimates of regressions of binary indicators for a set of individual socioeconomic
characteristics (gender, education, income, religion, volunteering, economic views, social policy views, and personal
knowledge of someone who had a transplant) on binary indicators of the 16 experimental conditions. Of the 160 estimated
coefficients, 5 are statistically significant at the 5 percent level, and 6 at the 10 percent level. The R-squared is smaller
than 0.01 in all cases. The p-value of one F test is 0.1 and another one is 0.06, whereas the others are far from values of
conventional statistical significance.
13

systems.18 The level of support at each transplant gain, however, differs between systems. In
particular, systems where a public agency compensates donors received significantly more
acceptance than systems where the patient pays. Pooled together, systems with compensation from
a public agency received support by 64 percent of respondents even for no transplant gains over the
current system, and by 77 percent when the system was hypothesized to satisfy 100 percent of annual
demand. Systems with payments from recipients, instead, went from support of 49 percent for no
transplant gains to 63 percent at the highest gain.
Table 3 reports estimates from linear regression models. The outcome variable is an indicator
equal to 100 if a respondent selected their assigned alternative system at a given transplant gain, and
0 otherwise; the right-hand-side variables include transplant gains, expressed in points over the
current number of transplants per year,19 and indicators for each system in some specifications, or
binary indicators for the three key features of each system: the level of payment (1 for $100,000, 0
for $30,000), the type of payment (1 for cash, 0 for noncash), and the identity of the payer (1 for
private payments from the recipient, 0 for payments from a public agency). We also added
interactions between these indicators and the measure of supply increases, and, in some
specifications, control variables for sociodemographic characteristics of respondents.20
The estimates confirm that both system features and transplant effects have an impact on support
for paid-donor systems. On average, a 10 percentage point increase in transplants leads to a 2.6
percentage-point increase in support for a paid-donor system (columns 1 and 2). Systems with
patient payments receive a support that is about 15-16 percentage points lower than systems with
payments by a public agency. Thus, the effect of payer identity on the support for a system
corresponds to the effect of about a 15/.26 57 percentage-point increase in transplants.21 The type
18

Because each respondent made multiple choices at each transplant level reported in ascending order, a possible concern
is that the overall relationship between support rates and transplant gains may be due to some form of “coherent
arbitrariness” (Ariely et al. 2003) rather than an independent response to each transplant-gain scenario. Attempts to create
coherence across choices, instead of considering them independently, may lead to an overall slope that is greater or smaller
than a case where individuals considered the five scenarios as fully independent. To address this concern, we ran an
auxiliary survey on Amazon mTurk with a “between subjects” design whereby each respondent expressed their support
or opposition at only one of the five kidney supply scenarios. The average transplant gains-support relationship is very
similar to the one we found in our main experiment. We describe this exercise in Appendix C1.
19
We chose this specification because the relationship between support and supply level that informs the raw data (see
Figure 2) is roughly linear. Regressions with binary indicators for different supply levels provided very similar results
(see Table B3 in the Appendix).
20
The addition of control variables to the regressions does not meaningfully affect any of the coefficient estimates of
main interest. Note also that the coefficient estimate on the transplant gain variable would be the same with or without
the introduction of individual fixed effects, because each individual was faced with the same set of five supply gains.
21
In the survey, the description of systems with payments by the recipient did not articulate the allocation rules in case of
imbalances between demand and supply, which may emerge because we assumed regulated prices. We did not clearly
14

and amount of payments, in contrast, have small and statistically insignificant effects on support.
Finally, the systems’ features do not affect the marginal response to supply increases (the coefficient
estimates on the interaction terms are not statistically significant); thus, the parameter ϱ from the
framework in Section 2 does not appear to be system specific, making our simplified model with
separate terms a plausible approximation.
4.2 Heterogeneous responses to transplant increases: “types” of respondents
Figure 2 suggests a further pattern in the data. A sizable share of respondents expressed preference
for a paid-donor system over the current one even when the alternative system would hypothetically
yield no gains in the number of transplants. Moreover, between 20 percent and 40 percent of the
respondents (depending on the specific system) supported the current no-payment system even when
the hypothesized supply gains from the paid-donor system would cover the entire annual need for
transplants. These findings are consistent with the presence of individuals with very different
preferences, including some with strong opposition to payments regardless of the transplant effects,
and others who, in contrast, supported compensation irrespective of any effects on transplants. The
overall positive response to transplant effects derives from individuals who responded to
hypothetical transplant gains by changing their position in favor or against donor compensation.
Overall, we characterize five distinct “types” among the respondents (Figure 3A). About 21 percent
of participants expressed opposition to the paid-donor systems regardless of the hypothesized
increase in transplants that the systems would yield (we refer to this group as “always opposed”).
Conversely, 46 percent favored compensating donors at all transplant levels, including the case with
no gains over the current system (“always in favor”).22 About 18 percent of participants expressed
opposition to payments in case of zero gains in transplants, but switched at some higher supply gains
(“from opposed to in favor”). In contrast, a small subset of 4.5 percent of respondents showed the
opposite pattern in their choices, supporting payments for no or small supply increases, but

define the allocation details in the “recipient pays” systems in order to limit the possibility of confusion for respondents.
In an ancillary survey on Amazon mTurk, we tested a different version of the “recipient pays” systems, with some details
about the allocation rule. If anything, the support for the patient-pays system with details on the allocation system was a
little lower than for the version described in the main survey. We interpret the results of this additional auxiliary survey
(described in Appendix C2) as corroborating our interpretation that the identity of the payer is a major determinant of the
support for a given procurement and allocation system.
22
The absence of a relationship between support for a paid-donor system and supply gains for these two categories does
not imply that these respondents do not place any value on supply gains; following the framework we laid out in Section
2, these choice patterns are consistent with very strong views about the desirability of the procurement and allocation
rules of a given paid-donor system.
15

expressing opposition for higher supply levels (“from favor to opposed”). Finally, 11 percent of
participants showed non-systematic patterns of choice with no correlation between support for the
alternative system and kidney supply levels (“others”).23 Among the respondents who went from
opposing to supporting the alternative system, almost 40 percent of them switched at the first
opportunity (i.e., when the paid-donor system was assumed to increase transplants by 14 percentage
points compared to the current system) whereas 15 percent of this subset became willing to support
the paid-donor system only when it was hypothesized to cover the entire demand for kidney
transplants.24 The distribution of types differs across systems. We generally observe the largest
proportions of “always opposed” and the lowest proportions of “always in favor” and “from opposed
to in favor” in systems where the patient pays (see Figure 3B).25
4.3 Moral concerns for paid-donor systems
Our next step is to describe respondents’ moral assessment of their assigned paid-donor system,
limited to the 1,276 participants who (randomly) received the morality module. Figure 4 reports the
distribution of ratings for each principle for all eight paid-donor systems and five kidney transplant
levels combined, as well as the distribution of the ratings for the current system. Recall that positive
numbers express consistency with a moral principle (e.g., autonomy of choice or respect of human
dignity), whereas negative numbers indicate violation (e.g., coercion of choice or harm to human
dignity). The main insight from Figure 4 is the wide variation in the morality assessments. The
majority of ratings is on the positive side of the spectrum; for example, in most cases respondents
saw at least some moderate benefit for donors, moderate respect of autonomy or dignity, and some
fairness toward patients and donors. However, a substantial share of the ratings is on the negative
side, thus indicating a perception of violation of certain moral principles. There is variation also for
the current unpaid-donor system. For example, about 30 percent of respondents indicated that the
current system at least moderately exploits donors (score of -1 or lower), and a similar share saw it
as at least moderately unfair to patients. The ratings of the six principles for the alternative systems

23
This behavior could derive from a lack of interest or attention, or an explicit desire to randomize (Agranov and Ortoleva
2016). The small share of this fifth group and some additional evidence we report below are consistent with these
individuals not paying sufficient attention or not showing interest in the survey.
24
Figure B1 in the Appendix shows details on the switchers separately for each of the eight paid-donor systems.
25
Appendix Table B4 offers more details. The share of “always in favor” ranges from 35.5% ($30K, cash, patient pays)
to 54.3% ($30K, noncash, public agency pays), that of “always opposed” varies from 10.2% ($30K, noncash, public
agency pays) to 29.6% ($100K, noncash, patient pays), and the share of tradeoff-sensitive, “from opposed to in favor”
individuals goes from 14.8% ($100K, noncash, patient pays) to 20.4% ($30K, noncash, patient pays).

16

are highly positively correlated (Pearson coefficients between 0.36 and 0.71); the same high
correlation holds for the current system (coefficients between 0.35 and 0.56). However, the
individual-level correlation between the paid-donor and current system ratings of a given principle
is close to zero for all six features (coefficients between -0.06 and 0.15).26
Table 4 and Figure 5 show the relationship between moral views and three factors: the transplant
gains from the paid-donor system over the current system, the features of the alternative systems,
and the respondent types we identified in Section 4.2 above. Our objective here is to begin to assess
whether a person’s overall reaction to a paid-donor system depends on moral concerns, and the
extent to which respondents’ different moral views relate to the transplants the system makes
possible, the system’s features (i.e., the process through which organs for transplantation are
obtained and distributed), or both. For these analyses, we constructed relative measures of moral
judgment by subtracting from each of the morality scores attributed by respondents to their assigned
paid-donor system at each kidney supply level the corresponding rating that the subject gave the
current system (respondents rated the current system only at the current kidney supply level), and
multiplied this difference by -1. Thus, positive (negative) values of these relative moral concern
scores indicate that a respondent considered their assigned paid-donor system at a given supply level
as being less (more) consistent with a particular ethical principle than the current system. Principal
component analysis identifies one single component that summarizes the six relative scores; in some
of the analyses we therefore use the standardized estimate of this component.27
Table 4 reports estimates from regressions of the relative moral concerns for each of the six
principles (and, in the last three columns, of their first principal component) on transplant increases
(again in linear form and expressed as percentage points), as well as on indicators for the identity of
the payer, and the type and amount of the payment. Overall, transplant effects have a small but
statistically significant negative association with moral concerns. Cash payments increase all six
moral concerns, although not significantly in the case of undue influence.28 Payments by kidney
recipients increase concerns that choices may not be fully voluntary, and that the system would be
26

The correlation table is in the Appendix (Table B2)
Figure B6 in the Appendix shows the scree plot from the principal component analysis. The estimated component we
use in some of the analysis is also strongly correlated with the average of the six relative scores (Pearson coefficient of
0.99).
28
The four examples of noncash payments that we gave in the descriptions included loan repayment. A possible concern
is that this could unduly put pressure on individuals who urgently need to repay a debt, making this type of compensation
similar to cash. To test this, we conducted an ancillary survey on mTurk (see Appendix C3 for details). We did not find
any significant difference in support for or moral concerns toward a version of the noncash compensation system that
included loan repayments and one that did not.
27

17

unfair to patients, cause undue influence, and be disrespectful of human dignity. The large payment
amount significantly increases concerns related to the system’s fairness to kidney recipients. These
concerns seem particularly strong with respect to all three features; payment by the recipient, cash
format, and higher payment amount all strongly increase this concern. Adding control variables or
individual fixed effects to the regressions (Columns 8 and 9) did not change the main estimates of
interest. The R-square statistic in these regressions is generally small, suggesting that individual
attitudes are especially relevant in determining moral views toward donor compensation rather than
the features of a system per se.
However, moral judgments correlate strongly with respondents’ support for paid-donor systems.
In Figure 5, each group of five dots reports respondents’ average value of the first principal
component of moral judgments across the six scores at each level of hypothesized transplant
increases, separately for each respondent’s type. Moral concerns are very different for individuals
who opposed payments regardless of kidneys procured, those who favored payments at all kidney
supply levels, and individuals who increased or decreased their support with increasing supply gains.
For participants with strong preferences (always in favor or against), moral views correlate only
weakly with kidney supply levels, suggesting that these individuals favor or oppose a paid-donor
system for reasons related to the system’s features rather than transplant effects. For respondents
who started out opposing the paid-donor system but switched to being in favor at higher supply
levels, moral concerns are substantially lower at higher supply levels, whereas the opposite pattern
characterizes participants who decreased their support for payments as the kidney supply
increased.29

29
The averages in the graph aggregate the eight different systems. We report separate analyses for each different system
in the Appendix (Figure B3); the aggregate findings in Figure 5 here reproduce qualitatively for each system. We also
performed analyses of variance for this summary measure of moral concerns, first by system and supply level, and then
by system, supply level, and type of respondent. A model with the eight paid-donor systems and supply levels explains
about 2.4 percent of the variance in moral concerns, with the systems’ indicators accounting for 93 percent of the explained
variation, and organ supply only 7 percent. Adding indicators for the respondent types increases the share of explained
variance to 32 percent, with these types accounting for more than 92 percent of the explained variance.

18

4.4 The association of moral concerns with support for paid-donor systems
Tables 5 and 6 report estimates from linear regression models where, again, the outcome variable is
an indicator for whether a respondent expressed support for their assigned paid-donor system at a
given transplant gain.
In Table 5, the results shown in column (1) are from a regression that included as right-handside variables the transplant increases, the indicators for the level and type of payment, and the
identity of the payer. In column 2, we added a binary indicator for whether respondents received the
morality assessment module, and in column 3, we included interactions of the morality module
indicator with the system’s features and kidney supply effects. The estimates indicate that
participants’ responses to supply gains and to the systems’ procedural features were broadly similar
with and without the morality assessment module, although the estimated slope of the supporttransplant gains relationship was lower for participants in the morality module condition (0.21 vs.
0.31, and the difference was statistically significant at the 1 percent level). The limited effect of
making morality considerations salient, coupled with their strong association with participants’
support for paid-donor systems that we document below, suggests that moral considerations
influence people’s attitudes toward paying organ donors even in the absence of an explicit prompt.30
We next turn to analyzing the extent to which morality judgments account for the support for
paid-donor systems. Because the moral concerns are subjective, we should interpret this evidence as
correlational. However, it is reassuring that the estimates are not affected by the inclusion of control
variables or individual fixed effects in the regressions we present.31 Table 6 reports estimates limited
to the sample of 1,276 participants who received the morality assessment module. Regressors
include the relative moral concerns for each of the six principles (columns 2 through 6), or their
principal component (columns 7 through 9). In column 1 we report, for reference, estimates from
the same specification as in column (1) of Table 5, limited to participants in the morality module
condition. The inclusion of moral judgments among the covariates substantially raises the share of
variance in the outcome for which the regressors account; the R-square in column (2), for example,
is 10 times as large as the R-square in column 1. Transplant gains still show a significant, positive

30
Appendix Figure B2 shows that the subset of respondents who received the ethics assessment module was a few
percentage points more likely to always oppose payments (23.4 percent vs. 19.3 percent) and correspondingly less likely
to be willing to switch from opposed to in favor (15.4 percent vs. 19.6 percent). The fractions of always in favor of
payments, instead, were similar among respondents with and without the morality assessment module (45.1 percent vs.
46.4 percent).
31
Appendix Table B5 reports the coefficient estimates on the control variables for the specifications in column 6 of Table
3 and columns 5, 7, and 9 of Table 6.

19

impact on the support for a paid-donor system; however, the marginal effect declines from about
0.20 to 0.14-0.15, suggesting that, in part, moral considerations drive responses to supply gains.
There still is a large, negative impact of the identity of the payer on the support for a system, but the
point estimate is, in absolute value, only about half as much as that from the specification without
the moral views measures (compare column 2 with column 1). This is a strong indication that
opposition to direct payments by kidney recipients, the strongest feature affecting individuals’
choices, has moral foundations. In particular, the estimates show that respondents worry that a
private payment system would be unfair to kidney recipients (compare columns 3 and 4 in
particular), consistent with the findings on the determinants of moral concerns that we reported in
Section 4.4 above. In column 9, we also include interaction terms between pairs of the variables of
interest. In this specification, we use the principal component of the relative moral concerns rather
than the six judgments separately. As in the estimates reported in Table 5, the coefficient estimates
on the interaction between transplant gains and system features is not statistically significant. Greater
moral concerns, instead, correlate with a further significant reduction in support for systems where
the payment is from the organ recipient.
We use the estimates in column 9 to compare the overall effect of kidney supply and moral
concerns, with the caveat that, because of the (ever-slight) correlation between supply gains and
moral views, these comparisons should be taken with caution. For example, an increase of 0.22
standard deviations in the principal component of moral concerns (i.e., roughly the average
difference in the principal component between systems with payments by an agency and payments
by the recipient) reduces overall support for paying donors by about 0.22*24=5.28 percentage
points; in absolute terms, one could obtain an equivalent increase in support for paying donors with
a supply gain of 5.28/0.14 = roughly 38 percentage points.
4.5 Attitudes toward payments for kidney donors and broader moral views
In this section, we explore whether attitudes toward paid-donor systems correlate with respondents’
“moral foundations,” which we assessed through a set of modules from Graham et al. (2011). We
also study the relationship between preferences for compensation and political and religious beliefs.
Table 7 reports the percentages of respondents with certain socio-demographic characteristics
and beliefs, according to the preference “types” defined in section 4.2. We consider gender,
educational attainment, income level, religious and political views, as well as whether respondents
reported knowing anyone who had or needs a transplant. Attitudes toward religion could arguably
20

relate to an individual’s ethical views; moreover, recent studies showed a link between religious
views and economic decisions and outcomes (Bénabou et al. 2016; Benjamin et al. 2016). The
analyses by education, income, and gender follow the literature on social preferences (Croson and
Gneezy 2009; Kuziemko et al. 2015). Finally, broader views on social issues or economic policy
issues may relate to opinions about the use of prices in the context of organ donation.
Turning to more direct measures of moral views, we also consider a subset of the moral
foundation questions we asked participants (we posed a larger set of questions to obfuscate the issues
in which we were especially interested). We focus on compassion, freedom, pleasure, pragmatism,
giving, and tradition. Individuals who value compassion highly may be more responsive to increases
in transplants and, as such, be less opposed to paying donors. This attitude may also characterize
respondents for whom freedom is a particularly important value, as well as those who hold values
such as pleasure and pragmatism (arguably related to utilitarian views) in high regard. To the extent
that people who value tradition also have a preference for the status quo, one might expect these
individuals to be more opposed to payments. Finally, a high consideration of giving as a moral value
may lead to disapproval of payments if giving is interpreted as a gratuitous activity, but also to
supporting payments if they lead to more giving. Following Graham et al. (2011), we used a 9-point
scale (from -1 = “opposed to my values,” to 7 = “of supreme importance”) for questions about moral
values in the survey. Next, we used a vignette (from the same source as the moral foundations
questions) describing a moral dilemma to measure whether a respondent was characterized by
deontological or consequentialist/utilitarian preferences. The dilemma consisted of a decision
whether to open a hatch in a sunken submarine that would result in certain death for one crew
member but save the rest of the crew. An opinion that one should not sacrifice a life even if doing
so would save several other lives indicates a deontological view, whereas a choice to sacrifice that
single person indicates a more consequentialist or utilitarian view. In our context, respondents who
gave a deontological answer to the vignette would more likely be opposed to payments to organ
donors regardless of how many additional lives might be saved as a result.32
For the ratings on these six principles and the response to the vignette, we performed principal
component analyses and identified two main components. The ratings of the six moral values have
a high loading on the first factor, whereas the response to the vignette has a high loading on the
second. In general, therefore, we can attribute stronger consequentialist or utilitarian views to the

32

In Section A of the Appendix we report details on the moral foundations questions and the vignette.
21

respondents who scored high on the first factor and stronger deontological views to those who scored
high on the second factor.
We find some significant differences in the distribution of types according to some sociodemographics.33 For example, participants who are socially or economically conservative are more
frequent among those who always oppose payments. Those who are liberal on social issues are more
frequent among those who go from opposing to supporting compensation at higher kidney supply
levels, and those who are liberal on economic issues are more frequent among subjects who always
favor compensation. However, the largest differences between types of respondents are in the scores
of the two principal components of moral values. With regard to the first factor, the one that best
summarizes consequentialist or utilitarian values, respondents who are opposed to donor
compensation regardless of the transplant effects have a much lower score than those who are always
in favor (a difference of 0.40 standard deviations) or switch to being in favor for high-enough
transplant gains (a difference of 0.22 standard deviations).
We obtain additional evidence that attitudes toward legalizing payments, and the role that supply
gains play in determining these attitudes, correlate with broader moral views from the analysis of
the time respondents took to complete our survey, and from an analysis of the open comments
respondents left at the end of the survey. Previous research shows that deontological judgments tend
to be faster than consequentialist ones (Sunstein 2014). Consistent with this idea, we find that
respondents who oppose payments regardless of supply gains were indeed faster in completing the
survey than the other two largest groups or types of respondents (those always in favor and those
who went from opposing to supporting compensation for higher supply gains). We find comparable
differences when we focus on the time participants took to respond to the “submarine” vignette, with
individuals always opposed to payments completing this part of the survey faster, and individuals
recommending to not that the action what would result in the death of the character (an answer that
the literature interprets as deontological) having a shorter response time. We report graphical
representations of these findings in the Appendix (Figures B4 and B5).
In the Appendix (Tables B6 and B7), we also report an analysis of the open comments that survey
participants could leave at the end of the questions. Of the 2,666 survey respondents, 330 left some
comment. We asked three independent raters to classify this feedback into a set of categories,

33

We reported the distribution of types after excluding the fifth group (“others”). Because of the lack of discernible
patterns in the choices of these participants, we concluded that it was not insightful to consider their underlying moral
views for the purposes of the analysis here.
22

including expressions of opposition to paying donors (73 comments), support for donor payments
(32), appreciation for the topic of the survey (111 comments), personal experience (15 comments),
or other (99 comments).34 We find that the nature of the comments correlates strongly with
participants’ attitudes toward paid-donor systems; respondents who left a comment expressing
opposition to organ donor payments are much less likely to favor compensating donors and less
likely to donate money to the pro-compensation foundation. Moreover, participants who were
always opposed to organ donor payments were 5.9 percentage points more likely to leave a comment
(corresponding to a 51 percent increase over the baseline). This is consistent with the idea that
individuals who feel more strongly about an issue are also likely to be more vocal. In contrast, the
features of the paid-donor system assigned to respondents and the prompt to think about ethical
issues do not correlate with the likelihood that respondents left a comment.
As a whole, our evidence strongly suggests that respondents’ attitudes toward paying organ
donors per our measurement relate to a broad set of moral values as commonly assessed in moral
and social psychology.
4.6 Donation choices
We now turn to looking at respondents’ choices in our incentivized donation experiment. The
regression estimates in Table 8 reinforce our interpretation of the findings from the analysis above.
In particular, there is strong consistency in preferences and their moral foundations as they emerged
in the survey responses and in the donation choice experiment.
Columns 1 through 3 report linear regression estimates of the choice to donate to the American
Transplant Foundation (ATF), which the respondents knew supported an expansion of allowable
forms of organ donor compensation. The only regressor in column 1 (in addition to the constant) is
the indicator for whether a given respondent received the morality assessment module; with this
analysis, we assess whether the salience to moral considerations per se affected donation behavior.
In column 2, we limit the sample to 955 participants who received the moral principles modules and
were assigned to the ATF donation opportunity, and regress the indicator for donation to ATF on
the average principal components of the six relative moral concerns (and the control variables). In
this case, we test whether the moral views that respondents expressed in the survey also explain their
34

591 respondents wrote something in the space provided; however, 236 wrote, “no comment” (or equivalent expressions)
and 29 typed some random characters. We found strong concordance across the three raters’ classifications and used a
majority rule (i.e., two out of three) to assign comments to categories. We assigned comments without a majority to the
“other comments” category.
23

willingness to donate to a pro-compensation organization. Finally, in column 3 we report donation
frequencies by respondent type to study whether overall patterns of support for paying donors
translate into costly donation choices.
The exposure to questions about the morality of a paid-donor system does not correlate with the
decision to donate to the ATF. Moreover, respondents who donated to the ATF had much lower
moral concerns toward compensating donors in the hypothetical survey than those who made the
costly choice not to donate. Finally, respondents who opposed payments in all five hypothetical
transplant gain scenarios were also less than half as likely to donate to the ATF as those who
expressed favor of payments at all five scenarios, and those who expressed favor for higher
hypothetical transplant gains.
Columns 4 through 6 of Table 8 report estimates of the same analyses as the ones in the first three
columns of the table, but limited to the 536 respondents who had the option to donate to the
organization that opposes the legalization of compensation to organ donors (the National Kidney
Foundation, or NKF). In this case, respondents with higher moral concerns toward compensation
were more likely to donate.35
These findings are consistent with those from our survey, and with the interpretation we gave to
those results. We see this as an important corroboration for our stated preferences survey.
4.7 Robustness: controlling for perceived consequentiality and beliefs about the popularity of
donor payments
The issue of incentive compatibility was one concern we discussed in Section 3.1.4 and addressed
with the abovementioned monetary donation experiment. We also considered two other topics
related to the reliability and interpretation of the data: the perceived consequentiality of the
responses, and the potential role of social pressure, conformity, and “strategic” responses. Table B9
in the Appendix reports regression estimates from the same model as in column 9 of Table 6 above,
where we either add to the regressors our measures of participants’ perceived relevance of the topic,
confidence in their answers, and consequentiality of the survey, or limit the sample to respondents
who perceived the topic as important, were confident of their responses, and attributed at least some
level of consequentiality to the survey. Finally, the estimates in Table B10 in the Appendix are from

35

Appendix Table B8 reports regressions where we also added measures of respondents’ “moral foundations.” Individuals
with deontological preferences are significantly less likely to donate to ATF, whereas holding stronger consequentialist
or utilitarian values (in particular for freedom) positively correlates with the decision to donate to ATF. A high value for
compassion correlates positively with the decision to donate to either foundation.
24

regressions where we added controls for the participants’ beliefs about the popularity of payments
to organ donors in the US population, and the importance that individuals attributed to social
recognition as a guiding value in their lives. The inclusion of these variables (or the restriction of
the sample according to how the respondents answered these questions) does not generally change
any of the main estimates of interest, including the responsiveness to transplant changes and the
effect of the systems’ procedural features.36

5. Discussion
Studying the nature of aversion or support to certain market transactions—in particular, the role that
cultural and moral beliefs play in determining these views—provides insights into how to address
policy-relevant problems and whether policymakers can alleviate ethical concerns via institutional
design. Although proper policy design can address some ethical concerns, others, such as the
perception that a transaction violates human dignity per se, are less amenable to being addressed. A
population’s strong feelings about them may explain why societies prohibit certain activities even if
these prohibitions reduce individuals’ freedom and private welfare.
This project studied the nature of preferences of Americans toward paying organ donors, and our
analysis offers four main insights.
First, we find strong polarization of attitudes: large proportions of respondents are either in favor
of or against paying organ donors, irrespective of the size of hypothesized kidney supply gains. We
also confirmed the evidence from stated preferences with the analysis of incentive-compatible
monetary donation choices. Strong polarization of opinions is a recurring feature in topics that are
ethically contentious.37
The second main insight is that moral considerations correlate strongly with these opposing
views. The broad similarity of (stated and revealed) preferences about paying organ donors among
subjects who were prompted to express their moral views and those who were not indicates that
concerns about the potential violation of ethical principles were prominent in respondents’ minds,
regardless of the salience that we (the researchers) gave to them. Our interpretation is consistent with

36

However, there were some “level” effects: respondents who found the topic more important, were more confident in
their responses, and perceived the survey as more consequential, reported that some of their responses were affected by
how they believed others would respond. Those who reported a high value for social recognition saw the legalization of
donor compensation more favorably; those who believed that less than 50 percent of Americans would approve of
different forms of organ donor compensation were more likely to be against compensation at any level of transplant gains.
37
See e.g., Mouw and Sobel (2011) on abortion.
25

the additional finding that attitudes and ethical views regarding donor compensation correlated with
broader moral values that respondents considered important to them.38
Third, despite this polarization, the attitudes of about one-fifth of respondents were tradeoffsensitive, i.e., they varied depending on how many additional transplants a paid-donor system would
enable. Expanded availability of kidneys increased these individuals’ support for legalizing organ
donor compensation and reduced their ethical concerns. Thus, although our evidence shows that
moral concerns do pose a constraint to introducing a price mechanism in this context, at the
population level, positive supply effects of paying organ donors may significantly change societal
support for legalizing these payments. A policy implication of this finding is that pilot studies of
compensation to organ donors would be useful to produce evidence of the potential effects on the
number of transplants. Without this evidence, a large share of Americans would lack a crucial
element to guide their preferences. The previous findings, however, suggest pilots should also
evaluate whether paying organ donors violates ethical principles.
A fourth insight is that attitudes toward paid-donor systems depend on certain procedural
features. In particular, there is a difference between the aversion to paying donors and the aversion
to having a recipient pay; a large portion of the opposition to legalizing compensation derives from
whether payments come from the kidney recipient or from a third party such as a public agency.
Concerns about fairness to patients were much more severe in the former case than in the latter. In
fact, the respect of fairness in the allocation of organs was the most relevant principle for respondents
among the six that we considered. This finding has implications for policy because it indicates that
appropriate institutional design can allay a major ethical concern in this context.39

38

It is interesting to compare some of our findings to those of Gibson et al. (2011) and Falk and Szech (2013, 2017). In
Gibson et al.’s experiment, subjects could report either a truthful (hypothetical) earning, or an untruthful one, in five
scenarios with different monetary gains from lying. Of the 261 subjects, about 19.5% always reported the truth regardless
of the gains from not doing so, 17.6% never reported the truth, and the remaining 62.9% displayed trade-off-sensitive
responses. In two different experiments, Falk and Szech study the willingness to let a mouse be killed in exchange for
money; they find that between 28% and 54% (Falk and Szech 2013) and between 41% and 56% (Falk and Szech 2017)
of their study participants were not willing to support the killing of the animal in exchange for money. In our study, the
proportion of individuals who declared to be unwilling to let organ donors receive compensation regardless of kidney
supply gains is between 10% and 29% (depending on the specific system features). Of course, there are many differences
between our study and those described above. For example, we focused on individuals’ attitudes to allow others to engage
in a certain morally controversial transaction, without any monetary benefits to themselves; moreover, the act of donating
a kidney without compensation is not considered immoral (quite the opposite, in fact), whereas the acts of killing a mouse
and not telling the truth are morally questionable regardless of whether they involve monetary exchanges.
39
The identity of the payer likely has different effects for other morally controversial activities. For example, in the United
States the “Hyde Amendment” prohibits the use of federal funds to cover abortion services unless the pregnancy was the
result of rape or incest, or if it would endanger a woman’s life (Keith 2018). Similarly, it is doubtful that Americans would
be more open to considering legalizing prostitution if sex workers were paid by a public agency and free for the clients.
26

The joint consideration, in our study, of the role of increased kidney availability due to
compensation as well as of procedural aspects of the organization of organ procurement and
allocation, together with the investigation into the ethical roots of attitudes toward these features,
permitted a detailed exploration of how people perceive the moral limits of markets, how deep their
differences in attitudes are, and whether and how individuals make trade-offs between potentially
competing values. Our conceptual framework and experimental design attempted to integrate an
economic approach to these issues with insights from several other disciplines, such as work in social
psychology on moral foundations and studies in experimental philosophy. We see this as a fruitful
confluence, one that can enhance our understanding of the nature of preferences in repugnant
transactions and of the reasons why societies may keep certain activities and transactions out of the
marketplace. In fact, we expect our methodology to apply to other morally controversial transactions.
For example, there is evidence that legalizing indoor prostitution enhances social welfare by
reducing violence and STD incidence (Cunningham and Shah 2017). Similarly, abortion tends to be
safer in countries where it is legal (Faúndes and Shah 2015). Our approach could be used to assess
whether these or other welfare gains are sufficient to induce a majority of voters to legalize a
transaction in spite of ethical concerns.

References
Agranov, M. & Ortoleva, P. (2017). Stochastic choice and preferences for randomization. Journal of Political
Economy, 125(1), pp.40-68.
Akerlof, G. A., & Kranton, R. E. (2000). Economics and identity. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 715-753.
Alesina, A. & Giuliano, P. (2015). Culture and institutions. Journal of Economic Literature, 53(4), 898-944.
Alesina, A., Stantcheva, S. & Teso, E. (2018). Intergenerational mobility and preferences for
redistribution. American Economic Review, 108(2), 521-54.
Ambuehl, S. (2018). An Offer You Can't Refuse? Incentives change how we think, Working paper, University
of Toronto.
Ambuehl, S., Niederle, M., & Roth, A. E. (2015). More money, more problems? Can high pay be coercive
and repugnant? American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 105(5), 357-360.
Andreoni, J. & Sprenger, C. (2012). Risk preferences are not time preferences. American Economic Review,
102(7), 3357-3376.
Ariely, D., Loewenstein, G. & Prelec, D. (2003). “Coherent arbitrariness”: Stable demand curves without
stable preferences. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 73-106.
Bartling, B., Weber, R.A. & Yao, L. (2014). Do markets erode social responsibility? The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 130(1), 219-266.
Bartling, B. and Özdemir, Y., 2017. The limits to moral erosion in markets: Social norms and the replacement
excuse. Working paper.
Basu, K. (2007). Coercion, contract and the limits of the market. Social Choice and Welfare, 29 (4), 559-579.
27

Becker, G. S., & Elías, J. J. (2007). Introducing incentives in the market for live and cadaveric organ
donations. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 3-24.
Bénabou, R., Falk, A., & Tirole, J. (2018). Narratives, imperatives, and moral reasoning. CEPR DP13056.
Bénabou, R., & Tirole, J. (2009). Over my dead body: Bargaining and the price of dignity. American
Economic Review, 99(2), 459-465.
Bénabou, R., & Tirole, J. (2011). Identity, morals, and taboos: Beliefs as assets. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126(2), 805-855.
Bénabou, R., Ticchi, D., & Vindigni, A. (2015). Forbidden fruits: the political economy of science, religion,
and growth. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 21105.
Benjamin, D.J., Choi, J.J. & Fisher, G. (2016). Religious identity and economic behavior. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 98(4), 617-637.
Benjamin, D. J., Heffetz, O., Kimball, M. S., & Rees-Jones, A. (2012). What do you think would make you
happier? What do you think you would choose? American Economic Review, 102(5), 2083.
Benjamin, D. J., Heffetz, O., Kimball, M. S., & Rees-Jones, A. (2014). Can marginal rates of substitution be
inferred from happiness data? Evidence from residency choices. American Economic Review, 104(11),
3498-3528.
Benjamin, D. J., Kimball, M. S., Heffetz, O., & Szembrot, N. (2014). Beyond Happiness and Satisfaction:
Toward Well-Being Indices Based on Stated Preference. American Economic Review, 104(9), 2698-2735.
Birnbacher, D. (1999). Ethics and social science: Which kind of co-operation? Ethical theory and moral
practice, 2(4), 319-336.
Bisin, A. & Verdier, T. (2011). The economics of cultural transmission and socialization. In Handbook of
social economics (Vol. 1, pp. 339-416). North-Holland.
Bonnefon, J.F., Shariff, A. & Rahwan, I., 2016. The social dilemma of autonomous vehicles. Science,
352(6293), pp.1573-1576.
Bursztyn, L., Callen, M., Ferman, B., Hasanain, A., & Yuchtman, N. (2015). Identifying ideology:
Experimental evidence on anti-americanism in Pakistan, Working paper.
Bursztyn, L., Egorov, G. & Fiorin, S., 2017. From extreme to mainstream: How social norms unravel.
National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 23415.
Carson, R. T. (2012). Contingent valuation: A practical alternative when prices aren't available. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 26(4), 27-42.
Carson, R.T. & Groves, T. (2007). Incentive and informational properties of preference questions.
Environmental and resource economics, 37(1), 181-210.
Cibelli, K., 2017. The Effects of Respondent Commitment and Feedback on Response Quality in Online
Surveys, doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.
Council of Europe (2015). Council of Europe Convention against Trafficking in Human Organs.
Croson, R. and Gneezy, U., 2009. Gender differences in preferences. Journal of Economic literature, 47(2),
pp.448-74.
Cunningham, S. & Shah, M. (2017). Decriminalizing indoor prostitution: Implications for sexual violence
and public health. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Doris, J. & Stich, S., 2005. As a matter of fact: Empirical perspectives on ethics. The Oxford handbook of
contemporary philosophy, pp.114-152.
Durkheim, E., 1893. The Division of Labor in Society (Anthony Giddens ed., W.D. Halls, trans., 1984).
Falk, A., & Szech, N. (2013). Morals and markets. Science, 340(6133), 707-711.
Falk, A., & Szech, N. (2017). Diffusion of being pivotal and immoral outcomes, working paper.

28

Faúndes, A., & Shah, I. H. (2015). Evidence supporting broader access to safe legal abortion. International
Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics, 131(S1).
Gibson, R., Tanner, C., & Wagner, A. F. (2013). Preferences for truthfulness: Heterogeneity among and
within individuals. American Economic Review, 103(1), 532-548.
Gneezy, U. (2005). Deception: The role of consequences. American Economic Review, 95(1), 384-394.
Graham, J., Nosek, B. A., Haidt, J., Iyer, R., Koleva, S. & Ditto, P. H. (2011). Mapping the moral domain.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 366-385.
Graham, J., Haidt, J., Koleva, S., Motyl, M., Iyer, R., Wojcik, S.P. & Ditto, P.H. (2013). Moral foundations
theory: The pragmatic validity of moral pluralism. Advances in experimental social psychology 47, 55130.
Grant, R. W. (2011). Strings attached: Untangling the ethics of incentives, Princeton University Press
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. & Zingales, L. (2006). Does culture affect economic outcomes? Journal of Economic
perspectives, 20(2), 23-48.
Haidt, J. (2007). The new synthesis in moral psychology. Science, 316(5827), 998-1002.
Halpern, S.D., Raz, A., Kohn, R., Rey, M., Asch, D.A. & Reese, P. (2010). Regulated payments for living
kidney donation: an empirical assessment of the ethical concerns. Annals of internal medicine, 152(6),
358-365.
Healy, K. & Krawiec, K.D., 2017. Repugnance Management and Transactions in the Body. American
Economic Review, 107(5), pp.86-90.
Held, P. J., McCormick, F., Ojo, A., & Roberts, J. P. (2016). A Cost‐Benefit Analysis of Government
Compensation of Kidney Donors. American Journal of Transplantation, 16(3), 877–885.
Jacob, B.A. & Levitt, S.D., 2003. Rotten apples: An investigation of the prevalence and predictors of teacher
cheating. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), pp.843-877.
Keith, K. (2018). Proposed rule would require separate transactions for abortion coverage in exchanges.
Health Affairs blog. November 8, 2018. https://tinyurl.com/yb98xfc4
Kerstein, S.J. (2009). Kantian condemnation of commerce in organs. Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal,
19(2), 147-169.
Kessler, J. B., & Roth, A. E. (2012). Organ Allocation Policy and the Decision to Donate. American Economic
Review, 102(5), 2018-2047.
Kessler, J.B. & Roth, A.E., 2014. Don't take 'no' for an answer: An experiment with actual organ donor
registrations. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 20378.
Knobe, J., Buckwalter, W., Nichols, S., Robbins, P., Sarkissian, H., & Sommers, T. (2012). Experimental
philosophy. Annual Review of Psychology, 63, 81-99.
Kuziemko, I., Norton, M. I., Saez, E., & Stantcheva, S. (2015). How elastic are preferences for redistribution?
Evidence from randomized survey experiments. American Economic Review, 105(4), 1478-1508.
Lagace, M. (2007). Repugnant markets and how they get that way. Harvard Business Review, July 30th.
Leider, S., & Roth, A. E. (2010). Kidneys for sale: Who disapproves, and why? American Journal of
Transplantation, 10(5), 1221-1227.
Marshall, A. (1890). 1920. Principles of economics. London: Mac-Millan.
Martinelli, C., Parker, S.W., Pérez-Gea, A.C. & Rodrigo, R., 2018. Cheating and incentives: Learning from
a policy experiment. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(1), pp.298-325.
Molewijk, B., Stiggelbout, A.M., Otten, W., Dupuis, H.M. & Kievit, J. (2004). Empirical data and moral
theory. A plea for integrated empirical ethics. Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy, 7(1), 55-69.
Mouw, T. & Sobel, M.E., 2001. Culture wars and opinion polarization: the case of abortion. American
Journal of Sociology, 106(4), pp.913-943.
29

Niederle, M. & Roth, A. E. (2014). Philanthropically funded heroism awards for kidney donors. Law &
Contemporary. Problems, 77, 131.
Nuffield Council on Bioethics (1995). Human Tissue: Ethical and Legal Issues, London.
Radin, M. J. (1996). Contested commodities: the trouble with trade in sex, children, body parts, and other
things. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rippon, S., 2012. Imposing options on people in poverty: the harm of a live donor organ market. Journal of
medical ethics, pp.medethics-2011.
Roth, A. E. (2007). Repugnance as a constraint on markets. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 37-58.
Roth, A., Sönmez, T., & Unver, U. (2004). Kidney Exchange. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 457488.
Sandel, M. J. (2012). What money can’t buy: The moral limits of markets. Macmillan.
Satel, S. (2006). Organs for sale. The American.
Satz, D. (2008). The Moral Limits of Markets: The Case of Human Kidneys. In Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, 108(1), 269-288.
Satz, D., 2010. Why some things should not be for sale: The moral limits of markets. Oxford University Press.
Sen, A. (1999). On ethics and economics. OUP Catalogue.
Shleifer, A. (2004). Does competition destroy ethical behavior? American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 94(2), 414-418.
Smith, A. (1822). The Theory of Moral Sentiments, J. Richardson, London.
Spital, A., Delmonico, F.L., Arnold, R. & Youngner, S.J. (2002). Ethical incentives--not payment--for organ
donation. New England Journal of Medicine, 347(17), 1382-1384.
Stoler, A., Kessler, J. B., Ashkenazi, T., Roth, A. E., & Lavee, J. (2017). Incentivizing organ donor
registrations with organ allocation priority. Health Economics, 26(4), 500-510.
Sunstein, C.R., 2014. Is deontology a heuristic? On psychology, neuroscience, ethics, and law. The Jerusalem
Philosophical Quarterly, 63, 83-101.
Sutter, M., Huber, J., Kirchler, M., & Stefan, M., 2016. Where to Look for the Morals in Markets?, working
paper.
Tanner, C., Medin, D. L., & Iliev, R. (2008). Influence of deontological versus consequentialist orientations
on act choices and framing effects: When principles are more important than consequences. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 38(5), 757-769.
Tetlock, P. E., Kristel, O. V., Elson, S. B., Green, M. C., & Lerner, J. S. (2000). The psychology of the
unthinkable: taboo trade-offs, forbidden base rates, and heretical counterfactuals. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78(5), 853.
United States Task Force on Organ Transplantation (1986). Issues and Recommendations. Task Force on
Organ Transplantation, US Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service, Health
Resources and Services Administration.
UNOS. 2017. https://unos.org/data/ Accessed 3/14/2018.
Vossler, C.A., Doyon, M. & Rondeau, D., 2012. Truth in consequentiality: theory and field evidence on
discrete choice experiments. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 4(4), pp.145-71.
World Health Organization (2004). World Health Assembly Resolution 57.18, Human organ and tissue
transplantation, 22 May 2004, http://www.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA57/A57_R18-en.pdf

30

Figure 1: The structure and flow of the experiment

Notes: The figure reports the flow of the randomized survey and donation choice experiment. The dotted lines separate the various phases of the experiment. The
solid lines indicate random assignment to a condition. Numbers in parentheses represent sample sizes. The terms S1 through S8 indicate the eight systems, with a
summary of their features (see also Table 1).
31

Figure 2: Support for alternative organ procurement systems, by level of transplant gains

Notes: The figure reports the percentage of participants assigned to each paid‐donor system who stated that they would
support the adoption of that system, at each level of hypothesized increase in transplants. The line styles distinguish
the type of payment (cash vs. noncash), the shape of the markers identifies the payment amount ($30,000 vs. $100,000),
and the line colors distinguish the identity of the payer (public agency vs. transplant recipient).

32

Figure 3: Respondent types
A: Overall

B: By identity of payer

Notes. Panel A reports the distribution (in percentages) of the 2,666 respondents in terms of their patterns of
support to kidney donor compensation at different hypothesized transplant gains (as defined in section 4.2). The
vertical bars and caps are 95 percent confidence intervals. “Always in favor” indicates the respondents who
supported the alternative system in all five supply gains scenarios. The participants in the “Favor to opposed” groups
are those who expressed support for an alternative system at no or low transplant gains, and opposition at higher
gains. The category “Opposed to favor” indicates participants who expressed opposition to the alternative system
at no or low gains, and shifted to supporting their assigned system at higher gains. “Always opposed” respondents
are those who expressed opposition to the alternative system at all hypothesized transplant gains. The residual
“Other” category includes individuals with patterns of choice that were not systematic with respect to transplant
gains.

33

Figure 4: Distribution of ethical principles scores
A. Benefit to the donor (vs. exploitation)

B. Respect (vs. limit) of individual autonomy

C. Fully informed choice (vs. undue influence)

D. Fairness (vs. unfairness) to donors

E. Fairness (vs. unfairness) to patients

F. Promotion (vs. violation) of dignity

Notes: The graphs report the distribution of ratings for each of the six ethical principles that we asked the participants
to consider. We aggregated all eight paid‐donor systems and five kidney supply levels, and included the distribution of
corresponding scores for the current system. We grouped the 21 possible scores (whole numbers from ‐10 to 10) into
seven groups to make the curves smoother and the figure more legible overall.

34

Figure 5: Moral concerns by type of respondent and transplant increases

Notes: Each group of five dots represents the average standardized principal component of the six rates of moral
concerns across individuals of each “type” and for a given transplant increase (reported on the horizontal axes, where
K stands for thousands). The vertical bars and caps are 95 percent confidence intervals. “Always in favor” indicates the
respondents who supported the alternative system in all five supply gains scenarios. The participants in the “Favor to
opposed” groups are those who expressed support for an alternative system at low transplant gains, and opposition at
higher gains. The category “Opposed to favor” indicates participants who expressed opposition to the alternative system
at low gains, and shifted to supporting their assigned system at higher gains. “Always opposed” respondents are those
who expressed opposition to the alternative system at all hypothesized transplant gains. The residual “Other” category
includes individuals with patterns of choice that were not systematic with respect to transplant gains.

35

Table 1: Characteristics of the kidney procurement and allocation systems randomly assigned to
study participants

System 1
System 2
System 3
System 4
System 5
System 6
System 7
System 8

Nature of
compensation

Amount

Payer

Cash
Cash
Cash
Cash
Noncash
Noncash
Noncash
Noncash

$30K
$100K
$30K
$100K
$30K
$100K
$30K
$100K

Public agency
Public agency
Patient
Patient
Public agency
Public agency
Patient
Patient

Number of
respondents without
morality assessment
module
188
160
178
182
188
167
165
162

Number of
respondents with
morality assessment
module
168
169
152
135
175
162
159
156

Table 2: Characteristics of respondents and comparison with American Community Survey Data
Qualtrics sample
(N=2,666)
(1)
50.8
24.2
36.4
39.5
63.5
12.6
14.1
6.3
3.4
7.5
24.4
30.3
22.9
14.8
59.4
60.4
34.5
35.6t
29.9

Women (%)
Age 18‐34 (%)
Age 35‐54 (%)
Age 55+ (%)
White (non‐Hispanic) (%)
Black (%)
Hispanic (%)
Asian (%)
Other race/ethnicity (%)
Less than HS diploma (%)
HS diploma/GED (%)
Some college or Associate degree (%)
Bachelor’s degree (%)
Graduate degree (%)
Married (%)
Employed (%)
Income <$50,000 (%)
$50,000 <= Income < $100,000 (%)
Income >=100,000 (%)

US
population
(2)
51.4
30.2
33.5
36.3
61.3
13.3
17.8
5.7
1.9
12.6
27.7
31.0
18.3
10.5
51.6
61.4
43.7
30.0
26.2

Notes: The table shows summary statistics from the Qualtrics sample in column (1) and corresponding statistics on the
US population from various sources in column (2). The employment‐population ratio is from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics for November 2017 and it refers to individuals 16 and over. The other statistics are from the American
Community Survey (ACS) for 2016 (https://www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data‐tables‐and‐tools/subject‐tables/).
Marital status is for population 20 years and over; the remaining ACS statistics are for population 18 years and over.

36

Table 3: The effect of transplant increases and procedural features on support for paid‐donor
systems
Outcome variable:
Regressors:
Transplant increase (%pts.)
$100K cash, public agency pays
$30K cash, recipient pays
$100K cash, recipient pays
$30K noncash, public agency pays
$100K noncash, public agency pays
$30K noncash, recipient pays
$100K noncash, recipient pays

(1)
0.256
(0.018)
‐1.645
(2.964)
‐14.461
(3.075)
‐13.086
(3.125)
5.462
(2.690)
‐0.186
(2.915)
‐15.327
(3.070)
‐13.269
(3.172)

Cash

Favor for alternative system (=100 if in favor, 0 if opposed)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.256
(0.018)

0.234
(0.043)
‐1.148
(3.488)
‐15.63
(3.551)
‐14.394
(3.601)
4.885
(3.213)
‐0.127
(3.453)
‐17.542
(3.563)
‐12.855
(3.640)

0.232
(0.045)
0.571
(3.552)
‐14.893
(3.679)
‐14.312
(3.678)
4.110
(3.283)
‐1.911
(3.545)
‐19.034
(3.651)
‐13.53
(3.725)

‐1.591
(1.535)
‐15.026
(1.542)
‐1.067
(1.538)

Recipient pays
$100K
$100K cash, public agency pays
x transpl. increase

‐0.021
(0.066)

‐0.057
(0.068)

$30K cash, recipient pays
x transpl. increase

0.048
(0.069)

0.005
(0.072)

$100K cash, recipient pays
x transpl. increase

0.054
(0.068)

0.072
(0.071)

$30K noncash, public agency pays
x transpl. Increase

0.024
(0.064)

0.031
(0.067)

$100K noncash, public agency pays
x transpl. Increase

‐0.002
(0.068)

‐0.016
(0.071)

$30K noncash, recipient pays
x transpl. increase

0.092
(0.071)

0.128
(0.074)

$100K noncash, recipient pays
x transpl. increase

‐0.017
(0.067)

‐0.002
(0.070)

Cash x transpl. Increase

Control variables
Observations
R‐squared

0.258
(0.036)

‐1.483
(1.788)
‐16.096
(1.794)
‐0.172
(1.791)

0.332
(1.841)
‐16.227
(1.849)
0.058
(1.852)

‐0.031
(0.037)
0.061
(0.037)
‐0.042
(0.037)
64.531
(4.093)
x
12,365
0.049

64.87
(2.105)

66.659
(1.481)

65.4
(2.393)

63.846
(4.346)

13,330
0.036

13,330
0.035

13,330
0.036

x
12,365
0.051

13,330
0.035

$100K x transpl. increase
Constant

0.255
(0.035)

‐0.004
(0.036)
0.044
(0.036)
‐0.037
(0.036)
67.203
(1.658)

Recipient pays x transpl. increase

(6)

Notes: The table reports the coefficient estimates from linear regressions of the support for a system on the
hypothesized supply increase and binary indicators for each of the eight systems or binary indicators for the three
features of each system: the level of payment (1 for $100,000, 0 for $30,000), the type of payment (1 for cash, 0
for noncash), and the identity of the payer (1 for private payments from the recipient, 0 for payments from a
public agency). Control variables (columns 4 and 6) include age, race, region, education, marital status, parental
status, religion, employment status, income, volunteering, whether they or someone they know need/needed a
transplant, and whether they or someone they know ever received a blood transfusion. The regressions include
all 2,666 participants (193 individuals chose not to report information on their income and were thus excluded
from the sample in columns 4 and 6). Standard errors, clustered at the respondent level, are in parentheses.

37

Table 4: Transplant increases, procedural features, and moral concerns
Outcome variable:
Regressors:
Transplant increase (%pts.)
Cash
Recipient pays
$100K
Cash x Transplant increase
Recipient pays x Transplant increase
$100K x Transplant increase
Constant
Control variables
Individual fixed effects
Observations
R‐squared

(1)

Concerns for lack
of autonomous
choice
(2)

Concerns for
undue
influence
(3)

Concerns for
fairness to
donors
(4)

Concerns for
fairness to
patients
(5)

Concerns for
harm to human
dignity
(6)

‐0.009
(0.004)
0.706
(0.373)
0.245
(0.374)
‐0.518
(0.371)
0.005
(0.005)
0.006
(0.005)
0.000
(0.005)
‐3.102
(0.357)

‐0.018
(0.004)
0.694
(0.355)
1.058
(0.356)
0.158
(0.354)
0.004
(0.004)
0.004
(0.004)
0.000
(0.004)
‐1.389
(0.346)

‐0.02
(0.005)
0.488
(0.389)
1.054
(0.391)
0.225
(0.389)
0.005
(0.005)
0.01
(0.005)
0.000
(0.005)
0.091
(0.366)

‐0.011
(0.004)
0.621
(0.393)
0.349
(0.394)
0.089
(0.391)
0.012
(0.004)
0.009
(0.004)
‐0.006
(0.004)
‐3.212
(0.376)

‐0.024
(0.005)
1.115
(0.370)
3.261
(0.374)
0.702
(0.369)
‐0.001
(0.005)
‐0.001
(0.005)
0.003
(0.005)
‐2.996
(0.340)

6,380
0.006

6,380
0.012

6,380
0.011

6,380
0.006

6,380
0.062

Concerns for
exploitation

Principal component of moral
concerns
(7)

(8)

(9)

‐0.019
(0.004)
0.902
(0.356)
0.897
(0.358)
0.051
(0.355)
0.003
(0.004)
0.003
(0.004)
0.002
(0.004)
0.459
(0.335)

‐0.003
(0.001)
0.138
(0.053)
0.202
(0.053)
0.019
(0.052)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
‐0.000
(0.001)
‐0.12
(0.050)

‐0.003
(0.001)
0.135
(0.054)
0.184
(0.054)
0.004
(0.055)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
‐0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.126)
x

‐0.003
(0.001)

6,380
0.012

6,380
0.020

5,990
0.052

0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
‐0.000
(0.001)
0.053
(0.008)
x
6,380
0.938

Notes: The table reports coefficient estimates from linear regressions of moral concerns on the hypothesized supply increase, binary indicators for the three features
of each system, the level of payment (1 for $100,000, 0 for $30,000), the type of payment (1 for cash, 0 for noncash), and the identity of the payer (1 for private
payments from the recipient, 0 for payments from a public agency). Control variables (columns 8 and 9) include age, race, region, education, marital status, parental
status, religion, employment status, income, volunteering, whether they or someone they know need/needed a transplant, and whether they or someone they
know ever received a blood transfusion. The sample includes the 1,276 participants who received the ethical principles module (78 individuals chose not to report
information on their income and were thus excluded from the sample in column 8). Standard errors, clustered at the respondent level, are in parentheses.

38

Table 5: Salience of ethical issues and support for paid‐donor systems
Outcome variable: Favor for alternative system (=100 if in favor, 0 if opposed)
Regressors:
Transplant increase (%pts.)
Cash
Recipient pays
$100K

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.256
(0.018)
‐1.591
(1.535)
‐15.026
(1.542)
‐1.067
(1.538)

0.256
(0.018)
‐1.670
(1.534)
‐15.114
(1.541)
‐1.047
(1.536)
‐3.911
(1.538)

0.306
(0.025)
‐1.193
(2.071)
‐15.862
(2.077)
‐1.204
(2.074)
‐1.858
(2.954)
‐0.103
(0.036)

0.305
(0.026)
1.205
(2.141)
‐16.018
(2.143)
‐1.520
(2.156)
‐1.016
(3.029)
‐0.109
(0.037)
‐3.437
(3.169)
2.423
(3.180)
1.263
(3.168)
65.591
(4.261)
x
12,365
0.051

Morality module
Transplant increase (%pts.)
x Morality module
Cash x Morality module

66.659
(1.481)

69.118
(1.631)

‐0.955
(3.079)
1.547
(3.094)
0.362
(3.082)
68.124
(1.985)

13,330
0.035

13,330
0.036

13,330
0.037

Recipient pays x Morality module
$100K x Morality module
Constant
Control variables
Observations
R‐squared

Notes: The table reports the coefficient estimates from linear regressions of the support for a system on the assumed
transplant increase, binary indicators for the three features of each system, and a binary indicator for whether a
respondent also received the moral principles module. The estimates in column 1 are the same as in column 2 of Table
3 above. The regressions include all 2,666 participants (193 individuals chose not to report information on their income
and were thus excluded from the sample in column 4). Standard errors, clustered at the respondent level, are in
parentheses.

39

Table 6: Transplant increases, moral considerations, and support for paid‐donor systems
Outcome variable:
Regressors:

(9)

0.144
(0.025)
1.656
(1.922)
‐8.416
(1.943)
‐0.759
(1.906)

0.143
(0.027)

0.141
(0.049)
2.318
(2.320)
‐9.258
(2.350)
‐0.917
(2.308)
‐0.029
(0.050)
0.034
(0.051)
0.002
(0.050)

‐24.47
(0.772)

‐27.031
(2.336)

Principal component of moral concerns
x Transpl. Increase

‐24.038
(1.715)
0.027
(0.018)

Principal component of moral concerns
x Cash

2.176
(1.505)

Principal component of moral concerns
x Recipient pays

‐3.121
(1.525)

Principal component of moral concerns
x $100K

‐1.673
(1.491)

Cash
Recipient pays
$100K

(2)

0.202
(0.026)
‐2.148
(2.279)
‐14.315
(2.293)
‐0.842
(2.280)

0.141
(0.024)
1.956
(1.862)
‐8.054
(1.900)
‐0.082
(1.855)

Favor for alternative system (=100 if in favor, 0 if opposed)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

(8)

Transplant increase (%pts.)

(1)

0.141
(0.024)
0.676
(2.072)
‐5.927
(2.115)
1.191
(2.064)

0.155
(0.024)
1.548
(1.879)
‐10.377
(1.887)
‐0.736
(1.868)

0.138
(0.025)
1.845
(1.911)
‐7.875
(1.942)
‐0.486
(1.898)

0.131
(0.027)

‐0.571
(0.167)
‐0.519
(0.167)
‐0.845
(0.164)
‐0.734
(0.174)

‐0.518
(0.169)
‐0.322
(0.173)
‐0.805
(0.168)
‐0.659
(0.183)
‐0.865
(0.153)
‐1.383
(0.189)

‐0.404
(0.227)
‐0.305
(0.247)
‐0.975
(0.239)
‐0.846
(0.271)
‐1.528
(0.236)
‐0.914
(0.282)

Cash x Transplant increase
Recipient pays x Transplant increase
$100K x Transplant increase
Concerns for exploitation

‐0.574
(0.164)
‐0.381
(0.165)
‐0.802
(0.162)
‐0.587
(0.177)
‐0.905
(0.144)
‐1.338
(0.180)

Concerns for lack of autonomous choice
Concerns for undue influence
Concerns for fairness to donors
Concerns for fairness to patients
Concerns for harm to human dignity

‐2.593
(0.115)
‐1.655
(0.170)

Principal component of moral concerns

Constant
Control variables
Individual fixed effects
Observations
R‐squared

66.266
(2.188)

59.546
(2.015)

58.458
(2.092)

61.69
(1.991)

60.609
(4.957)
x

6,380
0.028

6,380
0.289

6,380
0.167

6,380
0.278

5,990
0.300

55.729
(1.285)
x
6,380
0.758

64.803
(4.916)
x
5,990
0.294

59.476
(0.647)
x
6,380
0.756

64.441
(5.033)
x
5,990
0.296

Notes: The table reports the coefficient estimates from linear regressions of the support for a system on the hypothesized
supply increase, binary indicators for the three features of each system, and measures for the relative moral concerns
for the assigned paid‐donor system. The specifications for which estimates are in columns 7 through 9 include the
principal component of the six principles among the regressors. Control variables include age, race, region, education,
marital status, parental status, religion, employment status, income, volunteering, whether they or someone they know
need/needed a transplant, and whether they or someone they know ever received a blood transfusion. The sample
includes the 1,276 participants who received the ethical principles module (78 individuals chose not to report information
on their income and were thus excluded from the sample in columns 5, 7, and 9). Standard errors, clustered at the
respondent level, are in parentheses.

40

Table 7: Characteristics of respondents by paid‐donor system preference types

Individual characteristic:
Woman (%)
College+ (%)
Annual household income >$75K (%)
Atheist/agnostic (%)
Knows someone who needs/had a transplant (%)
Conservative on economic issues (%)
Conservative on social issues (%)
Liberal on economic issues (%)
Liberal on social issues (%)
Moral foundations ‐ Principal component 1 (average)
Moral foundations ‐ Principal component 2 (average)

Always
in favor
50.20
(1.43)
35.79
(1.37)
47.00
(1.48)
13.19
(0.97)
20.64
(1.16)
34.23
(1.36)
29.89
(1.31)
21.29
(1.17)
26.13
(1.26)
0.161
(0.03)
‐0.107
(0.03)

Paid‐donor system preference types
From favor
From opposed
to opposed
to favor
51.26
(4.60)
34.45
(4.37)
36.61
(4.57)
6.72
(2.31)
22.69
(3.86)
32.77
(4.32)
25.21
(4.00)
20.17
(3.69)
24.37
(3.95)
‐0.083
(0.10)
0.089
(0.09)

52.14
(2.31)
42.31
(2.29)
50.93
(2.41)
14.53
(1.63)
25.00
(2.00)
33.76
(2.19)
29.06
(2.10)
17.09
(1.74)
28.63
(2.09)
‐0.019
(0.04)
0.087
(0.05)

Always
opposed
52.20
(2.10)
37.21
(2.03)
48.55
(2.20)
14.11
(1.46)
18.34
(1.63)
42.86
(2.08)
36.33
(2.02)
14.64
(1.49)
22.05
(1.74)
‐0.242
(0.05)
0.146
(0.04)

Notes: The table reports the percentages of sociodemographic characteristics, political and religious beliefs, and the
average of the two principal components of the moral foundations scores (giving, compassion, tradition, freedom,
pleasure, and pragmatism) and response to the moral dilemma vignette, separately for the four the four types of
preferences toward paid‐donor system defined in section 4.2 (we excluded the “other” type from the table). The sample
has 2,375 observations (one per respondent) for all variables except income (180 individuals chose not to report
information on their income). Standard errors are in parentheses.

41

Table 8: Donation behavior
Outcome variable:
Regressors:
Morality module

Donation to ATF
(1)

(2)

Donation to NKF
(3)

‐0.026
(0.022)

Principal component of moral concerns
(over all transplant levels)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.035
(0.045)
‐0.128
(0.016)

0.102
(0.035)

Constant

0.517
(0.058)

0.486
(0.078)

0.199
(0.038)
0.064
(0.062)
0.095
(0.044)
‐0.221
(0.040)
0.414
(0.061)

Observations
R‐squared

1,974
0.035

955
0.115

1,974
0.134

Always in favor
From favor to opposed
From opposed to favor
Always opposed

0.284
(0.119)

0.360
(0.162)

0.039
(0.068)
0.308
(0.129)
0.043
(0.079)
0.110
(0.078)
0.254
(0.124)

499
0.065

243
0.163

499
0.078

Notes: The table reports the estimates from linear regressions of the choice to donate to the American Transplant
Foundation (ATF) or the National Kidney Foundation (NKF), expressed as binary (0‐1) indicators, on the following
covariates: an indicator for whether a respondent received the morality judgments module (columns 1 and 4); a
summary measure of the moral concerns participants expressed towards the paid‐donor system (average principal
component of six moral concerns over all transplant gain levels per individual, columns 2 and 5); and indicators for
a respondent “type” as expressed by their pattern of stated support for different transplant gains (columns 3 and
6). Control variables include the features of the paid‐donor systems (indicators for payment by recipient, cash
payment, and $100,000 payments) as well as the respondents’ age, race, region, education, marital status, parental
status, religion, employment status, income, volunteering, whether they or someone they know need/needed a
transplant, and whether they or someone they know ever received a blood transfusion. The regressions include one
observation per respondent.

42

