                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              FINANCIAL   STRUCTURE AND AGGREGATE   ECONOMIC   ACTIVITY:
                                    AN OVERVIEW




                                    Mark Gertler




                               Working Paper No. 2559




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 MassachusettsAvenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 1988




*University of Wisconsin and NBER. Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland's
Conference on Recent Developments in Macroeconomics.  I thank Jonathon McCarthy
for research assistance. The research reported here is part of the NBERs research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #2559
                                             April 1988




              Financial Structure and Aggregate Economic Activity:
                                  An Overview




                                 ABSTRACT



    This paper surveys literature which explores the possible links between
the financial system and aggregate economic behavior. The survey is in two
parts: The first reviews the traditional work and the second discusses new
research.




                                                Mark Gertler
                                                Department of Economics
                                                University of Wisconsin
                                                Madison, WI 53706
Introduction

    Most of macroeconomic theory presumes that the financial system functions

smoothly - and smoothly enough to justify abstracting from financial con-

siderations.     This dictum applies to modern theory.    The currently popular real

business cycle paradigm proceeds under the working hypothesis that financial

structure is irrelevant.      To a first approximation, it also applies to the tradi-

tional literature.      The main real/financial interaction in conventional Keynesian,

Monetarist and Classical models stems from activity in the market for the medium

of exchange, and not from the performance of markets for borrowing and lending.

    Recently, interest has grown in exploring the possible links between the

financial system and aggregate economic behavior.      This interest partly reflects

the on-going beliefs of applied economists and policy-makers that financial

markets and institutions deserve serious attention —      that   they play important

roles in the growth and fluctuation of output.       (See Kaufman [l87] and Eckstein

and Sinai (1986),     for example.)   It also arises for two reasons connected to deve-

lopments in academic work:     First, new empirical research, examining both histori-

cal and post-war data, provides support for further pursuit of this topic; second,

progress in theory over the last decade has made it possible to address these

kinds of questions using the same degree of rigor that is currently being applied

elsewhere in macroeconomics.

    In this paper, I survey recent developments in the study of the

real/financial interaction and try to place a perspective on where it currently

stands.   Many of the ideas in this new literature have appeared earlier, though

in less formal statements.     My discussion thus includes earlier work as well,

beginning with the period of the Great Depression.       The survey is in two parts:

The first reviews the traditional literature and the second discusses new work.

    In part I,   I   argue that Depression—era economists believed that the behavior

of the financial system was largely responsible for the extraordinary events of
                                              2


the time.       However, the Keynesian revolution supplanted further immediate research

in this direction while Keynes believed that financial elements were important,

his direct disciples focused on other issues.          Moreover, they devoted attention

to Keynes' liquidity preference theory which emphasized the importance of money,

as opposed to credit.       Friedman and Schwartz's (1963] empirical work provided

further impetus for viewing the money supply as the key financial aggregate.

    Part    I   continues by the discussing the counter-movement, lead by Gurley and

Shaw and others, which stressed the significance of the financial system and,

in particular, the importance of financial intermediation in the credit supply

process.        The relevance for our purposes is that modern theories of the

real/financial interaction and of the role intermediaries play incorporate many of

the ideas in this literature. The section also discusses the reasons why this

movement died down in the l970s.       A major factor was the methodological revolution

which stressed the importance of using first principles to construct macroeconomic

frameworks; at the time, it was not feasible to use this approach to study issues

of financial structure.       Another factor was the increasing use of vector-

autoregressions to study the money/output relation.         The statistical success of

money in reduced form output equations helped rejuvenate the case for money as

the central financial aggregate.       The section concludes by discussing the

empirical and theoretical work that redirected interest toward studying the

relevance of the rest of the financial system.

    Part II begins with recent literature that examines the real/financial

interaction at a general abstract level.          A common theme in this new work is

that informational asymmetries may introduce inefficiencies in financial

markets which may have quantitatively significant consequences.         A number

of basic conclusions arise relevant to aggregate behavior:          First, the
                                           3




informational problems typically reduce the level of market activity and

increase its sensitivity to disturbances such as changes in the riskless

interest rate or in productivity; second, financial contracts and institutions

are determined simultaneously with real variables; third, financial variables

such as balance sheet positions and cash flow affect individuals' and firms'

spending decisions, creating the analogue of income-accelerator effects on

demand.   The section continues by discussing some empirical work which bears on

these various hypotheses.

    The current research on intermediation and banking is reviewed next.          This

work is best understood in the context of the broader literature just mentioned;

the common approach is to endogenously motivate intermediaries as optimal

responses to the informational problems which may disrupt financial markets,

described in the more general literature.       In this vein, the main conclusion

is that intermediaries are important to aggregate activity.        It must be added

that the models are somewhat abstract, but do nonetheless characterize basic

features of intermediation and banking.        (Banks are distinguished from other

intermediaries by their role in liquidity provision.)       However, while the

literature offers considerable insights,       it is still well short of providing

precise policy advice.   The section discusses why policy recommendations vary

dramatically among frameworks, and what issues require further attention to

resolve the debate.

    Finally, this section examines the work which has focused directly on the

role of financial factors in output fluctuations,       This research integrates

advances in the literature on financial market inefficiencies and intermediation

with recent advances in business cycle analysis.       While the work is still

largely in a primitive form,   it does suggest rigorous    ways to address some

puzzles left currently unexplained by existing models.
                                           4




      A final section offers some concluding remarks.

      Before beginning, let me note that for tractability,     I   am restricting

attention to papers which have a macroeconomic emphasis, at the expense of

literature in finance which overlaps considerably in some areas.


I.      The Traditional Literature

1.1     From Fisher and Keynes to Friedman and Schwartz

      The idea that financial structure and output determination may be inter-

related phenomena is not new.     It is easily traceable to the time of the Great

Depression.    The collapse of the financial system along with real economic

activity struck the attention of economists contemporary to the period.         It

motivated Fisher (1933) to argue (in the first volume of Econometrica) that

the severity of the economic downturn resulted from poorly performing financial

markets.

      What made the economy initially so vulnerable, in Fisher's view, was the

high leverage of the borrowing class in the wake of the prosperity preceding

1929.    In his words, "they (debts) were great enough to not only 'rock the boat'

but to start it capsizing".     The ensuing business downturn precipitated a wave

of bankruptcies, enhancing the downturn.       Beyond this direct propagation mecha-

nism, according to Fisher,   was an indirect one which was probably of greater

empirical significance because it involved the entire borrowing class.         The

deflation accompanying the slowdown redistributed wealth from debtors to credi-

tors.    This decline in net worth induced borrowers to cut back on Current expen-

ditures and future commitments, sending the economy further down, Continuing the

spiral of falling output and deflation.        Fisher calculated that by March 1933,

real debt burdens increased   by roughly   4O due    to the sharp decline in prices

and incomes.     In his eyes, the fact that this massive deterioration in borrower
                                        5


balance sheets occurred simultaneously with the free fall in output and prices

lent credibility to the "debt-deflation" story.


   Many others also perceived a link between the financial system and aggregate

real activity.   Indeed, as Fisher noted in his article, ideas related to debt-

deflation appeared in the works of Veblen [1904), Hawtrey [1926) and others.

    The financial system did not have such an explicit central role in Keynes'

theory of output determination.   It was, however, an integral part of the broad

picture.   Financial considerations played a part in the theory of investment

behavior characterized in the General Theory.     A key factor in the Keynesian

investment story was the "state of confidence".     As Minsky [1975) notes, Keynes

was careful to distinguish two basic determinants of this state.     The first was

borrowers beliefs about prospective yields from investment projects.     The second

was the "state of credit", which Keynes argued was governed by the confidence

that lenders had in financing borrowers.    Lenders'   confidence depended on their

perceptions of how well borrowers' incentives were aligned with their own and,

relatedly, of how well secured were borrower liabilities.     Keynes concluded that

a collapse in the confidence of either borrowers or lenders was sufficient to

induce a downturn, but that a return to prosperity required that both be in good

repair.

   The macroeconomics literature following the General Theory largely ignored

potential links between output behavior and the performance of credit markets.

These papers (e.g., Hicks [1937), Modigliani [l944fl did, however, stress the

indirect connection between financial markets and real activity resulting from

Keynes' liquidity preference theory.   By doing   so, they shifted the emphasis   to

money as the financial variable most relevant to aggregate economic behavior.

The models in these papers demonstrated how the demand and supply for real money

balances could determine the real interest rate (presuming price stickiness,
                                          6


so that the interest rate rather than the price level was the equilibrating

force in the money market).

    Considerable debate arose over the empirical significance of the mechanism

linking money to real activity.     Indeed the early Keynesians emphasized the

importance of "real factors" such as the multiplier/accelerator mechanism and

fiscal policy.     The monetarists, with an intellectual foundation tied closest to

classical theory but nonetheless influenced by Keynesian thinking,   provided the

main support for the importance of the monetary mechanism.

    The famous study by Friedman and Schwartz [1963] of the historical

relationship between money and output became the cornerstone for the

monetarist case.    The money/output correlation was particularly transparent in

the Great Depression.    From the start of the downturn in 1929 to the trough in

1933, the money supply declined Sharply along with output.    Thus, one important

outcome of Friedman and Schwartz' work was an alternative explanation for the

role of financial markets in the Great Depression; the story emphasized the

central importance of money and, as a consequence, deemphasized the significance

of all other aspects of the financial system.

   Overall, the theory of liquidity preference and the time series work of

Friedman and Schwartz provided motivation for the preoccupation with money.

The net effect was that the quantity of the medium of exchange was the only

financial aggregate to appear regularly in macroeconomic frameworks. Further,

commercial banks were the only financial institutions to receive any attention

from macroeconomists, and they obtained this distinction only because a

component of their liabilities entered the money supply.
1.2      From Gurley and Shaw to Tobin

         Beginning with Gurley and Shaw [1955),    an attempt began to redirect atten-

tion toward the overafl interaction between financial structure and real

activity.      A distinctive feature of the theory Gurley and Shaw offered was an

emphasis on financial intermediation, and particularly on the role of inter-

mediaries in the credit supply process as opposed to the money supply process.

      The authors began by underscoring the following difference between

developed and underdeveloped countries In the former, and not in the latter,

there typically exists a highly organized and broad system of financial inter-

mediation designed to facilitate the flow of loanable funds between savers and

investors.      (In fact, this correlation between economic development and

financial sophistication has appeared regularly across time and across

countries.      See Goldsmith [1969) for an early and comprehensive study.)   The

implication, Gurley and Shaw argued, was that the role intermediaries play in

improving the efficiency of iritertemporal trade is an important factor

governing general economic activity.

      A corollary argument was that restricting attention to the money
                                                                       supply
mai   it impossible to properly characterize the link between real and

financial activity, and that this distortion worsens as the
                                                            economy evolves

financially.      In the early stages of financial development,
                                                                Gurley and Shaw

noted,   commercial banking is typically the only major form of intermediation, so

that most intermediaries provide both transactions and
                                                       lending services.       In

this environment, the money stock might be a usefu' proxy for financial
                                                                        activity
since the supply of inside money -    a   major component of commercial bank liabili-

ties —   is   closely related to the overall level of financial intermediation.

However, as the intermediary system evolves, and lending institutions with non—

monetary liabilities arise, the exclusive focus on money becomes less justified.
                                        8


The importance of money diminishes for two reasons     First,   the money stock

becomes a less exact measure of the flow of intermediary credit; second, the

liabilities of the non-bank intermediaries provide an alternative form for

holding liquid balances.

    In the simple Keynesian and Monetarist models, money could have important

real effects not only because prices were sticky, but importantly also because

the nominal money stock was fixed and therefore could not adjust endogenously to

changes in money demand.   Gurley and Shaw argued that the latter assumption

ignored the realities of modern financial markets; in such environments, even

if the central bank can control the narrowly defined money stock, the supplies

of close money substitutes may freely adjust to offset changes in money supply

or demand. This movement mitigates the response of interest rates.      Thus,

changes in the supply and demand for transactions media may be of minimal

importance to aggregate activity in a financially sophisticated economy,

regardless of whether prices are sticky.1    (Note that this argument does not

suggest that monetary p01 icy is unimportant to real activity
                                                              -   it   suggests

only that the principal channels of monetary policy may be different from the
conventional one which stresses effects on the quantity of the medium of

exchange.   See Section 11.2.)

    More relevant to macroeconomic behavior than the money stock, according to

Gurley and Shaw, was the economy's overall "financial capacity",       This was the

measure of borrowers' ability to absorb debt, without having to reduce either

current spending or future spending commitments (in order to avoid default or

costly rescheduling).   In the Gurley/Shaw world, financial capacity was an

important determinant of aggregate demand.   The ramifications for business fluc-

tuations reminded one of the debt deflation theory.   The behavior of balance

sheets - key determinants of financial capacity - assumed an important role, one
which tended to enhance movements in spending, and thus enhance the cycle.

    Intermediaries were relevant to the mechanism because they extended

borrowers    financial capacity.   By helping overcome impediments to the flow of
funds between savers and investors, these institutions made it feasible for cer-

tain classes of borrowers to obtain both greater quantities of credit and better

credit terms than they could otherwise get from directly issuing securities to

lenders.    To this extent, intermediaries performed important services for the

economy, services which the market did not perfectly duplicate elsewhere.

(See Patinkin [1961]   for a related discussion of how intermediaries facilitate

borrowing and lending.)

    The notion that financial considerations could be relevant to macroeconomic

behavior evolved through the literature. For example;     Kuh and Meyer, [1963]

and others presented evidence linking investment to balance sheet variables.

Tobin and Qolde [1963] stressed that capital market imperfections provided an

avenue for reconciling the Keynesian and life-cycle theories of consumption;

borrowing constraints could explain why current income might have a more impor-

tant role in consumption decisions than predicted by the naive version of the

life cycle model, which stressed the importance of the individuals    intertem—

poral budget constraint.    Brainard and Tobin [1963] and others elaborated the

financial sectors of macroeconomic models, and formally integrated some of the

ideas in Gurley and Shaw with existing theory.    Minsky [1975] and Kindleberger

[1978]   described how crises in financial markets could severely disrupt real

activity,   Finally, Tobin [1975] argued that Fisher's debt—deflation theory was

a natural complement to the Keynesian theory of income determination; it pro-

vided a rationale for why expansionary policy may dominate deflation as a way to

restore equilibrium output to its full capacity value.
1.3.    Consequences of the Modigliani-Miller Theorem, the Methodological Change
        in Macroeconomics, and Vector-AutorssionStudies

         Shortly after Gurley and Shaw E1955] emphasized the importance of the

financial system, Modigliani and Miller {M/M)          tl9581    derived the formal   proposi-

tion that real economic decisions were independent of financial structure.               The

proposition held for a setting of perfect markets.              While Gurley and Shaw had in

mind a different economic environment than the Arrow-Oebreu world underlying

the M/M theorem, they, and others at the time, did not have a formal counterpart

to offer.    They accordingly could not provide arguments at the same level of

rigor as those suggesting the unimportance of financial structure.

       Apart from its formal elegance, the MM theorem was attractive because it

provided researchers with a rigorous justification for abstracting From the

complications induced by financial considerations.              For example, the developers

of neoclassical investment theory (,e.g.    ,   Hail   and Jorgenson [1967])     took this

approach.     They used the MM theorem as a convenient rationale for ignoring capi-

tal market considerations when solving the firm's intertemporal investment

choice problem.      For similar reasons, financial variables started disappearing

from empirical investment equations.

       The methodological revolution in macroeconomics in the 1970's also helped

shift attention away From financial factors, in a less direct but probably more

substantial way.      The resulting emphasis on developing macroeconomic models

explicitly from individual optimization posed an obstacle,              At the time, the

only available and tractable model suitable For pursuing this methodological

approach —    the   stochastic competitive equilibrium growth model, developed by

Brock and Mirman [1972) and others — was essentially an Arrow-Oebreu model,

and thus had the property that financial structure was irrelevant.
                                                   11



     Modifying the Brock/Mirman framework               -   which would eventually become the
 core for real business cycle theory          -   to consider        financial issues was a for-

 midable task (and remains so today).
                                                  Modeling imperfections in intertemporal
 trade obviously requires having an environment where
                                                      there exists motivation for

 trade; this necessitates introducing heterogeneity among agents, which is

 difficult to accomplish in a way which is both
                                                interesting and tractable.                          The

 representative agent formulation used in the competitive growth models                       -   and

subsequently     in real   business                         -
                                      cycle   theory            effectively   abstracts from trade,
or more precisely, abstracts from any possible
                                               complications in the trading pro-
cess,

     In   addition,   abiding strictly by the rules of the game requires endogenously

deriving the financial system —         after all,          financial institutions and financial

contracts are ultimately endogenous variables and,
                                                   except in the frictionless
environment for which the MM theorem is relevant, determined
                                                             jointly with real

activity.      At the time, however, the theoretical
                                                     techniques required for
accomplishing this task and others related were not adequately developed, or

perhaps more accurately, not widely understood by macroeconomjsts.

    Empirical considerations also affected the course of research.                      The

widespread use of vector autoregressions to analyze macroeconomic time series

shifted the focus back to money as the
                                       key financial aggregate.                      Led by Sims

[1972],   researchers paid considerable attention to the reduced form
                                                                      bivariate
model of money and output.        The common result they obtained was that
                                                                           lagged
values of money were important for forecasting variation in
                                                            output.                     (This
general statistical pattern appears to remain true today,                     though it is
sensitive to the form of the estimated
                                       equations - see Eichenbaum and Singleton

(19861.) While this reduced form evidence did not have any
                                                           unambiguous struc-
tural interpretation, it nonetheless provided motivation for
                                                             developing models
                                            12


                                                                      in a true
of output fluctuations where money was an important driving variable,

causal sense.

    Even the classical/rational expectations macro—models of
                                                             the 70's -         the
                                          - focused on the money-output
forerunners of real business cycle models
                                                                   a true
correlation, and tried to explain this relationship by formulating

causal role for money.     The monetary transmission mechanism they emphasized,

                                         earlier Keynesian and Monetarist
however, differed substantially from the
                                           in the money supply mattered, and did so
theories:     Only unanticipated movements
                                 movements in nominal versus relative prices.
by creating misperceptions about
                                                                      mechanism
This conclusion sparked a controversy about the monetary transmission
                                                           and which remains
which moved quickly to the center stage in macroeconomics,

                                       )See Blanchard (1987)   for a review.)   Signifi-
there today in an updated form,

                         in all the debate over this issue,         the implicit common
cantly for our purposes,
                                                                the market for
view was that any important real/financial interaction involved

the medium of exchange.        The rest of the financial system was largely ignored.


1.4.    Revival of Interest

        New   empirical work   and new developments in theory rekindled interest

                                                               The empirical work
in studying financial aspects of the business cycle.

involved a reconsideration of two earlier issues:        first, the role of financial

                                                              of the post-war
factors in the Great Depression and, second, the significance

time series relationship between money and output.        On the theoretical side,

                                             market problems became available due
 techniques useful for formalizing financial
                                             and incentives.
 to progress in the economics of information
                                                               who analyzed data
       The new empirical literature began with Mishkin (1978],
                                                          factors affected
 from the Great Depression to determine whether financial
                                                                        consumer
 consumer spending.     Mishkin studied the interaction between output,
                                              13



balance sheets, and consumer spending.         He found that the behavior of household

net financial positions in fact had a significant influence on consumer demand.

Further, the results provided evidence for a financial aspect to the business

cycle propagation mechanism, reminiscent of the one present in Fisher's debt-

deflation theory.     Specifically, Mishkin found that the rise in consumer real

indebtedness resulting from declining incomes and deflation induced consumers to

lower spending on durables and housing, which in turn magnified the decline.

    In an influential paper, Bernanke {1983) analyzed the relative importance of

monetary versus financial factors in the Great Depression.          His central conclu-

sion was that the collapse of the financial system was an important determinant

of the depression's depth and persistence — and that monetary forces alone were

"quantitatively insufficient" to explain these phenomena.          The paper chronicled

the breakdown of credit markets over the period 1930-33.          It detailed both the

crisis in banking -    nearly   half the banks failed over the period and many of the

surviving ones suffered major losses      -   and the crisis   in security markets -     the
ratio of debt service to national income more than doubled in 1932-33.

Reasoning as Gurley and Shaw might have, Bernanke argued that the breakdown in

banking affected real activity by choking off financial flows to certain sectors

of the economy, sectors consisting of borrowers who did not have easy access to

non—intermediated forms of credit,       And there was more      The precipitous wor-

sening of balance sheets resulting from the jump in debt service —         the   "debt

crisis"   -   shrank borrowers' collateral, greatly reducing their ability to obtain

funds on the open market.       Overall, as Bernanke stressed, the principal arteries

facilitating capital flows were severely eroded.

   The alternative hypothesis, due to Friedman and Schwartz, was that the

decline in bank liabilities (money) was the main disrupting factor resulting

from the banking/financial crisis, and not the associated decline in bank assets
                                            14



or    other forms of credit.    To test the competing propositions, Bernanke esti-

mated Barro's (1978] model of unanticipated money and output, modified to

include proxies for financial distress.       He found that the financial variables —

(i)    liabilities of failed banks and businesses and (ii) spreads between risky

and safe bond rates — added considerable explanatory power to the output

equations.    He argued further that the    informal   evidence suggested that these

financial variables were not simply responding to anticipations of future output

decline; consequently, it was consistent with the evidence to conclude that the

disruption of credit markets was important to the collapse in real activity.

(See Hamilton (1987) for further evidence supporting this view and Haubrich

[1987]   for a parallel study of financial factors in the Canadian Depression.)

      A number of studies, beginning with Sims    [1980]    and Litterman and Weiss

(1985]   reexamined the post-war time series interactions between money and out-

put, and presented evidence which questioned the interpretation that money was

an important driving force.      While there remains no consensus view on how the

results bear on importance of money (see e.g., McCallum [1983]),         useful lessons

did arise.    It became widely appreciated that making definitive inferences about

causation from reduced form time series correlations was generally difficult, if

not impossible.     It accordingly became unacceptable to justify a preoccupation

with money simply by appealing to its ability to forecast well in reduced form

output equations.     (Tobin   [1970], of course, argued this point much earlier.)

      Another effect of this empirical literature was to motivate the need to con-

sider alternatives to the simple Keynesian and Monetarist stories of the real/

financial interaction, In this capacity, some interesting factors emerged.

King and Plosser [1984] found that inside money had significantly more explana-

tory power for output than did the monetary base.          (See also Lacker [1987].)

This suggested the possibility that much of the covariation between money and
                                             15


output was due to the money supply adjusting endogenously to movements in money

demand.     An implication of this possibility was that the statistical success of

money in vector auto-regressions may have resulted from its strong endogenous

component

    A series of papers by Friedman [1980], [1982] developed another set of

relevant facts.    The papers compared the performance of money versus debt in

reduced form output equations, and concluded that the ratio of debt to output

was considerably more stable than the ratio of money to output.            Of course, this

evidence alone did not yield sharp conclusions about the roles of money versus

credit.     tt was, however, at least consistent with a Gurley/Shaw interpretation;

the existence of money substitutes could explain the instability in monetary

velocity, while the importance of credit flows could underlie the stable connec-

tion between debt and output.

    At the same   time,   developments in the economics of information and incen-

tives facilitated making theoretical progress on these types of issues.             A

basic theme of the new work in information economics was that inefficiencies

in trade could arise when either of the parties involved had an informational

advantage; in addition, contracts -     or   possibly other types of institutional

devices such as screening or monitoring       -
                                                  may   be desirable to structure

incentives in a way which minimizes these inefficiencies.2 The formal

apparatus devised to analyze trade under imperfect information extended

naturally to the study of financial markets.            Indeed, beginning with Jensen

and Meckling [1976],      Leland and Pyle [1977] and others, the finance literature

quickly used this methodology to develop theories of capital Structure and

intermediation. Only in recent years has the approach been widely applied in

the macroeconomics literature.
XI.     Current Literature

        I   will divide the discussion of current research into three sections.

It is useful to begin with the literature that examines the allocative con-

sequences informational asymmetries in financial markets at the micro-level.

This is so because much of the new theory on the real/financial interaction

at the aggregate      level rests   on insights that emanate from these papers.

A discussion of intermediation will follow naturally, since the new develop-

ments in this area center on attempts to explain intermediaries as optimal

institutional responses to financial market inefficiencies. A final section

will review the literature that focuses directly on macroeconomic behavior.


11,1     Ailocative Effects of Informational Problems in Financial Markets

       Many of the ideas this literature can be best understood in the context
Akerlaf's tlg6g] paper on the "lemons" problem.         The paper illustrates how asym-

metric information between buyers and sellers about product quality can cause a

market to malfunction.       The argument runs as follows Since the market price

reflects buyers' perceptions of the average quality of the product being sold,

sellers of low quality goods (lemons) will receive a premium at the expense of

those selling high quality goods.         This distortion in turn will affect the level

of market activity; some high quality sellers will stay Out of the market, and

possibly enough to preclude the market from opening.

       The literature on financial market inefficiencies applies Akerlof's basic

idea that lemons problems may distort economic behavior.        An early example is

Jaffee and Russell [1976], which explains how unobserved differences in borrower

quality can induce credit rationing.        The paper constructs a setting where

borrower default probabilities increase with loan size.        Further, for any given

loan size, default probabilities differ across borrowers due to factors lenders

cannot observe.       Since borrowers are indistinguishable cx ante, the market
                                           17



interest rate incorporates a "lemons" premium.     Consequently, good quality

borrowers (those with low default probabilities) suffer at the expense of bad

quality borrowers.    Credit rationing in the form of restrictions on loan size

can emerge for the following reason:     Good borrowers may prefer the restrictions

because the smaller loan sizes may lower the market average default probability,

reducing the lemons premium bad borrowers have to follow along in order not to

reveal themselves.3

    In a very influential paper, Stiglitz and Weiss [19811 exploit informational

asymmetries to motivate a form of credit rationing where the market denies funds

to borrowers with characteristics identical to those receiving loans.     The key

unobserved factor is the riskiness of borrowers' projects.     It is also assumed

that borrowers issue standard risky debt which pays lenders a fixed interest

rate if the project yield is sufficiently high, and pays the net yield other-

wise.    Thus, for a given loan rate,   lenders earn a lower expected return on

loans to bad quality borrowers (those with riskier projects) than to good.        This

occurs because an unobserved mean preserving spread in a borrower's project

return distribution reduces the expected payment to lenders under default.

(Lenders receive no offsetting compensation in the non-default state, since the

loan rate is unchanged.)

   Stiglitz and Weiss show that, given their assumptions, the loan supply

curve may bend backwards and that credit rationing can emerge us a consequence.

Essentially, the lemons principle is at work.     A rise in the interest rate

lowers the average borrower quality, as those with relatively safe projects are

the first to drop out.    Thus, after a point, further increases in the interest

rate may lower lenders' expected return, making the loan supply curve bend back-

                          - where some borrowers are arbitrarily denied credit —
wards.   Rationing arises

when the loan demand and supply curves do not intersect.4 The quantity of loans
                                          18



offered is the maximum the supply curve permits.       The excess demand for loans

persists because adjustments in the interest rate cannot      equilibrate   the market;

further increases in the interest rate only lower the supply of loans offered.

   Many papers elaborate on the theme initiated by Jaffee/Russell and

Stiglitz/Weiss.5 The results often depend greatly on the particular infor-

mational asymmetries posed between borrowers and lenders.       Nonetheless, two

basic conclusions usually emerge: First, the postulated incentive problems

distort the market equilibrium, most often toward underlending; second, they

make the equilibrium quantity of lending more sensitive than otherwise to exoge-

nous disturbances.    A recent example is Mankiw (19861 who analyzes a credit

market plagued by lemons problems and shows how a small rise in the riskless

interest rate can lead to a large reduction in lending,      possibly even a

collapse.    The result occurs because the increase in the riskiess rate forces up

the loan rate, which reduces the average quality of borrowers as in Stiglitz

and Weiss.    This in turn forces the loan rate up further to offset the lemons

effect.     If the lemons problem is severe enough, the market will collapse.

   A notable distinction of Mankiw's results is that they do not hinge on the

existence of credit rationing, narrowly defined.       There are no loan ceilings for

individual borrowers (since all project sizes are fixed).       Also, identical

borrower types receive identical treatment, in contrast to Stiglitz and Weiss.

It is true, however, that market forces exclude a number of borrowers who would

otherwise obtain loans in the absence of informational problems.       The important

point is that the basic insights from this literature need not be tied to par-

ticular forms of credit rationing.

    Another strand of this literature emphasizes that lemons problems may affect

equity markets as well as debt markets.        Myers and Majluf (19841 and Greenwald,

Stiglitz and Weiss [1984) discuss how asymmetric information about the value of
                                          19


a firm's existing assets can restrict its ability to issue new shares.         Outside

 lenders must discern whether the share issue is a legitimate effort to either

obtain new financing or diversify risk, or is instead simply an attempt to pass

off bad assets.   This problem may lower the price the firm can obtain for its

equity, and in extreme cases, make it prohibitive to issue new shares.         Evidence

for this phenomena, according to Greenwald, Stiglitz and Weiss, is that a firm's

announcement of a new issue typically leads to a significant decline in its

market value.   The authors also emphasize the analogy between "equity rationing"

and credit rationing more generally.     As   is true for the latter,   the former may

affect a firm's real investment decisions by constraining its ability to raise

external funds or to suitably diversify risk.

    Particular results in literature discussed thus far are sometimes highly

sensitive to exogenous restrictions made on the forms of the relevant financial

contracts.   For example, in some models, allowing borrowers to issue a richer

menu of liabilities than the simple risky debt contract described earlier can

eliminate the incentive problems.   (See DeMeza and Webb t19871     for an illustra-

tion of this point.)   This is troublesome, since real world financial arrange-

ments are largely endogenous outcomes.    Even introducing empirically motivated

restrictions on contract forms is worrisome, given the rapid pace of financial

innovation; what is true in financial markets today need not be true tomorrow.

These problems have stimulated a recent literature which attempts to explore the

effects of financial markets inefficiencies without making a priori assumptions

about financial structure.

    Under this new approach the real/financial interaction is a purely endoge-

nous outcome, which arises explicitly from assumptions about the information

structure, and other primitive factors, such as preferences and technology. An

important early paper is Townsend [1979], which derives circumstances where
                                             20


standard risky debt contracts say be optimal.       He considers the problem of a

lender and borrower interested in formulating a bilterel loan agreement.            Two

key premises are, first, that the lender must pay a fixed cost to observe the

returns to the borrower's project   -   in   Townsend's terminology there is "costly

state verfication" - and, second that the borrower does not have sufficient colla-

teral to fully secure the loan.     The dilemma the lender faces is that the

borrower who is unmonitored has the incentive to misreport the project out-

come, but that it is inefficient to commit to auditing the borrower under all

circumstances.

    Townsend formally proves that the optimal contract has the following

features: It specifies a "no-default" yield r.        IF the project yield is suf-

ficiently high, the lender receives r and does not audit.         If not, the borrower

declares "default" and the lender monitors.        Thus,   the efficient contract is

debt with possible costly default.6     While the analysis does not provide a

complete description of bankruptcy, it does offer a very tractable and explicit
                                                 real Costs to the lending pro-
way to illustrate how incentive problems can add

cess.

    Several recent papers have used the costly state verification framework to

study how financial considerations may have allocative consequences.            Gale and

Heliwig t1985] analyze the interaction between the real
                                                        and         financial   decisions

of a firm which must borrow to finance factor inputs. In analogy to Townsend,

lenders Cannot costlessly observe the firm's output.          Gale and Heliwig show how

this informational problem ultimately constrains the firm's input demand.            Input

investment is lower than otherwise because the marginal cost of funds includes

the change in expected default costs; the optimal financial contract compensates

lenders for the greater probability of default resulting from a rise in

(leveraged) input demand.
                                          21



    Williamson [19871 analyzes a related problem in a market context, and

demonstrates how it is possible to explain the type of credit rationing charac-

terized by Stiglitz and Weiss, without a priori restrictions on financial

contracts.    Rationing may occur because the expected default costs stemming from

costly state verification may make it prohibitively expensive for borrowers to

obtain funds from lenders with high opportunity costs.     (Borrowers are identical

cx ante, but lenders vary according to their opportunity costs of funds).       As

with Gale and Heliwig, the allocative effects arise because the informational

problems effectively increase the marginal cost of funds.

       There are of course good reasons for not taking the costly state verifica-

tion model as literal description of many lending situations.    There exist many

circumstances where auditing and other default costs are insubstantial and where

borrowers issue liabilities other than standard risky debt contracts.    However,

similar types of qualitative conclusions regarding the link between infor-

mational asymmetries, the joint determination of real and financial variables,

and the inefficiency of the investment process emerge in settings with richer

descriptive features.

    For example, Bernanke and Gertler [1987bJ examine the endogenous interaction

between financial structure and real activity in a market with a general type of

lemons problem present.    In their setting, entrepreneurs (or, possibly cor-

porate managers) evaluate potential investment projects and proceed with those

which are profitable to them.    Because of insufficient resources, they must

obtain at least some outside funding.    Importantly, however, the information

they   obtain about project quality (i.e., the project's success probability) is

private knowledge to them.    This provides entrepreneurs with too strong an

incentive to proceed with the project they have initiated, since they can pass

off to lenders poor quality projects as good quality ones,
                                         22



      The optimal financial contract accounts for the lemons problem by struc-

turing the payoffs in a way to discourage this activity.    Because it is not

                                             — see the                       —
possible to completely eliminate the problem           paper for the details

the   cost of capital entrepreneurs face incorporates a lemons premium.    In ana-


logy to the earlier literature (with exogenous contract forms), this

lemons-induced rise in borrowing costs reduces the efficiency of the investment

process and in severe cases may induce an investment collapse.    An implication

is that informational distortions can in theory have quantitatively significant

effects on investment behavior.    In addition, the conclusions extend beyond

situations where simple debt contracts are the exclusive financial instruments.

The optimal contracts which emerge in the analysis are general state-contingent

contracts, which have a variety of institutional representations e.g., com-

binations of debt and equity, intermediary credit lines).

      As with the previous literature, conclusions from this recent work are often

sensitive to the postulated incentive problem.    The question arises,    What types

of general testable predictions can these models make, particularly ones rele-

vant to aggregate behavior?    Bernanke and Gertler [1986) argue that for a wide

class of environments the following proposition holds, The market equilibrium

level of investment depends positively on borrower balance sheet positions,

defined as the ratio of net worth to liabilities. In this regard,    there is a

strong connection between the conclusions of thim new literature and the ideas

which arose much earlier from the informal    discussions of Fisher, Gurley and

Shaw and others.

      The argument proceeds roughly as follows: A strengthened balance sheet

implies a borrower has more resources available to either use directly for pro—

ject finance or as collateral in obtaining outside funds.    This reduces the

borrower's cost of obtaining external funds by lowering the informational risk
                                          23


that outside lenders face, and in turn stimulates investment.        Examples of this

theoretical link between balance sheets and investment appear in Bernanke and

Gertler (1986],    [1987bJ and Calomaris and Hubbard [19871.    The two former papers

emphasize the cyclical interaction of these two variables and how a financially—

induced investment collapse is possible.       The latter uses the Stiglitz/Weiss

model to illustrate how borrower balance sheet positions affect the degree of

credit rationing.     In the end, one may view these analyses as attempts at formal

underpinnings for the Gurley/Shaw notion that "financial capacity" matters to

private spending.

    An equivalent prediction of these papers is that borrower investment deci-

sions will be     excessively sensitive" to Current Cash flow, that is, more san—

stive than they would be absent capital market problems.        In a setting of

perfect markets, cash flow and investment may be positively correlated because

movements in the former may signal movements in the firm's future earnings

potential.   With capital market imperfections there is an additional effect

A rise (fall) in cash flow strengthens (weakens)     the firm's balance sheet and

thus lowers (increases) its cost of capital.      In this vein, it is possible to

rationalize income-accelerator effects on investment.      (By making   a related

appeal to capital market imperfections, one can also explain why consumption

spending may be excessively sensitive to current income.       See, for example,

Scheinkman and Weiss [1985] for a theoretical analysis and Zeldes [1985] for an

empirical treatment.)

   Another prediction relevant to the empirical implementation of these ilels

is that new borrowers will face tighter financial constraints than those

long and reasonably successful track records, everything else equal.       In a fric-

tionless environment, for example, young firms and mature firms should be able

to obtain funds equally well at risk corrected interest     rates.   The same need
                                            24

not be true when informational asymmetries are relevant, for several reasons.

First,     lenders will generally know more about mature firms,   since    they will have

had some time and experience to learn about relevant characteristics. Second,

mature firms may credibly enter repeated relationships with lenders,          the signi-

ficance being that long term relationships help mitigate informational problems.

The reasons for this is that multi-period contracts permit more flexibility in

structuring incentives to curb against deviant behavior,      For example, Stiglitz

and Weiss £1983) provide an example of how lenders may use the threat to cut off

credit in the future to improve the current behavior of borrowers.

    A final testable implication is, ceteris paribus, that financial constraints

are likely to have more impact on the real decisions of individual borrowers and

small firms than on large firms.     First, the class of large firms consists pri-

marily of mature firms who have the advantages described above.       Second, there

may be an informational economy of scale in lending to large firms, to the

extent that lenders may face fixed costs of gathering certain types of critical

data about borrowers.

    In a very interesting and ambitious paper, Fazzari, Hubbard and Peterson

(1987)     find empirical support for these various propositions.   Using Value Line

data, they conduct a time series and cross-sectional analysis of a broad class

of firms. The main result is     that,   overall, investment is significantly more

sensitive to current cash flow than a frictionless neoclassical model would pre-

dict.     Further, the conclusions are most dramatic for new firms and small firms.

The authors buttress their arguments by reporting evidence from a case study

of corporate financing behavior over the period 1960-1980, by Srini Vasan

(1986].     The study shows that small to medium size manufacturing firms       —   which
account for roughly a quarter of all manufacturing assets —       relied   heavily on

internal    funds; they used this source to finance eighty five percent of their
                                            25


new investments.       (In addition, see Calomaris, Hubbard and Stock [1987]   for an

empirical analysis of how credit market problems afflict the agricultural sector

and Chirinko [1987)      for a recent econometric study of liquidity effects on

investment.)


11.2    Models of Financial Intermediation

       Current research on the macroeconomic implications of financial inter-

mediation incorporates many of earlier ideas of Gurley and Shaw and others.

It stresses the role of these institutions in overcoming imperfections in

markets which transfer funds between savers and investors.         Differences with the

traditional literature largely reflect advances in methodology.         The new work

applies first principles to explain the existence and structure of inter-

mediaries, and to describe how these institutions may interact with aggregate

real activity.

    Because the objective is so ambitious, this new literature is still at an

early stage.       While the models developed thus far capture basic features of

intermediation, they are still not rich in detail.       Whether it is necessary to

enhance certain descriptive aspects of these models before arriving at substan-

tive behavioral and policy conclusions is an important and open question.

    As a prelude to further discussion,      it is interesting   to compare two papers
on intermediation by Fama, spaced five years apart.       The first, Fama [1980),

characterizes the role of intermediaries, taking the frictionless competitive

'iarkets model as a working hypothesis.     The paper describes how, in this

environment, banks and other financial institutions are simply veils over real

economic behavior.      This follows since the Modigliani-Miller theorem applies in

this setting, and hence financial structure —      including   the structure of inter-

mediation —   is   both indeterminate and irrelevant.
                                          26

   The second, Fama [1985], takes Sr alternative route and considers why inter-

mediaries might indeed play an important role in the economy, particularly com-

mercial banks.   The starting point is the casual observation that borrowers who

obtain bank loans typically pay a higher return than the market rate on directly

placed securities of similar maturity.     The inference drawn is that,     for certain

classes of borrowers, bank credit is "special" - open market credit is not

available as a perfect substitute.     Fama then argues that this feature of bank

lending arises, because of the comparative advantage banks develop in gathering

information about borrowers.     This advantage implies that intermediation      -is



often not simply a veil, and is instead for many situations the most efficient

way to minimize the types of informational distortions described in the previous

section.

    Diamond [1984] provides an early example of how it    -is   possible to formally

explain intermediary-like institutions. He considers a setting with an infor-

mation structure similar to the one in Townsend's costly state verification

model: Lenders cannot freely observe the returns to borrowers' projects.          As

with Townsend, the optimal bilateral financial arrangement is a risky debt

contract, under which the lender monitors the borrower in the event of default.

An important difference from Townsend is that project sizes and endowment pat-

terns are fixed so that borrowers need to obtain funds from many individuals.

    Diamond then proves that, in order to economize on monitoring costs, it is

optimal for a competitive financial institution to channel funds between savers

and borrowers.   Further, the structure of this institution
                                                                 -   which arises endo-

genously -   shares   basic features of a conventional intermediary. This institu-

tion: (i) writes loan contracts with individual borrowers and monitors borrowers

who default; (ii) holds a heavily diversified portfolio; (iii)         transforms assets

for savers    in particular, the individual liabilities which the institution
                                              27


issues to savers have smoother payoff patterns than the individual securities

they obtain from borrowers.

    Diamond shows that the latter two characteristics arise to solve a potential

incentive problem between the financial institution and its depositors.            To

                                                                       institu-
avoid duplication of monitoring costs, it is clearly efficient for the
                                                                        of the deposi-
tion to perform as a         delegated monitor" of borrowers, on behalf

tors.      But the following issue arises: How do the depositors monitor the

monitor?      Diamond's argument is that the institution can circumvent this problem

                                                    Diversification eliminates the need
by holding a heavily diversified portfolio.
                                                                              to
for depositors to audit the intermediary, because it permits the intermediary

credibly offer savers a return which is unaffected by any of the independent

risks that borrowers face.

    A number of papers have followed Diamond's path to study the            link between


intermediation and real activity.         For example, Williamson [1986] uses a similar

environment to illustrate how intermediation and credit rationing may be
                                                                          state
interrelated phenomena. Rationing emerges in his framework because costly
                                                                      inter-
verification adds a premium to loan rates (see the previous section);
                                                                        —   and thus
mediation arises simultaneously as way to minimize this premium

minimize     rationing   —
                             by economizing on monitoring Costs, in analogy to Diamond's

argument.
                                             intermediaries play in evaluating
    Boyd and Prescott [1986) stress the role

loan projects cx ante and, relatedly, in minimizing the types of lemons problems

described in the earlier section.         They consider an environment where each
                                                               a project.               The
individual is endowed with both a limited amount of wealth and

latter is either of good or bad quality, and its type is the individual's pri-
                                                                        these coali-
vate information.        Endogenous intermediary coalitions emerge, and
                                                                   become savers
tions structure incentives so that those with bad quality projects
                                          28


while those with good quality ones seek funding.       The devices that these inter-

mediaries use are project evaluations and financial contract structure.

Further, diversification is desirable because it allows the intermediary to

implement the optimal incentive scheme with certainty.7

    Other papers have attempted to enrich the description of intermediation that

these types of frameworks offer.     Moore [1987] emphasizes that intermediaries,

particularly commercial banks, often enter repeated relationships with lenders.

He Constructs an environment where multi-period loan contracts help mitigate

informational distortions (see the previous section).       He then shows that inter-

mediaries help maximize the efficiency gains from long term relationships by

matching large quantities of lenders and borrowers, and thus diversifying the

risk that individual lenders or borrowers may disrupt multi-period arrangements

by having to suddenly leave the market    (e.g.,   to meet liquidity needs).

    Morgan [1987] considers another prevalent phenomenon, namely that most com-

mercial bank loans are made under loan commitment agreements, as opposed to

being negotiated on the spot.    Further these agreements typically do not specify

fixed loan quantities in advance, only ceiling levels instead.        Morgan first

adds uncertainty about project costs to the basic costly state verification

model.   This uncertainty about funding needs makes borrowers face the risk of

being rationed by lenders,   since default probabilities and thus expected default

costs vary positively with loan size.    Morgan then shows how in the competitive

equilibrium intermediaries will offer borrowers contracts which have the basic

features of loan commitments.    These contracts arise to provide borrowers with

partial insurance against the rationing risk.      (See also Veitch [1986]     and

Greenbaum et. al   [1987]   for related approaches).

   One striking feature of the behavioral theories presented thus far is that

intermediation works extremely well, so well that —     taking   the models literally —
                                        29


a laissez—faire policy toward financial intermediaries is optimal.    This conclu-

sion, however, is at odds with the position taken by policy-makers since the

Depression that the smooth functioning of intermediation, and of commercial

banking particular, requires some form of regulation.

    One possiblity, of course, is that these policy makers simply have been

wrong, and that any problems with financial intermediation instead stem from

unwise government policy.   Gorton and Haubrich (19863 adopt this view, and

present a formal analysis of how regulations which restrict the ability of

intermediaries to diversify or to write contracts - such as the Glass/Steagall

Act — can introduce inefficiencies that might not otherwise exist.8

    An alternative possibility is that there exist natural factors which can

disrupt the intermediation process, not captured in the basic frameworks of

Diamond and others.9   A leading candidate for concern is a liquidity crisis.

Indeed, traditional arguments for intervention (see e.g.,    Friedman and Schwartz

[1986]) cite the need to protect financial institutions exposed to liquidity

risk.

    Diamond and ilybvig [1983] explore the idea that liquidity considerations may

justify the types of interventions in commercial banking which are currently in

effect, such as federal deposit insurance.   They begin with a framework which

emphasizes the iu,purtance of banks in the provision of liquidity.   In their

setting, individuals face uncertain liquidity needs.    Further, these needs are

not publicly observable and therefore not directly insurable.    The incomplete-

ness in markets for liquidity insurance creates a role for banks.    These

institutions are able to provide this insurance by offering individuals deposits

which give them flexibility over the timing of withdrawal.

    The story is not over, however,   since the portfolios of these institutions

are potentially subject to liquidity risk.   6ecause the banks issue liabilities
                                             30


requiring payment on demand, circumstances say arise where they cannot honor the

claims of all those who decide to withdraw.           Diamond and Dybvig demonstrate that

as a result 'sunspot" panics can arise; depositors may withdraw simply in anti-

cipation of others withdrawing, making the prophecy self-fulfilling.                Further,

the panic disrupts real activity to the extent that it forces banks to liquidate

productive loan projects.     Diamond and Oybvig conclude that there is a strong

justification for policies such as deposit insurance which prevent costly

liquidity crises by eliminating the incentive for depositors to panic.10

    The Diamond/Oybvig paper has stimulated a lengthy debate in the literature.

At issue is whether private financial institutions, if left to their own devi-

ces, can make the types of arrangements necessary           to avoid problems like

liquidity panics.     ,Jacklin (1985]   and others, for example, demonstrate that the

bank run equilibrium in the Diamond/Dybivg model arises because of exogenous

restribtions on deposit contracts that banks can offer savers.                The critical

assumption is the "sequential service constraint" which requires that banks

honor deposit withdrawals at face value until they no longer have funds.               This

makes depositors' payoffs depend critically on their respective places in line,

which makes a panic possible.      A bank could   -   in   theory —   avert   a panic by

eliminating the sequential service constraint and instead offering contracts

with equity-like features; in particular, by making deposit returns contingent

on the total number of withdrawals, the bank could eliminate the depositors'

incentive to   run.
    Resolving this debate is difficult.       While in the context of these types of

models there typically exist private contractual arrangements which eliminate

the need for any government intervention, these types of arrangements are

often not observed in practice, as Diamond and Dybvig argue.              (See Gorton (1985]

for an opposing position).     Whether this is because the current regulatory
                                        31


environment either precludes these arrangements or makes them unnecessary, or is

instead because the existing models of intermediary behavior are still

incomplete is an issue that requires further attention.

    In an interesting paper, Bhattacharya and Gale [19871 make a case for

government intervention to insure the smooth flow of liquidity, without

appealing to arbitrary restrictions on private contracts.     In their framework,

banks are able to structure deposit contracts to preclude sunspot runs; however,

individual banks face withdrawal risk because they are not sufficiently diver-

sified across depositors (perhaps for geographic reasons).    This creates the

need for a clearinghouse arrangement among banks, under which those banks suf-

fering heavy withdrawals can borrow from those who do not.    Bhattacharya and

Gale then show that if it is costly to monitor individual bank portfolios, banks

will invest suboptimally in liquid assets.   The private scheme encourages banks

to hold a very illiquid portfolio, and instead rely heavily on the clearinghouse

to meet withdrawal risk.   This occurs because the clearinghouse rate is lower

than the rate banks can earn on illiquid assets, for insurance purposes.      Since

all banks hold too few liquid assets, less than the desired amount of funds are

available to the clearinghouse to meet legitimate loan requests.    Shattacharya

and Gale then show it is optimal for the government to provide subsidized

                                                                          either
liquidity insurance to private banks; the optimal policy is interpretable

as deposit insurance or subsidized discount window lending.

    Implicit in the Bhattacharya/Gale paper is the following important point

Any case for government intervention into particular forms of intermediation

probably rests on the absence of well functioning secondary markets for the

assets of the relevant financial institutions.12    Liquidity risk is not a

problem for banks or other intermediaries if they can easily obtain funds by

marketing their assets.    Bhattacharya and Gale proceed by assuming banks cannot
                                          32


trade their assets.    But they are not without support: Many recent authors

(e.g.,    Fama (1985] and Bernanke and Gertler (1987a]) argue that an important

feature of commercial banks is that a good fraction of the assets they hold are

information intensive loans, securities which are nonmarketable due to being

highly idiosyncratic and imperfectly collateralized.13 Moreover, it is this

feature which may make them candidates for special attention, and not their role

in money provision —    many other financial institutions provide transactions and

liquidity services to depositors, and function perfectly well because they have
                  14
marketable assets.

    In this spirit, Bernanke and Gertler (1987a] develop a model of banking and

macroeconomic behavior which stresses the role of banks in facilitating credit

flows.    The analysis first demonstrates how the financial health of the banking

sector itself say be important to the macroeconomy and second discusses how

monetary policy can matter to real activity by affecting the flow of bank

credit.

    In their setting, bank capital plays an important role in securing the

liabilities banks issue to depositors.    It is assumed that banks have private

information about the returns to their portfolio, but that they cannot perfectly

diversify independent risks from loan projects, due to spatial considerations

(in analogy to Bhattacharya and Gale).    Having larger quantities of net worth

permits a bank to Obtain more deposits and, correspondingly, to allocate a

larger fraction of its portfolio to risky loans; it provides the bank with sore

collateral to guarantee its liabilities and to therefore mitigate the infor-

mational risk that depositors face.15    Thus, overall, bank net worth positions

govern the scale of banking and hence the flow of bank credit.    This in turn has

implications for investment and output.
                                          33


      The framework Bernanke and Gertler develop is essentially a formalized ver-

sion of an extreme Gurley/Shaw environment.     There exist perfect substitutes for

bank liabilities, but not for bank assets)6      Using reasoning similar to Blinder

and Stiglitz (1983),   the authors then demonstrate how monetary policy can matter

by affecting the availability of bank credit, in contrast to the traditional

Keynesian and Monetarist stories.     This transmission mechanism arises to the

extent that, first, the level of bank reserves constrains bank lending and that,

second the central bank can control the real quantity of reserves (e.g., due to

temporary price stickiness).    (See Farmer [19861 for a description of a

"credit-based" monetary transmission mechanism which relies on reserve require-

ments, but not on price inertia.)

      Whether monetary policy matters by affecting bank liabilities or bank assets

is another issue which deserves further scrutiny.     The empirical evidence thus

far is mixed.    (See King £1985]   and Bernanke [1985] for opposing conclusions.)

Part of the problem may be due to the general difficulty of discerning struc-

tural relationships from time series data.


tI.3   Models of Business Fluctuations

      Only recently have macroeconomists regained an interest in exploring issues

of financial structure. Interestingly, this contrasts with many economists in

the   private sector who have continuously stressed the importance of financial

variables in output determination.      In the ORI econometric forecasting model,

for example, procyclical movements in balance sheet positions and other related

constructs feed back into output behavior.      As Eckatein and Sinai   [1986]   argue,

this financial mechanism is important for predicting business fluctuations.          The

current research in this area tries to formalize the types of propagation mecha-

nisms discussed in Eckstein and Sinai's paper and in the earlier academic
                                          34


literature, described previously.     In this regard, it attempts to provide

theories emphasizing financial factors using the same level of rigor as real

business cycle analysis.

    An early example of the new approach is Sheinkman and Weiss tl986], which

demonstrates how borrowing constraints can increase the variability of consump-

tion, output and employment. The paper considers an environment where two

representative individuals face negatively correlated productivity risks.        In a

frictionless environment, the individuals can either directly insure these risks

or accomplish the same through lending and borrowing; in this case,      individual

risks do not induce aggregate fluctuations.    In a setting where these markets

do not exist, the individuals must self-insure by adjusting consumption, saving

and labor supply.   Scheinkman and Weiss demonstrate how this behavior at the

individual level leads to cycles in aggregate behavior.17

    Other papers focus on motivating the financial structure endogenously, in

analogy to the literature discussed in the previous two sections.       Farmer [19841

presents a model where informational problems between lenders and borrowers

magnify the effects of changes in the riskless interest rate on output.

Entrepreneurs privately observe the productivity and ax post returns of their

loan projects.   Moreover, they have limited liability, so that the optimal

financial arrangement with lenders is a debt contract with a default option, for

reasons roughly similar to Townsend's argument. A change in the riskless rate

has an enlarged effect on loan rates - and therefore on output — because it

alters the default rate.   A subsequent paper, Farmer   [1985],   uses similar

reasoning to suggest why interest rate movements might have magnified effects on

employment demand and layoff probabilities, to the extent that firms need

leverage to finance factor demands.
                                         35


   Related approaches emphasize the role of intermediation.       For example,

Williamson [19871   incorporates his model of intermediation and credit rationing

(described earlier) into a simple business cycle framework to study the interac-

tion between financial and real variables.      Productivity disturbances
                                                                          -      in    the

form of mean preserving spreads to project returns — change default probabili-

ties, thereby affecting the degree   of credit rationing and the levels of invest-

ment and output.

    Finally, a number of papers attempt to explicitly formulate the balance

sheet and cash flow effects on investment and output fluctuations described by

Eckstein and Sinai and earlier by Fisher, Gurley and Shaw, and others.        Bernanke

and Gertler [19861 develop a framework in which endogenous procyclical movements

in entrepreneurial net worth magnify investment and output fluctuations.          Prior

to the introduction of informational asymmetries, the framework resembles a

simple real business cycle model; financial structure is irrelevant. Adding

the asymmetries, however, makes financial arrangements determinate and also

makes the borrowers' net worth positions key factors governing their capacity

to obtain external funds, for reasons discussed in Section 3.1.       Further,


Bernanke and Gertler structure the framework so that movements in output produce

positively correlated changes in borrower balance sheets.      As a result,      the


wedge between the Cost of external versus internal     funds moves counter-

cyclically, thus magnifying swings in investment and output.      Essentially,

an income-accelerator effect on investment emerges because increases in income

relax borrowing constraints.

    The paper also provides some formal support for Fisher's debt-deflation

story.   In the theoretical framework, redistributions between borrowers and len-

ders matter to aggregate real activity.       A transfer from debtors to creditors -
                                                                 - weakens
due, for example, to an unanticipated decline in the price level
                                            36



debtors' balance sheets and thus reduces their ability to externally finance

investments; because the debtor class includes those most efficient at managing

investment projects, the redistribution lowers investment and real activity.

    Greenwald and Stiglitz [1986] present a related analysis, which illustrates

the cycliCal implications of constraints on firms'        abilities to issue new

                                          - as described in Greenwald, Stiglitz
equity.   They appeal to equity rationing

and Weiss [1984]    (see section 11.1) -   to   motivate an environment where each

firm finances labor input exclusively with debt.         Because default is costly to

managers (e.g., it adversely affects their reputations), a firm's employment

demand depends on how well it can secure its debt, and hence on its equity

position.   Movements in cash flow affect employment demand by altering the

quantity of internal funds available.       Also,   wealth redistributions and relative

price changes affect borrowing constraints and, in this capacity, can matter to

aggregate activity.

    One limitation of these models — one that needs to be overcome before they

can explicitly confront time series data in the way real business cycle

frameworks do —    is   that they typically abstract from multi—period financial

arrangements. This is done to avoid the technical problems inherent in general

equilibrium modelling of long term relationships.         An important exception is

Green [1985].   This paper derives the optimal contract structure for an economy

of infinitely lived individuals who face independent and privately observed

income disturbances.       The informational problems preclude individuals from per-

fectly insuring against these risks.       Green proves that under the optimal

contractual arrangement individuals can obtain partial insurance by entering a

long term borrower/lender relationship with a diversified intermediary.

Further, the amount an individual can borrow depends on his net worth position.

As a result, individuals spending patterns will depend on the evolution of their
                                         37


respective net worth positions.    The next level of theoretical development in

this literature will, I think,    involve extensions of Green's work.

    Another current limitation is that these frameworks have very ambiguous

policy implications. In analogy to the intermediation literature, the basic

issue involves whether the government can improve on the types of contractual

arrangements that would arise in an unfettered private economy.       The results are

highly sensitive to the postulated information structure.      (See Townsend [1987]

for a general discussion of the sensitive connection between the information

structure and private equilibrium contractual arrangements.)

    Finally, the analyses are not well integrated with monetary theory.       The

major obstacle is probably the general difficulty of incorporating money into

general equilibrium frameworks. As result, it is difficult to sharply evaluate

the effects of monetary policy.    Townsend [1983] has made some progress in this

direction by appealing to inefficiencies in trade resulting from spatial separa-

tion to develop a unified treatment of money, credit, and output growth.

Understanding the exact link between these phenomena requires further study.


Concluding Remarks

    Summers [1986] has recently argued that historical experience suggests

recessions, and certainly depressions, involve breakdowns in trade in one form

or another — and that any theory of output determination must ultimately be able

to address this phenomenon. At the same    time,   Prescott [19861 has restated the

importance of internal consistency.    The new literature on the real/financial

interaction proceeds in the spirit of both these arguments.

    At this preliminary stage, it offers rigorous explanations for how inef-

ficiencies in intertemporal trade may arise.       It suggests how these inefficien-

cies manifest themselves in the behavior of financial markets and institutions
                                         38


and, mostly importantly, why they may be significant factors in aggregate econo-

mic activity.    There are as well a rich set of testable implications about the

co-movement between a broad array of real and financial variables,    And some

initial   empirical work has yielded encouraging results (,e.g., Fazzari, Hubbard

and Peterson [1987].)

      A major obstacle remains, nonetheless.   The theoretical models developed

thus far are highly stylized and capable of generating only qualitative predic-

tions.    Due to methodological limitations, there currently does not exist a

unified framework which can directly confront data, as for example is possible

with a real business cycle model.   This tractability problem appears common to

all   theories that appeal to (rigorously motivated) market inefficiencies to

explain aspects of macroeconomic behavior.     It alone, however, is not grounds

for abandoning the general approach.
                                           39


                                       Footnotes


    1This argument seems even more applicable to the contemporary economy, given

the rapid pace of financial innovation.      See Hester [1985) for a recent

discussion.

    2The literature distinguishes two general types of information problems

first, adverse selection - where trading parties have asymmetric information

prior to contracting - and second, moral hazard
                                                     -   where the asymmetries arise

after contracting.   See Gale [1987]    for a recent discussion of the behavior of

markets under adverse selection, and Hart and Holmstrom [1986]        for a treatment

of moral hazard.

    3The reasoning is similar to Rothschild and Stiglitz's [1976] and Wilson's

[1977)   description of how adverse selection may disrupt insurance markets.

    4Bester [1985) argues that banks may be able to screen the good borrowers

through collateral requirements, and thus eliminate the rationing.

Inefficiencies will remain however, since good borrowers will be exposing them-

selves to greater risk relative to the perfect information case.         Further,

Hellwig [1986] discusses how Bester's Conclusions are very sensitive to the form

of the game between banks and borrowers.

    5A recent example is Smith [1983], who embeds the Jaffee/Russell model into

a simple general equilibrium framework to evaluate the effects of central bank

discount window policies.

    6The argument assumes that the lender only uses deterministic monitoring

strategies and that he commits to monitoring in the default state even though it

may not be in his interest to do so ax post.       See Mookherjee and Png [1987) and

Townsend [1987) who generalize the analysis to allow for random monitoring

schemes.   See Moore [1987) who relaxes the commitment assumption.       One implica-

tion of these analyses is that the optimal contract form need not be debt.
                                          40


    In addition, to obtain simple debt contracts as the exclusive financial

instrument, it is also necessary that the borrower's returns not be correlated

with aggregate variables.     Otherwise, the optimal financial contract will

include contingencies based on the movements in these aggregates.

    It should be stressed that these caveats     do not alter the basic point that

the informational asymmetries reduce the efficiency of the financial process.

       central feature of the Boyd/Prescott analysis is that it uses the theory

of mechanism design (see, e.g., Harris and Townsend (1978] and Townsend (1985])

to endogenously motivate intermediation.       Roughly speaking, the optimal inter-

mediary structure emerges as the institutional scheme that implements the opti-

mal allocation resulting from a social planning problem, which is to maximize

welfare subject to the relevant informational and technological constraints.

See also, Haubrich, [1987].

    8One can't let this statement pass,    I suppose, without wondering for a

moment about what might have happened to the commercial banking system last

week, had Glass/Steagall not been in tact.

    9lhis possibility has motivated a number of researchers to study historical

episodes of free banking.     See Rolnick and Weber [1984] for a treatment of the

U.S. experience.

    10See Bryant (1980] and Smith [1986] for related analyses.       In addition,

Bental, Eckstein and Peled [1987] study the problem in a international setting.

    Need1ess to    say, my confidence in arguments that private institutional

arrangements can avert panics has dwindled a bit, after last week.

         alternative, discussed by Smith [19841      is that legal restrictions such

as interest ceilings may be necessary to ensure that an equilibrium exists in

the presence of adverse selection problems.
    13Bank assets   I.dhich   are securitized and sold on secondary markets are typi-

cally collaterized relatively well (e.g., car loans and mortgages).        See

Pennachi [1987] for an argument why moral hazard problems may inhibit an active

second market for idiosyncratic and unsecured business loans.

    140ne puzzle left unexplained (in theory) is why certain financial institu-

tions combine transactions and lending services.        One possibility, suggested by

Black [1975)   is that banks can better monitor their loan customers if they are

as well processing their transactions accounts.        See Fischer [19831 as well for

a discussion of this issue.

    15See also Samolyk [1987], who analyzes the connection between net worth and

banks' ability to withstand interest rate risk.

    16See James [1987] and Chirinko and King [1987] for empirical support for

the view that banks have a special role in the credit supply process.

    17See also Blinder [1986] who illustrates how borrowing constraints may

add to the variability of output, in the context of an IS/LM model.
                                           42


                                      Bibliography


Akerlof, George, "The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market

    Mechanism", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (1970), 488—500.

Barro, Robert J., 'Unanticipated Money, Output and the Price Level in the United

    States," Journal of Political Economy 86 (1978), 549-80.

Bental, Ben, Zvi Eckstein and Dan Peled, "Competitive Banking with Confidence

    Crisis and International Borrowing," Carnegie—Mellon University, mimeo,

    1987.


Bernanke, Ben S .,"Alternative Explanations of the Money/Income Correlation,"

    mimeo, Princeton University, 1985.

_________________ "Non—Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the

    Propogation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review 73 (June

    1983), 257—76.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler, "Agency Costs, Collateral, and Business

    Fluctuations", NBER working paper no. 2015, (September 1986).

_________________    "Banking   and Macroeconomic Equilibrium", In New Approaches

    to Monetary Economics, edited by William A. Barnett and Kenneth Singleton,

    New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987(a), 89-111.

________________     "Financial   Fragility and Economic Performance", NBER Working

    Paper No. 2318, 1987(b).

Bester, Helmut, "Screening vs. Rationing in Credit Markets with Imperfect

    Information," American Economic Review (1985), 850-855.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto and Douglas Gale, "Preference Shocks, Liquidity and

    Central Bank Policy".    In New Approaches to Monetary Economics, edited by

    William A. Barnett and Kenneth Singleton, New York:     Cambridge Press,

    (1987), 69—88.
                                          43


Black, Fischer, 'Bank Funds Management in an Efficient Market, Journal of

    Financial Economics (December 1975), 325-39,

Blanchard, Ol-ivier J., "Why Does Money Affect Output?    A Survey', MIT working

    paper no. 453 (June 1987).

Blinder, Alan, "Credit Rationing and Effective Supply Failures,' The Economic

    Journal 97, (June 1987), 327-352.

____________ and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Money Credit Constraints, and Economic

    Activity,' American Economic Review 73 (May 1983), 297-302.

Boyd, John and Edward Prescott, "Financial Intermediary—Coalitions",     Journal of

    Economic Theory, (April 1986), 221—232.

Brainard, William and James Tobin, 'Financial Intermediation and the

    Effectiveness of Monetary Control," American Economic Review, (May 1963),

    383-400.

Brock, William A. and Leonard J. Mirman, "Optimal Economic Growth and

    Uncertainty:     The Discounted Cases", Journal of Econmomic Theory 4:

    479—5 13.

                                                                       Journal
Bryant, John, "A Model of Reserves, Bank Runs, and Deposit Insurance,"

    of Banking and Finance 4 (1980), 335-344.

Calomiris, Charles and Glenn Hubbard, "Imperfect Information, Multiple Loan

    Markets, and Credit Rationing", Northwestern University, mimeo, 1986.

__________      and James Stock, "The Farm Debt Crisis and Public Policy",

    Brookings Papers on Economic Activjy, (1986), 441-79.

Chirinko, Robert S., "Tobin's Q and Financial Policy," Journal of Monetary

    Economics 19 (1987), 69-87.

___________________   and Stephen R. King, "Bank Loans and Information

    Accumulation," University of Chicago, mimeo, 1987.

deMeza, David and David Webb, "Too Much Investment: A Problem of Asymmetric
                                           44


    Information", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102 (May 1987), 281—292.

Diamond, Douglas, "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring", Review of

    Economic Studies, 51 (July 1984), 393—414.

______________       and Philip Dybvig, "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and

    Liquidity," Journal of Political Econom_y 91 (June 1983), 401—419.

Eckstein, Otto, and Allen Sinai      "The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle in the

    Postwar Era" edited by Robert Gordon, The American Business Cycle:

    Continuity and Change, Chicago:      University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1986,

    39—132.

Eichenbaum, Martin and Kenneth Singleton, "Do Equilibrium Real Business Cycle

    Theories Explain Post War Business Cycles?", in "NBER Macroeconomics

    Annual", edited by Stanley Fischer, 1, MIT Press, 1986, 91—l34.

Fama, Eugene, Banking in the Theory of Finance," Journal of Monetary Economics,

    10,    (1980), 10—19.

________    "What's Different   About Banks?," Journal of Monetary Economics 15

    (January 1985), 29-40.

Farmer, Roger, "A New Theory of Aggregate Supply", American Economic Review ?4

    (December 1984), 920-30.

_____________    "Implicit   Contracts with Asymmetric Information and Bankruptcy:

    The Effect of Interest Rates on Layoffs", Review of Economic Studies 52

    1985, 427—442.

_____________    "Money and Contracts," University of Pennsylvania, mimeo, 1986.

Fazzari, Stephen, Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Peterson, "Financing Constraints and

    Corporate Investment," Northwestern University, mirneo, 1987.

Fischer, Stanley, "A Framework for Monetary and Banking Analysis," Economic

    Journal 92 (March 1983), 1-15.
                                               45


Fisher, Irving, "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions," Econometrica

    1    (October 1933), 337-57.

Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz, A Monetary History of The United States:

    1867—1960, Princeton University Press, 1963.

__________________________________          "Has Government any Role in Money,' Journal

    of Monetary Economics, 1986, 37-62.

Friedman, Benjamin      P1.,   "Posthar Changes in the American Financial Markets.

    In The American Economy in Transition edited by Martin Feldstein, Chicago:

          University of Chicago Press, 1980, 9—78.

___________________ (1982)            Debt and Economic Activity in the United States.'

    Friedman (ed.), The Changjg Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing U.S.

    Capital Formation.         Chicago:   University of Chicago Press, 91—110.

Gale, Douglas, "A Walrasian Theory of Markets         .iith   Adverse Selection,"

    University of Pittsburgh, mimeo, 1987.

____________ and Martin Hellwig, "Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts               I:   The

    One-Period Problem", Review of Economic Studies 52 (October 1985), 647-664.

Goldsmith, Raymond, Financial Structure and Development, Yale University Press,

    1969.

Gorton, Gary, "Check Clearing, Banking Panics, and the Structure of the Banking

    Industry," University of Pennsylvania, mimeo, 1985.

____________ and J. Haubrich, "Bank Deregulation, Credit Markets and the Control

    of Capital," University of Pennsylvania, mimeo, 1986.

Green,   Edb.lard,   "Lending and the Smoothing of Uninsurable Income," University of

    Pittsburgh, mimeo, 1985.

Greenbaum, Stewart, George Kamatas and Itzhak Venezia, "Loan Commitments and

    Credit Demand Uncertainty", Northwestern University, mimeo, 1987,
                                            46


Greenwald, Bruce, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Information, Finance Constraints, and

    Business Fluctuations," Princeton University, mimeo, 1986.

____________________________________       and Andrew Weiss, "Informational

    Imperfections in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic Fluctuations",

    American Economic Review 74 (May 1984), 194-200.

Gurley, John and Edward Shaw, "Financial Aspects of Economic Development,"

    American Economic Review 45 (September 1955), 515—38.

Hall, Robert and Dale Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior," American

    Economic Review 57 (1967), 391-414.

Hamilton, James, "Monetary Factors in the Great Depression," Journal of Monetary

    Economics, (1987).

Harris, Milton and Robert Townsend, "Resource Allocation under Asyn,metric

    Information," Econometrica 49 (1978), 33—64.

Hart, Oliver and Bengt Holmstrom, "The Theory of Contracts," MIT, mimeo, 1986.

Hicks, John R., "Mr. Keynes and the 'Classics'          A Suggested Interpretation"

    Econometrica   5   (April 1937), 147—159.

Haubrich, Joseph G .,"Money Supply, Bank Failures, and Credit Crunches:          Lessons

    from the Great Depression in Canada," University of Pennsylvania, mimeo,

    1987.

___________________     "Optimal   Financial Structure in Exchange Economies,"

    University of Pennsylvania, mimeo, 1986.

Hawtrey, Ralph 0. 1926. The Trade Cycle.         Economist (Rotterdam).   Reprinted in

    Readings in Business Cycle Theory, 330-49.         Homewood, lrwn, 1951.

Hellwig, Martin, "Some Recent Developments in the Theory of Competition in

    Markets with Adverse Selection," University of Bonn, mimeo, 1986.

Hester, Donald, "Monetary Policy in Evolutionary Disequilibrium," Social Systems

    Research Institute Working Paper #8506, University of Wisconsin, 1985.
                                        47


Jacklin, Charles, Essays in Banking, PhD Thesis, Stanford Graduate School of

    Business, 1985.

Jaffee, Dwight and Thomas Russell, "Imperfect Information and Credit Rationing,'

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 1976, 651-666.

James, Christopher, "Some Evidence on the Uniqueness of Bank Loans", Journal of

    Financial Economics 19, 1967.

Jensen, Michael and William Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,

    Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,' Journal of Financial Economics

    (1976), 305—360.

Kaufman, Henry, "Debt,   The Threat to Economic and Financial Stability".

    Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, December 1987,

    3—il.

Kindleberger, C., Manias, Panics, and Crashes, New York:   Basic Books, 1978.

King, Stephen R ,"Monetary Transmission:     Through Bank Loans, or Bank

    Liabilities?," mimeo, Stanford University, 1985.

King, Robert and Charles Plosser, "Money, Credit, and Prices in a Real Business

    Cycle," American Economic Review 74 (June 1984), 363-380.

Kuh, Edwin and James Meyer, "Investment, Liquidity and Monetary Policy," in

    Commission on Money and Credit:   Impacts of Monetary Policy, 1963, 339-474

Lacker, Jeffrey, "Inside Money and Real Output," Purdue University, mimeo,

    1987.

Leland, Hayne and Douglas Pyle, "Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and

    Financial Intermediation," Journal of Finance 32 (1977), 371—387,

Litterman, Robert and Lawrence Weiss, "Money, Real Interest Rates, and Output:

    A Reinterpretation of Postwar U.S. Data," Econometrica 53, (1985), 129-156.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, "The Allocation of Credit and Financial Collapse,"

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (August 1986), 455—470.
                                         48


McCallum, Bennett, "A Reconsideration of Sims' Evidence Concerning Monetarism",

    Economics Letters, 13 (1983), 167—171.

Minsky, Hyman, John Maynard Keynes, New York:    Columbia University Press, 1975.

Mishkin,   Frederic, "The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression",

    Journal of Economic History 38 (December 1978), 918—37.

Modigliani, Franco and Merton Miller, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance

    and the Theory of Investment," American Economic Review 48 (June 1958),

    261 —297.


Modligliani, Franco, "Liquidity Preference and the Theory of Interest   arid



    Money", Econometrica (1944), 45-88.

Mookherjee, Dilip and Ivan Png, "Optimal Auditing, Insurance, and

    Redistribution," Stanford University Graduate School of Business Research

    Paper #887, (1987).

Moore, Robert, "Three Essays on Asymmetric Information and Financial Contractirg,

    University of Wisconsin, PhD. Thesis, 1987.

Morgan, Donald, "Credit Commitments and Credit Rationing," University of

    Wisconsin, mimeo, 1987.

Myers, Stewart C., and N.S. Majluf, "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions Wh€

    Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have", Journal of Financial

    Economics 13 (June 1984) 184—221.

Patinkin, Don, "Financial Intermediaries and the Logical Structure of Monetary

    Theory," American Economic Review 51 (March 1961), 95—116.

Pennachi, George, "Loan Sales and the Cost of Capital," University of

    Pennsylvania, mimeo, 1987.

Prescott, Edward C., "Theory Ahead of Measurement," Minneapolis Federal Reserve

    Bank Quarterly Review, (Fall 1986), 9-22.
                                          49


Prescott, Edward C. and Robert M. Townsend, "Pareto Optima and Competitive

    Equilibrium with Adverse Selection and Moral hazard", Econometrica, January

    1984, 52, 21—45.

Rolnick, Arthur J. and Warren Weber, "The Causes of Free Bank Failures      A

    Detailed Examination," Journal of Monetary Economics 14 (October 1984),

    267—291.

Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz, "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance

    Markets An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,"

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (1976), 629—650.

Samolyk, Katherine, "Portfolio Risks and Bank Asset Choice," University of

    Wisconsin, rnimeo, 1987.

Scheinkman, Jose, and Laurence Weiss, "Borrowing Constraints and Aggregate

    Economic Activity," Econometrica 54 (January 1986) 23-46.

Sims, Christopher, 'Money, Income and Causality", American Economic Review 62

    (1972), 540—542.

____________   "Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles    Monetarisum

    Reconsidered," American Economic Review 70-2 (May 1980), 250-257.

Smith, Bruce, "Bank Panics, Suspension and Geography     Some Notes on the 'Contagion

    of Fear' in Banking," Carnegie-Mellon University, mimeo, 1986.

____________   "Limited   Information, Credit Rationing, and Government Lending

    Policy", American Economic Review 73 (June 1983), 305-318.

____________   "Private   Information, Deposit Insurance Rates, and the

    'Stability' of the Banking System," Journal of Monetary Economics 14

    (November 1984), 293—317.

Srini yasan, Philip, Credit Rationing and Corporate Investment, Harvard

    University Ph.D. Dissertation, 1986.
                                           50



Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect

    Information", American Economic Review 71 (June 1981) 393—410.

_________________________________     "Incentive   Effects of Terminations:

    Applications to Credit and Labor Markets," American Economic Review 73

    (December 1983), 912-927.

Summers, Lawrence, "Some Skeptical Observations on Real Business Cycle Theory,"

    Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank Quarterly Review, (Fall 1986), 23—27.

Tobin, James, "Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc", Quarterly Journal of Economics 84

    (May 1975), 195-202.

__________    "Keynesian Models of Recession and Depression," American Economic

    Review (May 1975), 195—202.

_________ and William Dolde, "Wealth, Liquidity and Consumption," in Consumer

    Spending and Monetary Policy:      The Linkages, Monetary Couterance Series 5,

    Boston:   Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 99-146.

Townsend, Robert N., "Arrow-Oebreu Programs as Microfoundations for Macro-

    economics," University of Chicago, mimeo, 1986.

___________   "Financial   Structure and Economic Activity," American Economic

    Review 73 (December 1983), 895—911.

__________    "Optimal   Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State

    Verification," Journal of Economic Theory 21 (1979), 265—93.

__________    "Private   information and Limited Insurance:   The Revelation

    Principle Extended," University of Chicago, mimeo, 1987.

Veblen, Thorsten, "Theory of Business Enterprise," Charles Scribner's Sons, New

    York, 1904, Chapter VII.

Veitch, John, "Credit Rationing, Moral Hazard, and Noisy Signalling," University

    of Southern California, mimeo, 1987.
                                          51



Williamson, Stephen D.,    Costly Monitoring, Financial Intermediation, and

    Equilibrium Credit Rationing,     Journal of Monetary Economics 18 (September

    1986>, 159—79.

__________   "Costly Monitoring,   Optimal Contracts, and Equilibrium Credit

    Rationing, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1987, 135-145,

__________   "Financial   Intermediation, Business Failures, and Real Business

    Cycles,' working paper, University of Western Ontario, 1985.

Wilson, Charles A., "A Model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Information,"

    Journal of Economic Theory 16 (1977), 167-207.

Zeldes, Stephen, "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints:     An Empirical

    Investigation," University of Pennsylvania, mimeo, 1985.
