NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE CONSUMERS ATTENTIVE TO LOCAL ENERGY COSTS? EVIDENCE FROM
THE APPLIANCE MARKET
Sébastien Houde
Erica Myers
Working Paper 25591
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25591

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

We would like to thank Meredith Fowlie, Christopher Knittle, Richard Newell, Ryan Kellogg,
Kochiro Ito, in addition of numerous seminar participants. The U.S. Department of Energy and
the National Science Foundation provided funding for this project through the NBER Economics
of Energy Market program. This research is also part of the activities of SCCER CREST, which
is financially supported by the Swiss Commission for Technology and Innovation (CTI) /
Innosuisse. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Sébastien Houde and Erica Myers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Are Consumers Attentive to Local Energy Costs? Evidence from the Appliance Market
Sébastien Houde and Erica Myers
NBER Working Paper No. 25591
February 2019
JEL No. D12,D83,Q41,Q50
ABSTRACT
We estimate whether consumers respond to local energy costs when purchasing appliances.
Using a dataset from an appliance retailer, we compare demand responsiveness to a measure of
energy costs that varies with local energy prices versus purchase prices. We strongly reject that
consumers are unresponsive to local energy costs under a wide range of assumptions. These
findings run counter to the popular wisdom, which motivates energy standards, that energy costs
are a shrouded attribute. Capital investments are an important channel for electricity demand
response and may explain some of the large differences between short and long run electricity
price elasticities.

Sébastien Houde
ETH Zurich
Department of Management, Technology, and Economic
Centre for Energy Policy and Economics
Zurichbergstrasse 18, 8092 Zurich
shoude@ethz.ch
Erica Myers
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
and E2e
ecmyers@illinois.edu

1

1. Introduction
Policymakers are increasingly relying on behavioral insights to design programs to alter consumer
choices in ways that might improve market efficiency. Consumers make systematic mistakes in their
choices for a wide range of products, such as health care plans (Abaluck and Gruber 2011; Kling et
al. 2012; Handel and Kolstad 2015), mutual funds (Barber et al. 2005), schools (Jensen 2010), and
which foods to consume (Bollinger et al. 2011), among many others. Whether and how we should
regulate markets when consumers are prone to mistakes has become an important and sometimes
controversial topic (Allcott and Sunstein 2015; Mannix and Dudley 2015).
In the energy context, policymakers have long argued that consumers undervalue energy operating costs, which has been the primary rationale for energy efficiency standards and energy labeling
programs adopted in the 1980’s in the U.S. and elsewhere. A long held view is that markets for
energy-intensive durables, such as cars and appliances, may not operate efficiently if consumers
purchase products that were “too energy intensive” (Hausman and Joscow 1982). Therefore, limiting choices through standards and empowering consumers with information labels may have the
potential to improve welfare through steering consumers to make better choices and by reducing
externalities.
This paper asks how responsive U.S. consumers are to energy operating costs when purchasing
household appliances. Apart from being a critical input for energy policy design, investigating
consumers’ response to energy operating costs in the U.S. appliance sector provides an important
case study for the design of regulations and nudges in complex choice environments. The popular
wisdom is that energy costs are a “shrouded” attribute of appliances, although some relevant
information is readily available in this decision context due to the presence of two energy labels:
the mandatory EnergyGuide label and the voluntary Energy Star label (Figure 1). These labels are
examples of imperfectly targeted nudges (Allcott and Knittel 2019) designed to help consumers but
that may have unintended consequences. Sallee (2014) and Davis and Metcalf (2016) highlight that
the EnergyGuide label provides estimates of energy operating costs that rely on national averages,

2

but substantial variation exists at the local level, which may induce consumers to under- or overinvest in energy efficiency. Houde (2018) shows that the Energy Star label, which only provides a
binary signal about the most energy-efficient products in the marketplace, is a very coarse piece of
energy information that may crowd out efforts to compute energy operating costs. Both types of
labels exemplify the difficulties of designing information-based policies: simple and salient pieces
of information may still mislead consumers, whereas detailed and complex information might be
simply ignored. Similar issues arise in contexts such as consumer financial protection (Campbell et
al. 2011), health insurance (Handel and Kolstad 2015), and nutrition (Downs et al. 2009), to name
a few, where policymakers require information disclosure to address potential consumer mistakes.
An important element of our analysis is that we focus on estimating consumer responsiveness
to their local energy operating costs. In particular, our empirical strategy provides evidence that
consumers can overcome imperfectly targeted information in the U.S. appliance market and rely
on local average electricity prices to form estimates of appliances’ energy operating costs when
making a purchase decision. It is not immediately straightforward for consumers to incorporate
local electricity prices into appliance decisions since monthly electricity bills are often complex and
provide only aggregated usage information, making it difficult to map particular end uses to costs.
We use a unique administrative data set from a large national appliance retailer with individual
transaction data on the timing and price paid for each model sold. Since we know the location of
each branch of the retailer, we can match county-specific annual electricity prices to each transaction. We focus on refrigerators, which offer two advantages. First, since refrigerators are plugged in
continuously over their lifetime, it is straightforward to model operating costs, and abstract away
from households’ utilization decisions. Second, refrigerators consume a large amount of energy and
there is rich variation in prices and expected energy consumption across models, which allows us
to identify households’ behavioral responses.
We employ a widely used test of consumer misperception: to compare the demand response
to potentially misperceived costs (e.g. sales tax, shipping and handling fees, highway tolls, or

3

energy operating costs), versus salient, correctly perceived purchase costs.1 Unlike many demand
estimation exercises, the pricing scheme of the appliance retailer results in variation in purchase
prices that is plausibly exogenous to local market conditions. As we describe in detail in what
follows, the retailer has a national pricing algorithm that induces model-specific idiosyncratic price
variation. We exploit this variation and account for potential correlated demand shocks using a
rich set of fixed effects.
We estimate demand responsiveness to local energy operating costs using variation in relative
operating costs among models coming from electricity price differences across utilities and over
time. We show that these electricity price differences are largely driven by exogenous variation in
the fuel costs. The fine grained nature of our data allow us to control for county-by-time specific
movements in appliance demand, which allows us to disentangle the effect of energy operating costs
on product choice from confounding market conditions which affect the probability of buying an
appliance at all.
Counter to the popular wisdom, that local energy costs are a “shrouded” attribute of appliances
(e.g., Auffhammer 2017), our findings strongly reject that consumers are unresponsive to appliance
operating costs under a wide range of lifetime and discount rate assumptions. Our preferred
estimates suggest that consumers are indifferent between $1.00 in discounted future energy costs
and $0.82 in purchase price. These results are consistent with recent work in car and housing
markets, where it is generally considered much easier to map fuel consumption to its cost than
for household appliances. People tend to know how much it would cost to drive from one place to
another in car, given many households purchase gasoline one or more times a week and that gasoline
prices are prominently posted at gas stations. Heating costs appear seasonally and constitute a big
jump in natural gas bills compared to baseload water heating and cooking consumption, making
most people aware of how much it costs to heat their home. Recent estimates of implied discount
rates for automobile and house purchases range between 3% and 15% (Busse et al. 2013; Allcott and
1

See for example, shipping and handling fees (Hossain and Morgan 2006), sales tax (Chetty et al. 2009),
highway tolls (Finkelstein 2009).

4

Wozny 2014; Sallee et al. 2016; Grigolon et al. 2018; Myers 2018), which is in line with our valuation
ratio.2 Overall, our findings suggest that consumers are attentive to local energy operating costs,
and do not simply rely on information about national averages, which is readily available in this
context.
Previous work quantifying consumer attention to energy operating costs in the context of appliances has been mixed, with some studies finding that consumers substantially discount future
energy costs (e.g., Hausman 1979; Dubin and McFadden 1984) and others finding more modest
undervaluation (e.g., Rapson 2014; Houde 2018). These studies have relied on variants of a discrete
choice model and have exploited primarily cross-sectional variation in energy prices. While there
is rich cross-sectional price variation in the U.S., it may be correlated with systematic differences
in demographics or consumer preferences across regions, thus biasing these types of estimates.
Jacobsen (2015) is one example of a recent study that attempts to address this issue by using
state level panel data to assess the effect of energy prices on Energy Star market shares. He finds
very little evidence that energy prices affect the market share of Energy Star appliances. The
Energy Star certification is, however, an imperfect proxy for energy operating costs because the
certification requirement varies with product class and is thus not perfectly correlated with energy
consumption. Moreover, consumers may value Energy Star models for reasons other than energy
savings (Newell and Siikamaki 2017; Houde 2018).
Our work thus provides the first estimates of consumer attentiveness to appliance energy operating costs by exploiting rich panel data. In the spirit of recent approaches in the context of cars
and housing (e.g., Busse et al. 2013; Allcott and Wozny 2014; Grigolon et al. 2018; Myers 2018),
we estimate average responsiveness with microdata which allows us to control for region-specific
trends in preferences, removing many of the factors that might be correlated with electricity price
that confound approaches using cross-sectional or more aggregated data.
2

Our framework also allows to compute an implied discount rate, which corresponds to approximately 8%
in our preferred specification.

5

Our findings show that higher local electricity prices lead to the adoption of more energy-efficient
appliances. These results contribute to our understanding of electricity price demand response.
While consumers are relatively inelastic in the short run, they do change their consumption in
response to changes in their local average electricity prices. Ito (2014) estimates a price elasticity
of −0.07 to −0.09 in the 1 to 4 months following a price change. Deryugina et al. (2017), find
that consumers are much more demand responsive to electricity price changes given more time
to adjust, with a long run elasticity estimates between −0.31 and −0.35. Our results suggest
that one important channel for electricity demand response is through capital investments, which
may explain some of the differences between short and long run elasticities. These investments
are an important margin to consider when designing energy and climate policies, which will have
heterogeneous impacts on local electricity prices.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data, Section 3 details the empirical
framework, Section 4 describes the estimates of consumer inattention to energy operating costs,
and Section 5 concludes.

2. Data
We use transaction level data from a major U.S. appliance retailer, which include all transactions
for 2008-2012 that involve full-size refrigerators. Each transaction has information about the price
paid, zip code of the store location, refrigerator model number, and an identifier tracking consumers
making multiple purchases with the same credit card. During the sample period, we observe several
million refrigerator purchases across all 50 states. For our analysis, we first exclude online sales,
which represent a small fraction of the sales during the sample period. We also exclude purchases
made by renters, which also represent a small percentage (< 2%). Finally, we restrict the sample to
transactions where we observe only one purchase of a full-size refrigerator by household identifier.
This corresponds to approximately 68% of the sample. The latter criterion is a conservative way to
identify transactions made my households in the sample. Our goal is to exclude transactions made

6

by contractors, landlords, or governmental entities that may be subject to different incentives when
investing in energy-efficient appliances. For example, they may not have to pay for the electricity
operating costs of the appliances they purchase.
The purchase price we use in our analysis is the actual retail price paid by the consumer.
We also observe the manufacturers’ suggested retail prices, sales taxes paid on each transaction,
and an indicator variable that specifies whether the retail price paid for a particular transaction
corresponded to a promotional price. An important institutional feature that we exploit in our
analysis is the fact that the retail prices are determined by the retailer at the national level using a
dynamic pricing algorithm. The pricing strategy results in rich variation over time and appliance
models, but not across stores. In particular, the price of each refrigerator model is subject to weekly
variation, which is model specific and not perfectly correlated across brands.
Figure 2 shows the idiosyncratic variation that the dynamic pricing algorithm induces. Each
panel plots time series of retail prices for four different refrigerator models. For illustration purpose,
we focus on the two most popular models of two brands. Although, the patterns are similar across
other models and brands. To create the figure the data are aggregated to the model-week-zip
code level. We first normalized retail prices by removing model-specific fixed effects. We then
computed the median, the 25th percentile and the 75th percentile at the model-week level. The
goal of comparing these three time series is to show that there is little variation across regions for a
given model due to the national pricing strategy. For each panel, we observe that for most weeks,
the 25th and the 75th percentiles exactly coincide with the median retail prices—i.e. there is no
variation across regions. Variation over time is, however, important. From week to week, we see
price changes of the order of 10%. Another important take away from Figure 2 is that the rich
weekly variation appears to not be correlated within brand. We show this formally by plotting
normalized price without week-of-sample fixed effects interacted with brand dummies (the blue
dashed line). These fixed effects remove all the time varying demand shocks that might impact
the different brands in the U.S. refrigerator market. The fact that these residual prices closely

7

follow the normalized price of each model shows that the pricing algorithm induces model-specific
variation, which is independent of the brand.
Further, the variation appears to be independent to demand shocks for particular refrigerator
features. In Table 2, we show the change in price with respect to the mean after controlling for not
only brand-by-week fixed effects, but also Energy Star-by-week fixed effects, and other attributeby-week fixed effects (i.e. size-by-week, and freezer location-by-week fixed effects). These various
controls remove little variation compared to the variation observed in normalized prices. This
suggests that the pricing algorithm provides credible exogenous variation in retail prices, which is
uncorrelated with shifts in demand.
We create a measure of annual energy cost for each refrigerator purchase using the manufacturer
reported kWh/year consumption multiplied by the county-level annual average electricity price.
County level electricity prices are constructed using the Energy Information Administration (EIA)
form 861, which reports revenue and quantity of electricity consumed by residential consumers.
We divide revenue by quantity sold to create a measure of average electricity price for each utility
operating in the U.S. The EIA also provides information on which utilities serve each county,
allowing us to map average energy prices to the county-level. If a county is served by more than
one utility, we take an average of the prices for each utility serving that county.
In our estimation, we exploit variation in the relative energy operating costs among models
coming from electricity price differences across utilities as well as changes in prices over time.
Areas with higher electricity prices at particular points in time will have larger differences in
relative operating costs than places that have lower electricity prices at particular points in time.
Figures 3 and 4 give a sense of this variation. Figure 3 shows the mean sales-weighted annual
electricity price for each state in a U.S. census division. Each of the 9 plots represents a U.S.
census division and each line on the plot represents a state in that census division. It is clear from
this figure that prices vary substantially regionally, with the highest prices in New England (above
$0.15/kwh on average) and lowest prices in the Midwest and the South (less than $.10/kwh on

8

average). There is also some variation in prices over time, where some states experience increases
over the study period, while others experience decreases.
Figure 4 displays density plots of prices and lifetime energy costs. The first panel shows the
distribution of prices paid in our sample. Almost all models sold are less than $2000, though there
is some density for high price models (> $5000). The average price paid is $1263 (Table 1). The
second panel shows how the the distribution of the life time energy costs vary across places with
higher or lower electricity prices. We display the distribution for the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile
of county electricity prices. To calculate the life time energy cost of each model, we sum the annual
energy cost over an expected lifetime of 18 years, using a 5% discount rate.3 The average annual
energy cost is $61 for the whole sample (Table 1). But there is substantial variation across regions.
Mean lifetime costs vary from $555 for the 10th percentile of energy price to $1000 for the 90th
percentile. The third panel displays the distribution of the ratio of lifetime cost to purchase price.
The mean ranges from 0.44 at the 10th percentile of energy price to 0.79 at the 90th percentile.
Therefore, operating costs can be thought of as a significant fraction of the lifetime costs of the
appliance.
In the U.S. appliance market, another potential determinant of purchases are consumer rebates
for models that are certified by the Energy Star program. During the sample period, two types of
Energy Star rebates were offered. First, several electric utilities offered rebate programs as part
of their demand-side management portfolio. The DSIRE database collects all information about
utility rebate programs. Using these data, we identified all rebate programs that apply to full-size
refrigerators and constructed time series of utility rebates at the year-county level. Utility rebate
programs were present in 129 different counties during the period 2008-2012. In those counties,
the rebate amount ranged from $10 to $250, with a mean of $74. In addition to utility rebate
programs, state governments also offered rebates for Energy Star products during that period. The
State Energy Efficiency Appliance Rebate Program (SEEARP) was funded as part of the stimulus
3These

lifetime and discount rate values are used by the Department of Energy (DOE) in setting appliance
standards

9

package of the American Recovery Act. This program led to generous rebates for Energy Star
certified products from 2010 through 2011. Houde and Aldy (2017) collected data on the level
and timing of the rebate programs offered by each state, which we use for this analysis. In several
states, these programs were short-lived and lasted a few weeks, and even a few days in some rare
instances. We thus constructed measure of SEEARP rebate at the state-week level. These rebate
programs have substantial variation across states and time—44 states offered a rebate targeting
full-size refrigerators with a mean rebate amount of $128.
For our main analysis, we aggregate the transaction level data at the model-week-zip code level.
For each appliance model, we create time series of sales and retail prices. We do not observe store
inventories, and not all models sell in every zip code in every week. We impute choice sets using the
first and last sales of each refrigerator model in each location (i.e., zip code). That is, we assume
that this model was available between those two sale events period at this particular location.
The time series of sales have a large number of zeros, which correspond to weeks where a model
was available but did not sell. The overall sample used for the estimation has 18,725,640 unique
combinations of refrigerator models, weeks, and zip codes. We observe 2,520 different models during
the period 2008-2012. Table 1 provides additional summary statistics for the main variables used
in our estimation.
The price variable that we use in our regressions is the weekly retail price inclusive of all local
sales taxes. The sales tax rates are computed using our data and correspond to zip code-yearly averages. For our estimation, we drop 1,241 observations (> 0.01% of the sample) without information
about sales taxes.

10

3. Empirical Strategy
3.1. Main Specification
In order to estimate the average demand response to changes in both purchase price and electricity
costs, our preferred specification is as follows.

qjrt = ηPjrt + θEjrt + τ ESjt + φRebatejrt + γj + Brandj × W eekt + Countyr × Attj + ξrt + εjrt

(1)

We regress the quantity (q) sold of product j in zip code r and week t on the product’s
price (Pjrt ), the product’s annual energy cost (Ejrt ), the Energy Star certification status
(ESjt ),4 rebates offered for Energy Star certified products (Rebatejrt ), product fixed effects
(γj ), brand dummies interacted with week-of-sample (Brandj × W eekt ), county fixed effects
interacted with product attributes (Countyr × Attj ), and county-by-time fixed effects (ξrt ).
We include product fixed effects to control for the time invariant, unobservable characteristics of a particular product, which make it more or less attractive. The brand-by-week
fixed effects capture any demand shifts for particular brands over time due to factors such as
advertising campaigns. Therefore, the coefficient η is identified from the variation in modelspecific prices generated by the retailer’s dynamic pricing algorithm. To the extent that the
variation in the national price is determined by supply-side shocks and other idiosyncratic
drivers, it will be exogenous to local market conditions. If the variation is determined by
4The

Energy Star certification status of a large number of refrigerator models changed in 2008 due to a more
stringent requirement. Models that did not meet the certification requirement had to be decertified.

11

demand-side drivers, it could create endogeneity and bias our demand estimates. We explore this possibility by testing the robustness of our estimates to various controls for shifts
in demand, as we describe further in what follows.
County-by-time fixed effects control for the mean probability of purchasing any of the
available products in a given time period in a given county. In this way, we are flexibly
controlling for trends in preferences for the outside option, without having to make explicit
assumptions about local market size or the level of utility from the outside option. The
outside option in this context refers to the decision: 1) not to purchase a refrigerator in this
particular week, or 2) to purchase a refrigerator at another retailer. In addition to capturing
the variation in the local market size over time, county-by-time fixed effects also capture
local trends affecting the retailer. Our main specification uses county-by-year fixed effects.
We also show that using finer time variation in our controls, i.e. county-by-week FE, makes
little difference since the variation in electricity price is at the county-year level.
Since county-by-year is the level of our electricity price variation the model estimates
the effects of differences in annual energy costs and purchase price on the probability of
purchasing a particular product, given that the customer has decided to buy a refrigerator in
a particular zip code in a particular year. The remaining variation in annual energy operating
cost comes from the relative energy cost differences among products in a given county in
a given year, where the relative energy cost differences will be larger in counties with high
electricity prices than in counties with low electricity prices. Therefore, we are estimating
effect of energy operating costs on product choice while controlling for confounding local
market conditions affecting the probability of buying an appliance at all.
One concern with the variation in relative energy costs we are using in our model is that
preferences for energy-related attributes are correlated with local electricity prices. This

12

correlation may arise for a variety of reasons. High income households might prefer larger
refrigerators and live in regions subject to higher electricity prices. Moreover, in regions
with high electricity prices such as New England and California, electric utilities, retailers,
and local governments may advertise energy-efficient products more, especially Energy Starcertified products.
In order to control for region-specific preferences for energy-related refrigerator features
we interact county dummies with several refrigerator attributes (denoted Countyr × Attj ).
Specifically, we interact county dummies with Energy Star certification status as well as the
two attributes that induce the most variation in refrigerators’ energy use: 1) overall volume
and 2) freezer location. We explore whether there is any remaining endogeneity in energy
costs after including these controls using an instrumental variables approach, described in
the next section.
Finally, we also control for rebates offered for Energy Star certified products (Rebatejrt ),
which may make Energy Star-certified products more attractive. Rebates vary across regions
and time, and thus capture time-variant demand for certified products that is not captured
by the refrigerator attribute-by-county fixed effects.

3.2. Robustness Checks
In addition to our main specification, we perform three other estimations to probe the
robustness of our results: 1) a sensitivity analysis to the inclusion of several fine-grained fixed
effects that capture shifts in demand to address the potential endogeneity of the retailer’s
national pricing algorithm, 2) an instrumental variable approach to address endogeneity and
measurement error in energy costs, and 3) a Poisson estimation that addresses potential
model mis-specification with a linear model due to a large number of zero sales.

13

3.2.1. Endogeneity of Retail Prices
As mentioned above, if the retailer’s national pricing algorithm is determined by aggregate
shifts in demand for particular models or types of appliances, it could potentially bias our
estimates. In order to explore this possibility, we estimate models that include attribute by
week fixed effects. In particular, we interact Energy Star status, an indicator for fridge size
(adjusted volume smaller than < 29 cu. ft.), and indicators for model type (i.e. top freezer,
side by side refrigerator, or bottom-freezer) with week fixed effects. These fixed effects will
capture trends in demand for particular model features. If most of the variation in the
retailer’s pricing algorithm is driven by shifts in demand, inclusion of these fixed effects will
soak up a lot of the variation in purchase price and affect the coefficient estimates of η. If η
changes little, it is suggestive that the variation in the national pricing algorithm is driven
by supply-side or other idiosyncratic drivers, which are exogenous to change in demand over
time.

3.2.2. Endogeneity and Measurement Error of Energy Costs
While the county fixed effects interacted with energy-related attributes may control for
some of the potential endogeneity between preferences for energy efficient products and
local electricity prices, we address the issue more rigorously using an instrumental variable
approach. Following Kahn and Mansur (2013), we construct instruments for county-level
energy prices using the product of the local utility’s capacity shares of coal, oil and gas-fired
power plants and their respective annual average fuel price. We use data from EIA form 860
to construct the shares. We use shares from 2007, the year before our sales data begin, so
that their values are pre-determined. We use the crude oil WTI spot price for petroleum
plants and the annual Henry Hub contract 1 prices for natural gas plants. For coal plants, we

14

use the national average coal price from EIA. We then calculate a single generation-weighted
fuel price for each county by averaging prices across any utilities serving that county.
Using this instrument, the identifying variation in electricity price is coming from the
underlying fuel price variation. This variation is driven by national and global economic
trends, rather than by county or state specific policies. Therefore, the only way fuel price
variation can affect local appliance selection is through higher or lower electricity prices due
to the pre-determined generation mix.
This instrumental variables approach not only addresses the potential endogeneity between energy efficiency preferences and local electricity prices, but the issue of measurement
error as well. Since we constructed our county-level electricity price as an average price
for the utilities that serve a particular county, there will be some measurement error in the
calculated operating costs for individual purchases. Another potential source of measurement error is that we use the average county price of the county in which the appliance
was purchased, which may differ in some cases from the county in which the consumer lives.
This type of classical measurement error could attenuate our estimates of the coefficient on
operating cost, and bias our estimates of responsiveness to energy costs towards zero. To
investigate the role of measure error, we also examine the effect of using state-level average
prices, which may have less measurement than county-level average prices.

3.2.3. Model Misspecification
In addition, we estimate attention to energy costs using a Poisson regression model. The
Poisson estimation assumes a log-linear relationship, which may more accurately reflect the
relationship between prices and quantities purchased. If so, it is better to model the conditional expectation of the dependent variable directly rather than applying a transformation

15

to the dependent variable. Simply taking the log of sales counts (y) is not possible, since
the value is zero for a non-trivial fraction of our data (Table 1). We could apply other transformations that are defined for all y ≥ 0, such as log(1 + y), but it is not obvious how to
recover E(y|x) from a linear model for E(log(y + 1)|x). Like OLS, which is consistent and
asymptotically normal even if the normality assumption is violated, Poisson has the desirable
property that quasi-maximum likelihood estimation recovers consistent, asymptotically normal coefficient estimates even if the Poisson distribution does not hold and standard errors
can be adjusted for violations of the Poisson variance assumption that the variance is equal
to the mean (Wooldridge 2010). We also use Poisson because unlike other count models,
e.g., negative binomial, we are able to efficiently estimate models with high-dimensional fixed
effects using the algorithm proposed by Guimaraes and Portugal (2011).

3.3. Interpretation of Model Parameters
The empirical test of consumer responsiveness in this paper asks how consumers trade off
purchase price with energy costs. Absent any bias, consumers would be indifferent between
an additional dollar of purchase price and an additional present discounted dollar of energy
expenditure. The coefficient on annual energy cost, θ, reflects how a $1 change in annual
energy operating costs affects sales, or more specifically the probability of a purchase. We
measure consumer responsiveness as the ratio between a the effect of a $1 change in lifetime
energy operating costs on demand and the effect of a $1 change in purchase price. In order
to estimate lifetime operating costs, we need to make assumptions about: 1) how consumers
sum and discount future operating costs, 2) consumers’ expectations about future annual
operating costs, 3) the lifetime of the appliance, and 4) consumers’ discount rate.
One feature of our approach is it is straightforward for analysts to apply different assumptions for the lifetime cost parameters to judge consumer bias based on our reduced

16

form estimates of consumer responsiveness to price and energy costs. In what follows, we
describe our preferred parameter assumptions and the range we consider around them for
sensitivity analysis.
For our analysis, we assume that consumers discount future costs using the exponential
model of intertemporal choice and believe prices follow a random walk so that today’s prices
are the best predictor of tomorrow’s prices.5 For the lifetime of the appliance, we use 18
years, and for the discount rate we use 5%; both of these values are used by the Department
of Energy (DOE) in setting appliance standards. In addition, we show sensitivity of our
responsiveness measure to discount rates ranging from 2% to 10% and to lifetimes of 10, 15,
or 20 years.
Assuming that consumers form time-invariant expectations about the annual operating
electricity expenditure, the lifetime energy operating cost (LCj ) for the durable j is given
by:

LCjrt =

L
X

ρt Ejrt ,

t=1

where L is the lifetime of the durable (18 years), ρ = 1/(1 + r) is the discount factor with
discount rate r, and Ejrt is the product of the electricity price paid by a household in region
r at time t and the manufacturer’s expected annual electricity consumption for durable j. In
the estimation model specified by Equation 3.1, the coefficient on annual energy cost relates
to the discount factor and marginal utility of income as follows:
5Anderson

et al. (2013) finds that consumers believe that gasoline prices follow this type of pattern. Another
possibility is that consumers use information from futures markets to make projections about electricity
prices going forward. However, forward curves rarely deviate substantially from spot prices for major fuels.
Therefore, even if consumers were and paying attention to trends in futures prices, their beliefs about fuel
prices going forward would not differ significantly from no-change beliefs (Myers 2018).

17

(2)

θ =η·ρ·

L
X

ρt Ejrt .

t=1

Give our parameter assumptions, the average measure of responsiveness to energy costs,
also referred as the valuation ratio (Allcott 2013), is:
(3)

m = θ/η · ρ ·

1 − ρL
.
1−ρ

4. Results
4.1. Main Estimation
Table 3 displays the results from the estimation of our main specification. Columns I through
III show the impact of additional controls, where Specification IV corresponds to our preferred specification described by Equation 3.1. Rows 1 and 2 display the coefficient estimates
for the product purchase prices and annual energy costs, respectively. Row 3 shows the estimate of the average consumer responsiveness to energy costs (the valuation ratio: m) using
a 5% discount rate and 18 years appliance lifetime. All specifications control for product
fixed effects, Energy Star certification status, and Energy Star rebates.
The first column shows the results from an estimation including county fixed effects and
week-of-sample fixed effects and the second column shows results from an estimation with
county-by-year fixed effects, and with similar controls otherwise. When county fixed effects
are not interacted with a time dimension, the coefficient on energy costs is statistically
significant, but suggests a large degree of undervaluation of energy costs, where m = 0.27.
In Specification II, the coefficient on energy costs is more than three times larger than

18

in Specification I, and m = 0.95.6 The large difference between Specifications I and II
suggests that variation in local energy prices is potentially correlated with local market
conditions, which affects refrigerator demand. Specifications controlling for county fixed
effects uninteracted with time confound the effect of energy cost on appliance choice with
its effect on the probability of buying an appliance at all.
One major advantage of our administrative data set is that we are able to use a research
design that disentangles the effect of energy prices on product choice from confounding
market conditions. County-by-year fixed effects control for the average probability that an
appliance will be purchased in a county in a given year. The remaining energy cost variation
comes from the relative variation in operating costs between high and low energy consuming
appliances. This variation allows us to control for region-specific preferences for energy
efficiency and exploit the fact that counties with high electricity costs in a given year have
higher variation in operating costs for the same available models than counties with low
electricity costs at a given point in time.
The estimation in column III includes county fixed effects interacted with the Energy Star
certification status and with other energy-related attributes (i.e., dummies for large refrigerators and freezer location). Under this specification, the absolute magnitude of the coefficient
on annual energy costs is reduced relative to Specification II such that the valuation ratio is
now m = 0.89. This suggests that local energy prices may be correlated, albeit weakly, with
preferences for energy-related attributes. We explore any remaining endogeneity of the local
electricity prices further with our instrumental variable approach described above. In our
preferred specification, column IV, we include brand-week-of-sample fixed effects, instead of
only week-of-sample fixed effects. This has a small impact on the coefficient of purchase
6In

the Appendix (Table A2, Specification I), we show that county-by-week produces similar results to
Specification II.

19

price and the average measure of responsiveness is m = 0.82, which suggests that the modelspecific variation in purchase price is not strongly correlated with brand-level strategies, as
we previously demonstrated in Section 2.

4.2. Robustness Checks
In Table 4, we examine the sensitivity of our preferred estimates to the inclusion of controls
for shifts in demand for refrigerator attributes. In Specification I, we include Energy Star
indicator-by-week fixed effects, and in Specification II, we include Energy Star indicator-byweek, refrigerator size-by-week, and freezer location (i.e. top, bottom, or side-by-side)-byweek fixed effects. These fixed effects control for any changes in demand for these attributes
over time. The coefficient on purchase price is reduced compared to our preferred Specification IV in Table 3. This leads to an increase in the valuation ratio but the differences are
not statistically significant at the 5% level. This confirms that exploiting the model-specific
idiosyncratic variation induced by the retailer’s pricing algorithm provides a credible source
of identification.
In Table 5, we address measurement error and any remaining endogeneity in our constructed measure of local energy costs by implementing the instrumental variable strategy
described earlier. The utilities for which we constructed fuel shares using EIA form 860 did
not perfectly map to all of the counties in our sample, so we perform the IV approach on
a subsample of our data (about 80% of the full sample). In Specification I, we estimate
Equation 3.1 on this subsample of data using OLS and in Specification II, we estimate the
model using two-staged least squares (2SLS).
The results from Specification I show that limiting our sample has little impact on the
results from our preferred specification (m = 0.83), indicating that the counties for which

20

we were able to construct the fuel price instrument were representative of our full sample.
The coefficient on energy cost in the 2SLS estimation (Specification II) is larger and also less
precisely estimated than in Specification I. It is, however, not statistically distinguishable
from the OLS estimates. Altogether, this suggests that our county-level fuel prices are highly
correlated with the fuel price instrument (see first-stage results in Table A1). Therefore, given
the controls in our model, the identifying energy cost variation appears to be driven by the
pre-determined electric generation fuel mix and exogenous supply side shocks to fuel prices.7
Table 6 presents the results for the Poisson regressions. We present two specifications
with a parsimonious set of fixed effects to accommodate the estimation. In Specification I,
we control for product fixed effects, week-of-sample fixed effects, and county-by-year fixed
effects, in addition to controls for the ES certification status, and Energy Star rebates. In
Specification II, we control for brand-week-of-sample and we interacted the county fixed
effect with the Energy Star status. These Poisson regressions yield estimates that are lower
than the OLS estimates but qualitatively the conclusions are the same. On average, there is
a modest amount of undervaluation—the valuation ratio is m = 0.73 for both specifications.
This suggests that a linear model specification is not a significant biasing factor in our
analysis.8

4.3. Sensitivity Analysis
Table 7 shows the sensitivity of our energy cost responsiveness estimates to our assumptions
driving lifetime energy costs. Specifically, we look at the effect of changing the discount rate
7We

also show in Appendix A1 that using state rather than county average electricity prices to calculate energy costs has little effect on our estimates. Consistent with the 2SLS results, this suggests that measurement
error in county-level prices is not a significant biasing factor in our analysis.
8Given the computational burden of the Poisson model, we use a 10% random sample for our estimation. In
Appendix A2, we show that the OLS results for the full sample differ little from those using the 10% random
sample.

21

from 2 percent to 10 percent and the refrigerator lifetimes using values of 10, 15, 18, and 20
years. Using the coefficients from our preferred estimation (Specification IV) in Table 3, a
discount rate of 5%, and a lifetime of 18 years, the measure responsiveness to energy costs is
m = 0.82. This estimate is, however, highly sensitive to assumptions about the underlying
parameters. Therefore, it is difficult to explicitly test the hypothesis of full responsiveness to
energy costs (i.e., m = 1). While our baseline estimate of responsiveness is below 1, a single
percentage point change in the discount rate or a 2-3 year change in lifetime of the appliance
can move the measure of energy cost responsiveness by as much as 20 percent. However, our
estimates clearly show that on average consumers are responsive to energy operating costs
using information about local electricity prices when purchasing an appliance.

5. Conclusion
This paper explores how shifts in retail prices and local electricity prices affect demand for
appliances. We test if consumers respond to a measure of energy operating costs that relies on
information about local electricity prices. We exploit a unique administrative data set from
an appliance retailer, with individual transaction data tracking the price and location for each
model sold. We compare the demand response from changes in the potentially misperceived
energy costs to the demand response from changes in correctly perceived product prices. We
estimate responsiveness to product price using exogenous variation created by the retailer’s
national pricing algorithm, which results in large and frequent model-specific price changes.
We estimate responsiveness to energy costs using the relative differences in operating costs
between more and less efficient models, which varies with electricity prices across space and
time. We control for county-by-time specific movements in appliance demand to isolate the
effect of energy operating costs from confounding market conditions, which might affect the
probability of buying an appliance at all.

22

We can strongly reject that consumers are unresponsive to local energy operating costs
for appliances. The results from our preferred specification suggest that consumers are
indifferent between $1.00 in discount future energy costs, at a 5% discount rate and $0.82
in purchase price. These results are surprising because the main energy information that is
readily available in this decision context is provided by the EnergyGuide label, which only
provides estimates of energy operating costs based on a national average. The Energy Star
label is even coarser, and only provides a binary signal about energy efficiency. The fact that
consumers do respond to a measure of local energy operating costs suggests that they have
the ability to form complex beliefs beyond the pieces of information that are presented to
them in the retail environment. These findings have implications beyond the energy context.
The U.S. energy labels are examples of imperfectly targeted nudges. We show that consumers
are able to overcome imperfect information in these labeling schemes, which suggests that
they may be able to do so in other contexts as well.
Our results also have implications for our understanding of demand response to electricity
prices. Capital investments are likely an important driver of the differences in short and long
run elasticity estimates, since on average consumers are changing their appliance choices in
response to local energy prices. These investments are an important margin to consider
when designing energy and climate policies that bring electricity prices closer to the social
cost of electricity.

23

References
Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber, “Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly:
Evidence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program,” American Economic Review,
2011, 101 (4), 1180–1210.
Allcott, Hunt, “The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations
from the Automobile Market,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5 (3),
30–66.
and Cass R Sunstein, “Regulating Internalities,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 2015, 34 (3), 698–705.
and Christopher Knittel, “Are Consumers Poorly Informed about Fuel Economy? Evidence from Two Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
2019, forthcoming.
and Nathan Wozny, “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox,”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96 (5), 779–795.
Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee, “What Do Consumers
Believe About Future Gasoline Prices?,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2013, 66, 383–403.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, “Energy Institute Blog: A Tale of Two Standards,” https:
//energyathaas.wordpress.com/2017/03/20/a-tale-of-two-standards/ 2017.
Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng, “Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The
Effects of Expenses on Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of Business, 2005, 78 (6), 2095–2120.
Bollinger, Brian, Phillip Leslie, and Alan Sorensen, “Calorie Posting in Chain Restaurants,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2011, 3 (1), 91–128.
Busse, Meghan, Christopher Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer, “Are Consumers
Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases,” American Economic Review,

24

2013, 103 (1), 220–256.
Campbell, John Y, Howell E Jackson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Peter Tufano,
“Consumer Financial Protection,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (1), 91–114.
Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,”
American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1145–1177.
Davis, Lucas and Gilbert E. Metcalf, “Does Better Information Lead to Better Choices?
Evidence from Energy-Efficiency Labels,” Journal of the Association of Environmental and
Resource Economists, 2016, 3 (3), 589–625.
Deryugina, T., Alexander MacKay, and Julian Reif, “The Long-Run Dynamics of
Electricity Demand:Evidence from Municipal Aggregation,” NBER Working Paper, 2017,
(Number 23483).
Downs, Julie S, George Loewenstein, and Jessica Wisdom, “Strategies for Promoting
Healthier Food Choices,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (2), 159–64.
Dubin, J. and M. McFadden, “An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric Appliance
Holdings and Consumption,” Econometrica, 1984, 52 (2), 345–362.
Finkelstein, A., “E-ztax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2009, 124, 969–1010.
Grigolon, Laura, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven, “Consumer Valuation of
Fuel Costs and the Effectiveness of Tax Policy: Evidence from the European Car Market,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy: Forthcoming, 2018.
Guimaraes, Paulo and Pedro Portugal, “A Simple Feasible Procedure to Fit Models
with High-Dimensional Fixed Effects,” The Stata Journal, 2011, 10 (4), 628–649.
Handel, Benjamin R and Jonathan T Kolstad, “Health insurance for” humans”: Information frictions, plan choice, and consumer welfare,” American Economic Review, 2015,
105 (8), 2449–2500.

25

Hausman, J., “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of Energy Using
Durables,” Bell Journal of Economics, 1979, 10 (1), 220–225.
Hausman, Jerry A. and Paul L. Joscow, “Evaluating the Costs and Benefits of Appliance Efficiency Standards,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 1982, 72
(2), 220–225.
Hossain, T. and J. Morgan, “Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue (Non)Equivalence
in Field Experiments on eBay,” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, 2006, 6 (2).
Houde, Sébastien, “How Consumers Respond to Product Certification and the Value of
Energy Information,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2018, 49 (2), 453–477.
and Joseph E. Aldy, “Consumers’ Response to State Energy Efficient Appliance
Rebate Programs,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2017, 9 (4), 227–255.
Ito, K., “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Nonlinear
Electricity Pricing,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 537–563.
Jacobsen, G., “Do Energy Prices Influence Investment in Efficiency? Evidence from Energy
Star Appliances,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2015, 74 (C),
94–106.
Jensen, Robert, “The Perceived Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 515–548.
Kahn, M. and E. Mansur, “Do Local Energy Prices and Regulation Affect the Geographic
Concentration of Employment?,” Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 101, 105–114.
Kling, Jeffrey, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian Wrobel, “Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (1), 199–235.
Mannix, Brian F and Susan E Dudley, “Please Don’t Regulate my Internalities,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2015, 34 (3), 715–718.

26

Myers, E., “Are Home Buyers Inattentive? Evidence From Capitalization of Energy Costs,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy: Forthcoming, 2018.
Newell, Richard G. and J. Siikamaki, “Nudging Energy Efficiency Behavior: The
Role of Information Labels,” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
Economists, 2017, 1 (4), 555–598.
Rapson, D., “Durable Goods and Long-run Electricity Demand: Evidence from Air Conditioner Purchase Behavior,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2014,
68 (1), 141–160.
Sallee, James M., “Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency,” Journal of Law and Economics, 2014, 57, 781–820.
Sallee, J.M., S. West, and W. Fan, “Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations,” Journal of Public
Economics, 2016, 135, 61–73.
Wooldridge, J., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Second Edition,
MIT Press, 2010.

27

6. Tables and Figures
Table 1. Summary Statistics: Main Sample
Mean

S.D.

Retail price ($)

1263.33

620.26

Retail price inclusive of sales taxes ($)

1348.95

662.75

Sales (qty/model-week-zip code)

0.26

0.59

Electricity operating costs ($/year)

60.87

20.10

Manufacturers’ reported electricity use (kWh/year)

516.77

79.16

Share of refrigerators < 29 cu. ft. (%)

48.75

49.99

Energy Star-certified (%)

70.36

45.68

Share of top-freezer (%)

25.27

43.46

Notes: Summary statistics (mean and standard deviation) for the main variables
used in the regressions. The overall sample has 18,725,640 unique combinations of
refrigerator models, weeks, and zip codes. The sample has 2,520 unique refrigerator
models during the period 2008-2012. Electricity operating costs are computed
by multiplying average electricity prices at the county level and manufacturers’
reported estimates.

28

Table 2. Idiosyncratic Variation in Retail Prices
I
∆ Price w.r.t. Mean Price (%) 9.18
R2
0.965
Product FE
Yes
Week FE
No
Brand × Week FE
No
Energy Star × Week FE
No
EE Attributes × Week FE
No
County × Product FE
No
County × Brand × Week FE
No

II

III

IV

V

V

8.04
0.973
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No

7.88
0.974
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No

7.39
0.977
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

7.11
0.979
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

6.91
0.980
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of the retail prices. Each column reports
the standard deviation of the residuals of a regression of the log of retail prices
on various fixed effects (∆ Price w.r.t. Mean). The residuals correspond to the
percentage variation in retail prices relative to the mean price of each refrigerator
model. The energy-related attributes (denoted “EE Attributes”) other than Energy Star that we consider are a dummy variable that identifies small versus large
full-size refrigerators and a dummy variable that distinguishes top-freezer versus
other types of refrigerators.

29

Table 3. Estimation of the Effect of Price and Energy Costs on Demand
Purchase Price

Annual Energy Cost

Valuation Ratio

Product FE
County FE
Week FE
County × Year FE
County × Energy Star FE
County × EE Attributes FE
Brand × Week FE
# Observations

I
-0.000349∗∗∗
(0.00000680)

II
-0.000349∗∗∗
(0.00000672)

V
-0.000350∗∗∗
(0.00000618)

VI
-0.000360∗∗∗
(0.00000664)

-0.00110∗∗∗
(0.000166)

-0.00387∗∗∗
(0.000388)

-0.00363∗∗∗
(0.000402)

-0.00343∗∗∗
(0.000399)

0.268
(0.042)

0.948
(0.094)

0.888
(0.096)

0.816
(0.093)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
18724399

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
18724399

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
18724399

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
18724395

Notes: The dependent variable is the number of units of a particular appliance sold in a given
week in a given zip code. The standard errors are clustered at the county level and are in
parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
The valuation ratios are computed assuming a discount rate of 5% and a refrigerator lifetime
of 18 years.

30

Table 4. Robustness: Exogeneity of Retail Prices
Purchase Price

Annual Energy Cost

Valuation Ratio

Product FE
County × Year FE
County × Energy Star FE
County × EE Attributes FE
Brand × Week FE
Energy Star × Week FE
Attribute × Week FE
# Observations

I
-0.000328∗∗∗
(0.00000625)

II
-0.000327∗∗∗
(0.00000642)

-0.00366∗∗∗
(0.000412)

-0.00351∗∗∗
(0.000397)

0.954
(0.105)

0.919
(0.102)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
18724395

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
18724395

Notes: The dependent variable is the number of units of a particular appliance
sold in a given week in a given zip code. The standard errors are clustered at the
county level and are in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance
at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels. The valuation ratios are computed assuming a
discount rate of 5% and a refrigerator lifetime of 18 years. The 2SLS estimation
uses the incidence of a promotion at the national level as an instrument. The
first-stage results are presented in Table A1.

31

Table 5. IV Estimation of the Effect of Price and Energy Costs on Demand
Purchase Price

Annual Energy Cost

Valuation Ratio
Product FE
Brand × Week FE
County × Year FE
County × Energy Star FE
County × EE Attributes FE
# Observations

I (OLS)
-0.000362∗∗∗
(0.00000809)

II (2SLS)
-0.000362∗∗∗
(0.00000809)

-0.00350∗∗∗
(0.000460)

-0.00481∗∗∗
(0.000761)

0.826
(0.107)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
14790176

1.135
(0.178)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
14790176

Notes: The dependent variable is the number of units of a particular appliance sold in a given
week in a given zip code. The standard errors are clustered at the county level and are in
parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels. The
valuation ratios are computed assuming a discount rate of 5% and a refrigerator lifetime of 18
years. The first column is the OLS estimation with county electricity prices but restricted to
the sample that we can implement the instrumental variable approach. The IV estimates are
presented in the second column. We construct instruments for county-level energy price using
the product of the local utility’s capacity shares of coal, oil and gas-fired power plants and
their respective annual average fuel price. We use data from EIA form 860 to construct the
shares from 2007, the year before our sales data begin. We use the crude oil WTI spot price
for petroleum plants, the annual Henry Hub contract 1 prices for natural gas plants, national
average coal price from EIA for coal plants. The first-stage results are presented in Table A1.

32

Table 6. Estimation of the Effect of Price and Energy Costs on Demand: Poisson
Poisson-I
-0.00224∗∗∗
(0.0000420)

Poisson-II
-0.00228∗∗∗
(0.0000448)

-0.0191∗∗∗
(0.00170)

-0.0195∗∗∗
(0.00173)

Valuation Ratio

0.731
(0.064)

0.731
(0.063)

Product FE
Week of Sample FE
Brand × Week FE
County × Energy Star FE
# Observations

Yes
Yes
No
No
1869985

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1850810

Purchase Price

Annual Energy Cost

Notes: These models are estimated using a 10% random subsample from our full data set.
The dependent variable is the number of units of a particular appliance sold in a given week in
a given zip code. The standard errors are clustered at the county level and are in parentheses.
***, ** and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels. The valuation
ratios are computed assuming a discount rate of 5% and a refrigerator lifetime of 18 years.

33

Table 7. Sensitivity of Valuation Raio Estimates to Parameter Assumptions
Discount Rate
2 percent
3 percent
4 percent
5 percent
6 percent
10 percent

10 Year Lifetime
1.061
1.117
1.175
1.234
1.295
1.551

15 Year Lifetime
0.742
0.798
0.857
0.918
0.981
1.253

18 Year Lifetime
0.636
0.693
0.753
0.815
0.880
1.162

20 Year Lifetime
0.583
0.640
0.701
0.765
0.831
1.119

Notes: This table shows the ratio of demand responsiveness to a $1 change in lifetime energy costs
relative to a $1 change in upfront price calculated for discount rates of 2 percent, 3 percent, 4
percent, 5 percent, 6 percent, and 10 percent and for refrigerator lifetimes of 10, 15, 18, and 20
years. We use the coefficient estimates on purchase price and annual energy cost from Specification
IV in Table 3.

34

(a) EnergyGuide Label (2007
version)

(b) Energy Star Label

Figure 1. Energy Labels: U.S. Appliance Market

35

−60

−60

−40

Normalized Price (%)
−20
0

Normalized Price (%)
−40
−20
0

20

40

Brand A: Sales Rank 2

20

Brand A: Sales Rank 1

2008w1

2011w26

2008w1

2011w26

Weeks

Weeks

(a)

(b)
Brand B: Sales Rank 2
40

20

Brand B: Sales Rank 1

−30

−20

−20

Normalized Price (%)
0
20

Normalized Price (%)
−10
0

10

25/75 Percentiles of Price
Normalized Price
Normalized Price w/o Brand−by−week FE

2010w1

2011w1

2012w1
Weeks

(c)

2013w1

2009w26

2010w26

2011w26

2012w27

Weeks

(d)

Figure 2. Price Variation Due to Retailer’s National Pricing Algorithm
Notes: Each panel corresponds to a particular model offered by a particular brand. Models
with sales rank equals to one corresponds to the most popular model offered by a given
brand. Each panel displays the week-to-week variation in retail price relative to the mean
price for a particular model. The plain red line corresponds to the median price across
zip codes. The grey band depicts the 25th and 75th percentiles. The dash blue line is the
median price without brand-by-week fixed effects.

Middle Atlantic

cents/kwh
6 10 14 18 22

cents/kwh
6 10 14 18 22

New England

East North Central

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
year

West North Central

South Atlantic

East South Central

cents/kwh
6 10 14 18 22

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
year

cents/kwh
6 10 14 18 22

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
year

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
year

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
year

West South Central

Mountain

Pacific

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
year

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
year

cents/kwh
6 10 14 18 22

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
year

cents/kwh
6 10 14 18 22

cents/kwh
6 10 14 18 22

cents/kwh
6 10 14 18 22

cents/kwh
6 10 14 18 22

36

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
year

Figure 3. Average Electricity Prices for Each State in a Census Division
Notes: Each line represents the appliance sales weighted average electricity price for
a particular state within each census division.

0

Density
2.0e-04
4.0e-04

6.0e-04

37

2000

4000
6000
Price Paid

8000

10000

0

Density
.002
.004

.006

0

500

1000

1500
Lifetime Energy Cost

10th Percentile

2000

2500

Median

0

.5

Density
1
1.5

2

90th Percentile

0

1

2
3
Lifetime Energy Cost/Price Paid
10th Percentile

4

5

Median

90th Percentile

Figure 4. Distributions of Prices and Lifetime Energy Costs
Notes: The lifetime energy costs are calculated using, an expected lifetime of 18
years, and a discount rate of 5%, and the manufacturer’s reported annual energy
consumption for each model at the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile of electricity prices.

38

Appendix
For Online Publication

A1. Robustness to Model Specification
Table A2 displays the results from including county-by-week fixed effects rather than countyby-year fixed effects, as we use in our preferred specification. Specification I is comparable to
Specification II in Table 3 in that the only difference is time dimension that we interact with
the county fixed effects. There is little difference in the coefficients on purchase price and
annual energy cost and in the responsiveness to energy costs parameter. This is unsurprising
given that we are exploiting annual variation in electricity prices, so that the identifying
variation in both cases is the differences in relative energy costs between low and high
consuming refrigerators for low and high electricity price county-year combinations.
Specification II is our preferred specification using state average electricity prices rather
than county average electricity prices. The results differ little depending on which level of
aggregation is used. Consistent with our 2SLS exercise, it appears that measurement error
in county level prices is not a significant biasing factor in our analysis.

A2. OLS with Zip Code-Level Controls
Table A3 displays the results from where we use control for zip code level unobservables. We
use the exact same specifications as in Table 3, except that we include zip code fixed effects
interacted with various controls, i.e., time dummies or attributes. There is little difference
in the coefficients on purchase price and annual energy cost and in the responsiveness to
energy costs parameter.

39

A3. OLS Results Using a 10% Random Sample
Table A4 shows the results for our preferred specification using the 10% subsample rather
than the full sample. There is little difference in our coefficient estimates or energy cost
responsiveness parameter when using a 10% subsample. Therefore, the comparisons between
our Poisson estimates and OLS estimates should not be affected by the fact that we used a
subsample to estimate the Poisson regressions.

Appendix Tables
Table A1. First-Stage: IV Regression
dep. var.
IV: capacity share × fuel prices
F stats
R2
Product FE
County × Year FE
County × Energy Star FE
County × EE Attributes FE
Brand × Week FE
# Observations

county electricity prices
38.44∗∗∗
(7.824)
25.27
0.9970
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
. 14790176

Notes: First-stage regression for the instrumental variable
approach presented in the main text.

40

Table A2. OLS Regressions: Additional Robustness Checks
Purchase Price

Annual Energy Cost (County)

I
-0.000346∗∗∗
(0.00000674)
-0.00395∗∗∗
(0.000399)

-0.00371∗∗∗
(0.000333)

Annual Energy Cost (State)

Valuation Ratio

Product FE
County FE
Week FE
County × Year FE
County × Week FE
County × Energy Star FE
County × EE Attributes FE
Brand × Week FE
# Observations

II
-0.000360∗∗∗
(0.00000663)

0.974
(0.098)

0.881
(.078)

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
18724142

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
18724395

Notes: The dependent variable is the number of units of a particular appliance sold
in a given week in a given zip code. The first column uses a measure of electricity
operating costs based on county average electricity prices and the second column
is based on state electricity prices. The standard errors are clustered at the county
level and are in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at the 1,
5 and 10 percent levels. The valuation ratios are computed assuming a discount
rate of 5% and a refrigerator lifetime of 18 years.

41

Table A3. OLS Regressions: Additional Robustness Checks
Appliance Price

Annual Energy Cost

Valuation Ratio

Product FE
Zip Code FE
Week FE
Zip code × Year FE
Zip code × Week FE
Zip code × Energy Star FE
Zip code × EE Attributes FE
Brand × Week FE
# Observations

I
-0.000350∗∗∗
(0.00000689)

II
-0.000350∗∗∗
(0.00000682)

III
-0.000350∗∗∗
(0.00000630)

IV
-0.000360∗∗∗
(0.00000676)

-0.00110∗∗∗
(0.000167)

-0.00390∗∗∗
(0.000391)

-0.00368∗∗∗
(0.000408)

-0.00348∗∗∗
(0.000407)

0.269
(0.043)

0.954
(0.095)

0.899
(0.098)

0.826
(0.096)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
18724399

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
18724399

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
18724399

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
18724395

Notes: The dependent variable is the number of units of a particular appliance sold in a given week in a given zip
code. The standard errors are clustered at the county level and are in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical
significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels. The valuation ratios are computed assuming a discount rate of 5% and
a refrigerator lifetime of 18 years.

42

Table A4. Estimation of the Effect of Price and Energy Costs on Demand:
10% Sample

Appliance Price

Annual Energy Cost

OLS
-0.000365∗∗∗
(0.00000772)
-0.00345∗∗∗
(0.000473)

Valuation Ratio

0.8102
(0.111)

Product FE
Brand × Week FE
County × Year FE
County × Energy Star FE
County × EE Attributes FE
# Observations

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1872179

Notes: These models are estimated using a 10% random subsample from our full data set.
The dependent variable is the number of units of a particular appliance sold in a given week in
a given zip code. The standard errors are clustered at the county level and are in parentheses.
***, ** and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels. The valuation
ratio is computed assuming a discount rate of 5% and a refrigerator lifetime of 18 years.

