                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOUSEHOLD INNOVATION, R&D, AND NEW MEASURES OF INTANGIBLE CAPITAL

                                         Daniel Sichel
                                        Eric von Hippel

                                      Working Paper 25599
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25599


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2019




We thank David Byrne and Leonard Nakamura for helpful comments. Sichel is grateful to the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration for grant support of $76,800 during 2016 to 2017 for research on price
measurement. Sichel currently is working with BEA as a consultant and serves on the agency's
External Advisory Committee. von Hippel is grateful for research support from the Gates
Foundation, NASA, the United Nations Development Program, Ford Inc., General Mills, IPSOS,
and Syngenta. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Daniel Sichel and Eric von Hippel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Innovation, R&D, and New Measures of Intangible Capital
Daniel Sichel and Eric von Hippel
NBER Working Paper No. 25599
February 2019
JEL No. E01,E21,E22,E24,J24,O3,O31,O33,O34

                                         ABSTRACT

Household R&D (or household innovation) is an important source of innovation that has to date
been largely overlooked in research related to national accounts. Indeed, it is not currently
counted as investment in the literatures on household production and human capital. This paper
develops time series estimates of nominal investment, real investment, and real capital stocks for
household R&D for product innovations in the United States. (We focus on product innovations
because survey data on services innovations in the household sector are not yet available.) In the
U.S., we find that household product R&D is significant. Our estimate of real investment in 2017
is $41 billion (2012 dollars). This is about half of what producers spend in R&D to develop new
products for consumers – a sizable fraction. Our estimate of the real capital stock of household
product R&D in 2017 is $233 billion. We conclude that household R&D is an important feature
of household activity and, more generally, of the overall landscape of innovation.


Daniel Sichel
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
dsichel@wellesley.edu

Eric von Hippel
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sloan School of Management.
Cambridge, MA 02142
evhippel@mit.edu
1. Introduction and overview
        Household and non-market activities have long been of interest to economists
and national income accountants. One important strand of this work includes the
development of estimates of the value of time devoted to the production of household
services (such as child care and cooking) as well as the service flow from consumer
durable assets.1 Another important strand has focused on human capital accumulation.2
Household production and human capital accumulation largely have been judged to be
outside the scope of GDP and thereforenot included in official measures. That being
said, satellite GDP accounts have been developed for both household production
(including the service flow from household durables) and human capital accumulation.3

         While these extensions have provided important insights about household
activities, they largely miss an important type of intangible capital accumulated by
households. In particular, they neither explicitly include nor distinguish household
research and development (R&D) and innovation. What are household R&D and
innovation? It is the dedication of household resources to creating a product or process
that will generate a service flow to the household (and often to other households) in the
future. For example, an individual householder may develop a new type of sport and
related sporting equipment for his or her own use, and then find it diffuses to many
others. Another householder, a medical patient with a chronic disease like sleep apnea,
may develop a significantly improved medical device to manage his or her disease, and
then tell others about it.

        Recent research has shown household innovation to be a significant
phenomenon.4 Nationally-representative surveys, conducted in 10 nations to date,
document that, in just these ten nations, tens of millions of consumers (16 million
individuals in the U.S. alone) engage in household sector innovation to fill personal
needs, and collectively spend tens of billions of dollars annually on this activity (Table
1).




1
  Early mentions include Gilman (1898), Leontieff (1941), Marshall (1920), and Pigou (1932). More
recent work is extensive and a sample includes Bridgman (2016), Nordhaus (2006), Abraham and Mackie
(2006), Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi, and (2009), and Poissonnier and Roy (2017). Jorgenson pioneered the
idea of counting household purchases of durable goods as investment rather than consumption. This issue
is discussed in Jorgenson and Landefeld (2006), which provides an overview of the issues surrounding the
structure of National Income and Product Accounts.
2
  See Jorgenson and Fraumeni (1989) and updates, including Christian (2016).
3
  For recent vintages of satellite accounts, see Bridgman (2016) for household production and Fraumeni,
Christian, and Samuels (2017) for human capital.
4
  For a review of work on household innovation, see von Hippel (2017).


                                                                                                      2
Table 1. Household sector innovators developing or improving consumer products for personal use
 Nation           UK USA Japan Canada Finland S.Korea Sweden Russia UAE China
 % of                 a        b        c         d          e           f         g         h         i        j
                  6.1      5.2     3.7        5.6        5.4         1.5       7.3       9.6       3.0      1.5
 population
 Millions of
 individuals       2.9      16      4.7        1.6       0.17       0.54       0.72      13.9      0.28    20.7
 % protected
 by any type IP    1.9      8.8     0.0        2.8        4.7        7.0        1.4       na        4.0     6.5
Sources: a von Hippel et al. (2012); b,c von Hippel et al. (2011); dde Jong (2013); ede Jong et al. (2015); f
Kim (2015); g Bengtsson (2016); h Fursov et al. (2017); von Hippel et al. (2017); jChen, Su, et al. (2017).


        Regarding the definition of household innovation, all ten surveys used a standard
definition for developments by householders that qualified for inclusion as innovations.
Each survey included only new products and product modifications that had been
developed by individuals or collaborating groups for personal or family use and that
provided useful functional improvements over products already available on the market.                        5



(This requirement is in line with OECD requirements for a product innovation
developed by a business as spelled out in the 2018 Oslo Manual: “Product innovations
must provide significant improvements to one or more characteristics or performance
specifications. This includes the addition of new functions, or improvements to existing
functions or user utility.”6) Innovations that individuals developed at home for their jobs
or for sale, or were paid to develop, were not included in the household sector study
samples. Accordingly, because household production entails the “production of goods
and services by members of a household, for their own consumption, using their own
capital and their own unpaid labor” (Ironmonger 2000, p. 3), household sector
innovation as defined in these surveys is a form of household production.

        Despite the prevalence indicated by household surveys, household R&D largely
has, as noted, fallen between the cracks of existing work on economic measurement.
Indeed, in the literature on household production, time spent developing household
R&D is considered leisure. Moreover, that literature largely focuses on the production
of services that are consumed roughly concurrently with their production, rather than on
the production of new intangible capital. In the literature on human capital, time spent
developing household R&D would be considered non-market consumption or leisure.
That classification as consumption or leisure (rather than as an activity creating capital)
occurs both in the lifetime-income approach to measuring human capital (pioneered by
Jorgenson and Fraumeni (1989 and 1992)) as well as in the cost approach (developed by
Kendrick (1976)).7 The indicators approach to measuring human capital also would not
count household R&D as investment.8 None of these approaches consider household
R&D as an investment that generates a long-lived capital stock and affect economic

5
  Because the definition focuses on products developed for personal or family use, innovations developed
in hacker or makerspaces would be included or excluded depending on the innovator’s intention (personal
or commercial) with respect to use.
6
  See OECD/Eurostat (2018), p. 71.
7
  In the Jorgenson Fraumeni framework, time spent on R&D would be considered non-market
consumption, and in the Kendrick approach this time would be counted as leisure.
8
  See Barro and Lee (2013) for an example.


                                                                                                              3
welfare in ways that are missed when household R&D is counted as consumption or
leisure.

        That being said, a handful of papers has estimated values for household activity
that would fall outside the prior literatures on household production and human capital.9
Miranda and Zolas (2018) develop estimates of the value of household innovations that
are patented. That research takes an important step forward. However, as Miranda and
Zolas point out about their estimates, “Admittedly this [patented innovations] excludes
perhaps what might be the lion’s share of household innovation; that which is not
patented.” (p. 3). Indeed, as we discuss in Section 5 below, their estimate of the number
of innovations patented each year amounts to well under 1 percent of the universe of
household innovations estimated from survey data. That small share is, perhaps, not
surprising, given that—as reported in table 1—just 8.8 percent of household innovations
in the United States captured in surveys receive any type of intellectual property
protection (ranging from nondisclosure agreements to patents), and patenting is the most
expensive type of protection.

        In addition, several recent papers have assessed the value of online activity by
household members. One strand of this literature has focused on the value of time
consumers spend in various online activities.10 And, Brynjolfsson, Kim, and Oh (2013)
have assessed the value of Internet firms’ capital that is generated by users. However,
much of the household activity considered by these papers—social media, search, or
posting reviews—would not be categorized as household innovative activity by the
definition in this paper but rather as business capital developed by users of a platform.

        Just as the existing methodologies for measuring economic activity largely have
omitted household R&D, the great bulk of household sector product and service
development also had previously fallen outside the OECD’s official definition of
innovation. That definition (Oslo Manual, 3rd edition) required, in part, that to qualify as
an innovation, a novel product, process or service must be “implemented on the market.”
However, the great bulk of household sector developments are not mediated through
markets. Indeed, evidence from the above-mentioned national surveys show that 90
percent or more of the innovations developed are not market mediated. Fortunately, this
definitional problem now has been eliminated with the publication of the 4th edition of
the Oslo Manual (2018). Responding in part to the new evidence for the extent and
importance of “free” household sector innovation, a new general definition of innovation
has been promulgated that no longer requires that a development be placed on the
market:




9
  More generally, Coyle and Nakamura (2019) highlight needed steps to develop a framework for
assessing the relationship between household time-use and social welfare.
10
   For example, see Nakamura, Samuels, and Soloveichik (2017), Brynjolfsson and Oh (2012), Goolsbee
and Klenow (2006), Brynjolfsson, Eggers, and Gannamaneni (2018), and Diewert and Fox (2017).


                                                                                                      4
        “The general definition of an innovation for all types of units is as follows:
        An innovation is a new or improved product or process (or combination thereof) that
        differs significantly from the unit’s previous products or processes and that has been
        made available to potential users (product) or brought into use by the unit (process).
        The general definition uses the generic term “unit” to describe the actor responsible for
        innovations. It refers to any institutional unit in any sector, including households and
        their individual members. The definition is appropriate for measuring innovation
        developed by individuals, a key goal identified at the 2016 Blue Sky Forum.” (¶1.25
        and 1.26, Oslo Manual, 4 edition, p. 32)
                                    th




        In line with the change in the OECD general definition of innovation, we believe
that household R&D warrants more focused attention from a national income accounting
perspective. This focus on a new category of household intangible capital mirrors
earlier efforts to expand the measurement of business investment and capital to include
intangible capital.11 Our effort also can be seen as connecting the literatures on
household innovation and R&D with work on economic measurement from a national
income accounting perspective.

        To take a step toward classifying this category of household activity as capital
accumulation, this paper provides illustrative estimates of quantities and prices for this
type of household capital. Obtaining such estimates is a daunting task, given
challenging conceptual issues and data limitations. That being said, we rely on available
survey and other data, and plow ahead to build up a set of estimates. In the U.S. alone,
our estimates suggest that household R&D is sizable, with our preferred estimates of real
investment in 2017 at $41 billion (2012 dollars) and our preferred estimate of the real
capital stock at about $233 billion. According to these estimates, household R&D
represents an important feature of household activity and, more generally, of the overall
landscape of innovation.

       To be sure, our estimates should be regarded as an effort to establish a rough
order of magnitude. The survey evidence covers a single year, and we had to use
extrapolators to create a time series for investment. In addition, we must rely on rough
assumptions to obtain price trends to convert nominal to real investment. Still, even
though necessarily imprecise, we hope that our rough estimates demonstrate the
importance of undertaking an effort to correctly classify these activities as accumulation
of household R&D.

        The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines household
R&D and highlights how this category is not captured in extant estimates of household
production or human capital. In section 3, we review what is currently known about the
nature of household R&D. In section 4, we develop estimates of nominal investment,
real investment, and the real capital stock for household R&D. In Section 5, we

11
  For early papers on intangibles, see Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005 and 2009). For a more recent
discussion, see Haskel and Westlake (2017). For one collection of recent work on innovation, see
National Academy of Sciences (2017).


                                                                                                        5
describe a number of different metrics for assessing the magnitude and importance of
household R&D. In section 6, we present some initial thoughts on how to improve
measures of household R&D. Section 7 concludes.


2. Defining Investment in Household Research and Development
       Following in the spirit of Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005 and 2009) and
Kendrick (1976), household investment can be defined as any use of resources within a
household to create an asset that will generate a flow of services to that household or to
other households in the future. This definition covers both market and non-market
investment as well as tangible and intangible capital. Let’s consider these in turn.

         Household tangible capital is acquired both through market transactions and non-
market channels. Purchases of household durables are tangible capital typically
acquired via market transactions, such as the purchase of a car. Non-market or own-
account tangible investment would include a homeowner building raised garden beds or
a deck. While these own-account examples may not seem particularly consequential,
own-account tangible household investment was important in the past. For example,
estimates of own-account farm structures reach well back into the 19th century and are
important for getting a full picture of capital used in the production of food in those
earlier time periods.12 Today, households purchase most food outside the home, so
estimates of own-account farm structures receive little attention.

       Regarding intangible household capital, the most recognized and studied form is
human capital. However, households also devote resources to developing other types of
intangible capital, such as new products or services. We call the development of new
products and services household innovation or R&D.

        All of these types of household investment (market and non-market and tangible
and intangible) are not counted as investment in the National Income and Product
Accounts. Household purchases of durable goods are counted as consumption. Own-
account investment by households in durable goods is not currently included in GDP at
all except through the purchase of materials. And, neither human capital nor household
R&D are included in official GDP accounts. While satellite accounts have been
developed for human capital and for purchased household durables counting as
investment, household R&D is nowhere to be seen. Thus, to gauge the magnitude and
importance of household R&D we must look elsewhere.


3. What we know today about household innovation and diffusion
        At the time of this writing, household sector national innovation surveys have
collected data on product innovations only – not on services and process improvements.
Case studies have shown that householders are very important sources of consumer
service and process innovations as well, so future empirical surveys will likely fill in this

12
     See Gallman (1966).


                                                                                             6
temporary gap (Oliveira and von Hippel 2011, van der Boor, Oliveira, and Veloso
2014).

3.1 Overview of household innovation
         Nationally-representative surveys have taught us that household sector
innovation activity is present in essentially all products of interest to consumers, ranging
from medical devices to sporting equipment. The figures reported in table 2 – the
fraction of household innovations in different categories – shows this pattern clearly for
the first 6 22
             national surveys.
                  Chapter 2



           Table  2
           Table 2.2
           Scope of product development by household sector users in various innovation
           categories.
                                UKa      Japanb   USb        Finlandc Canadad   S. Koreae
            Craft and shop      23.0%     8.4%    12.3% 20%            22%      16.4%
            tools
            Sports and hobby    20.0%     7.2%    14.9% 17%            18%      17.9%
            Dwelling-related    16.0% 45.8%       25.4% 20%            19%      17.9%
                                                                   f
            Gardening-related   11.0%     6.0%     4.4%       na        na         na
            Child-related       10.0%     6.0%     6.1%       4%       10%      10.9%
            Vehicle-related       8.0%    9.6%     7.0% 11%            10%       6.5%
            Pet-related           3.0%    2.4%     7.0%       na        na         na
            Medical               2.0%    2.4%     7.9%       7%       8%        5.5%
            Computer software       na      na          na    6%       11%         na
            Food and clothes        na      na          na   12%        na         na
            Other                 7.0% 12.0%      14.9%       3%       3%       23.9%

           a. Source: von Hippel, de Jong, and Flowers 2012
           b. Source: von Hippel, Ogawa, and de Jong 2011
           c. Source: de Jong, von Hippel, Gault, Kuusisto, and Raasch 2015
           d. Source: de Jong 2013
           e. Source: Kim 2015


Categoriesmore
             showing
                 than high   levels of
                       a thousand      product
                                    dollars      innovation
                                             in time          map well
                                                      and materials      into major
                                                                     combined.  (In categories of
unpaid time   activities
          these          reported
                 calculations, timeby
                                    wasconsumers.
                                        converted toFor   example,
                                                       a money       in theby
                                                                equivalent  United
                                                                              using Kingdom,
sports, gardening,
          the averagehousehold    chores,
                       per-hour wage   ratecaring fornation
                                            in each   children,  and using
                                                            surveyed.)      computers
                                                                       The range of    were
significantproject
            activities  (Lader, Short,
                   expenditures         and Gershuny
                                  by respondents         (2006)).
                                                   was wide,  varying from almost
           nothing—projects accomplished very quickly using only materials on
       In hand—to
           the U.S., levels
                      11 percent
                            much of    household
                                    higher         sector innovations
                                            than average.  Other researchwere
                                                                            on developed
                                                                                other       by
collaborating  groupssamples
          innovation    of individuals,
                                finds thatand  89 percent
                                           individuals whoby   individuals
                                                            spent            working
                                                                  significantly more alone. For
groups working    together,
          than average       collaboration
                        are likely to be lead at a distance has been
                                              users—individuals  at theincreasingly
                                                                        leading edge enabled by
advances of
          in important
             digital design   tools,
                         market      andhaving
                                  trends   also bya advances  in for
                                                    strong need  communication
                                                                     their creations.via the internet.
ExamplesLead
           of innovations    developed
                users are also more likelybythan
                                              group  collaboration
                                                  average            include:
                                                          users to develop  products
           with potential commercial value (von Hippel 1986; Urban and von
           Hippel 1988; Franke, von Hippel, and Schreier 2006; Hienerth, von
           Hippel, and Jensen 2014, table 3).




                                                                                                    7
        •    Personal 3D printers (de Bruijn 2010). Developed by household innovators,
             they are used today by millions with annual equipment sales of $500 million
             in 2017.13
        •    DIY artificial pancreas developed by Type 1 diabetics for their own use and
             successfully applied in everyday life by hundreds (Openaps.org 2018). Only
             free transfers of the design to others are offered by the innovators.
        •    Many new sports practiced by millions – ranging from skateboarding to
             white-water kayaking to mountain biking – and the novel equipment needed
             to practice those novel sports. Equipment sales for these many new sports in
             aggregate are in the tens of billions of dollars annually.

For individuals working along, three examples of (relatively modest) product
innovations include:
       • Craft and shop tools: “I created a jig to make arrows. The jig holds the arrow
           in place and turns at the same time, so I can paint according to my own
           markings. Jigs available on the market do not rotate.”
       • Child-related: “I created a cloth expansion panel to enable me to fasten my
           winter coat while wearing a baby carrier underneath. Helps keep me and my
           baby warm.”
       • Computer software related: “I am colorblind. I developed an iPhone camera
           app that identifies the colors of objects in a scene, and codes them for easy
           recognition.”

        Survey results show that individuals’ expenditures on innovation projects
generally are “person-sized,” ranging from a few hundred to a few thousand dollars in
out of pocket expenses and expenditures of unpaid discretionary time (calculated at the
average wage rate of each country surveyed). In the U.S., time spent on respondents’
most recent project averaged 14.7 days, and out-of-pocket expenditures averaged
$1,065. In the U.S., total annual expenditures on this activity by householders, with
time valued at the U.S. average wage rate in 2010 was $20.2 Billion (von Hippel,
Ogawa, and de Jong 2011).

        Finally, regarding the quality of the nationally-representative survey data, note
that the survey questionnaires used in national studies of household sector product
innovation have been designed to stringently screen out false positives with respect to
determining national percentages of household sector innovators.14 So, if anything, we
suspect that the data collected on innovation frequencies is likely to be conservative.




13
   For more on the development of 3D printers, see
https://www.forbes.com/sites/tjmccue/2018/06/04/wohlers-report-2018-3d-printer-industry-rises-21-
percent-to-over-7-billion/#714996712d1a
14
   For details, see von Hippel, de Jong, and Flowers (2012).




                                                                                                    8
3.2 Diffusion of household innovations
        National survey data results show that significant numbers of householder-
developed innovations diffuse beyond the innovator(s) to additional adopters. There are
two possible paths for diffusion of innovations developed in the household sector: direct
peer-to-peer transfers and transfers to commercializing firms that in turn sell copies to
consumers. In the U.S. household sector innovation survey, respondents were asked a
combined question: Did your innovation diffuse via peer-to-peer transfer and/or via
transfer to commercializing firms? In response, 6.1 percent of respondents reported that
diffusion had occurred by one or both pathways. Given that there were 16 million
household sector innovators in the U.S. in 2010 and that, on average, each of them
created 1.9 projects per year, this equates to 1.85 million projects per year being diffused
to peers and/or commercial producers. The great bulk of this diffusion likely takes place
without compensation for the household sector innovators: only 8.8 percent of U.S.
household sector innovations were protected by any form of IP including patents,
trademarks, copyrights, and confidentiality agreements (von Hippel, Ogawa, and de
Jong (2011)).

        Case studies show that the value over time of household innovations diffused for
free and commercialized by producers can be significant. Specifically, a study of the
sources of the most important innovations over the 50+ year history of the field of
whitewater kayaking found that 63 percent of the 54 most important equipment
innovations in the history of the sport were developed by household sector kayakers. In
addition, 100 percent of the 39 most important process or technique innovations (the
things you do with a whitewater kayak like flips and rolls) were also developed by
household sector kayakers (Baldwin et al. 2006 Table 1). A second study explored the
sources of 16 important innovations that had been first introduced into retail banking in
computerized form between 1975 and 2010. It found that 44 percent of these (and 80
percent of the manual precursors to these computerized services) had been developed
originally by household sector banking customers rather than banks (Oliveira and von
Hippel 2011). For example, as documented by Hemenway and Calishain (2004),
”computerized aggregation of account information across multiple institutions was first
implemented by individual “hackers” for their own use in the 1980s.” A third study
explored the sources of the most basic services supplied by mobile banking, such as
money transfer between customers. The authors determined that at least 50 percent of
these had been pioneered originally by consumer service users (van der Boor, Oliveira,
and Veloso 2014).


4. Measuring Household R&D Investment and Capital
Nominal investment
       To measure nominal investment in household R&D, we follow the literatures on
household innovation and intangible business capital. In particular, we rely on a
nationally-representative survey conducted for the U.S. The U.S. survey focused on
product innovations undertaken to meet personal needs, and was conducted in December
of 2010. A questionnaire was sent to 25,200 household sector individuals and 1,192
responded. The results provide a snapshot in time of the nominal investment in



                                                                                          9
household R&D. Respondents were asked about time spent on their most recent
innovation, the cost of materials used for that innovation, and the number of other
innovations completed over the past three years.

         The survey data were used to construct an estimate of total nominal expenditure
on household innovation (which we are calling investment in household R&D) for
2010.15 In particular, for a person reporting an innovation on the survey, the value of
time devoted to their latest innovation (valued at an average wage rate) was combined
with the cost of purchased inputs, providing the investment in a single innovation. This
figure then is grossed up by the average number of innovations completed in a year for
those who undertook innovations based on responses to the question on the average
number of innovations completed over the past three years. Finally, this figure is
multiplied by an estimate of the total number of innovators in the civilian non-
institutional population aged 18 and above. For the U.S., this estimate of aggregate
nominal investment in household R&D for 2010 is $20.2 billion.

        As noted earlier in the paper, the U.S. figures focus on innovations undertaken to
meet personal or family needs. Analysis of data from China, Finland, and the United
Arab Emirates captures household R&D undertaken for a wider range of motivations,
including fun and learning, altruism, and financial gain. Chin, Su, de Jong, and von
Hippel (2018) report that, based upon a comparison of the relative scale from these three
nations of “need only” versus “all motive” innovations developed by householders, the
U.S. results should be grossed up by about 1.5 to obtain a measure of household R&D
that more completely covers a wider range of motivations.16 Accordingly, we gross up
the $20.2 billion estimate for 2010 to $30.3 billion.

        We used two different extrapolators to extend the 2010 estimate to a time series.
First, we assumed that nominal household R&D grows in line with nominal GDP.
Second, we assumed that nominal household R&D grows in line with nominal business
investment in R&D. While both of these extrapolators are plausible, we suspect that
they may understate the more recent growth rate of household R&D. Increased
sophistication of digital design tools available to householders for free, and also an
increased ability to coordinate multi-person projects via the Internet have both greatly
reduced costs and facilitated household innovation (von Hippel 2017, p 51-2). As a
consequence, this activity may have increased more rapidly in the past two decades than
has nominal GDP or business R&D investment. Still, to be conservative, we use GDP
and business R&D as plausible extrapolators.

       The two estimates of nominal investment in household R&D are shown in figure
1, and we refer to these as our base case estimates. Both of the base case nominal
investment series rise from a modest value in 1949 to $39 billion (series extrapolated by
nominal GDP) and $44 billion (series extrapolated by nominal business R&D spending)
in 2017. We do not have a strong preference between these estimates though the R&D

15
  See von Hippel, Ogawa, and de Jong (2011). For a summary, see von Hippel (2017), table 2.5.
16
  This blowup factor brings in some household innovations that were developed for financial gain;
however, the fraction of innovations whose original motivation was financial gain is quite small.


                                                                                                    10
extrapolator seems more appropriate to us so we identify those figures as our “preferred”
estimates.

        We believe that the estimates reported in figure 1 are conservative because they
largely cover R&D related to new products. Recall from section 3.2 that case studies
have shown that households also develop important new consumer services, such as
basic new retail banking services (Oliveira and von Hippel (2011) and van der Boor,
Oliveira, and Veloso (2014)). Accordingly, we should, in principle, gross up the
investment series to account for household R&D that develops new services. We do not
know of a reliable way to do this, but by way of illustrating the possible magnitude, we
gross the investment series up to account for the ratio of consumer services expenditure
relative to consumer goods expenditures in the US economy – a ratio that was 2.2 in
2017.

       The resulting investment series are reported as the upper two lines in figure 2,
which also includes the investment series shown in figure 1. With this blow-up factor
included, our estimates of nominal investment in household R&D now range between
$126 and $143 billion in 2017. The estimates with the services blow-up factor are
presented for illustrative purposes only because the adjustment for services is so
speculative given the methodological difficulties encountered to date in getting reliable
information on process or service innovations via questionnaire.17 Going forward, we
focus on the estimates without this services blow-up as our base case and preferred
estimates.

Real investment
        Measuring changes in prices over time for household R&D (and for most
categories of business intangibles) is very challenging. Because these types of
intangible investment and the accumulated capital are rarely acquired or exchanged
through market transactions, prices will, in most cases, be unobservable. With
sufficiently detailed surveys, one could track the cost of the inputs needed for an
investment in intangible capital and then construct a price index of how those costs for
wages and materials have changed over time. One could also, as was done in early
studies of business intangible capital, use the GDP deflator, a wage index, or some other
price or wage index as a proxy to track changes in the price of household intangible
capital over time.18

       We consider two proxies for prices of household R&D, both drawn from the
National Income and Product Accounts: the GDP deflator and the price index for
business R&D. The GDP deflator could be considered a general proxy for prices, and

17
   Researchers have found that respondents do not tend to recall service or process innovations when
asked about them via questionnaire, even though they have in fact created these types of innovations as
has been revealed by follow up personal interviews. For example, householders are much more likely to
recall designing and building a special device to help an invalid family member get out of bed, than they
are to recall devising a novel series of physical lifting movements to accomplish that same task.
18
   Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) used the GDP deflator as a proxy for the price of business intangible
capital.


                                                                                                       11
we apply it to the series that used nominal GDP as an extrapolator. Implicitly, this series
assumes that growth rates of real household R&D match those of real GDP.
Alternatively, we apply the business R&D deflator to the nominal series that was
extrapolated using nominal business R&D investment. Using this deflator implicitly
assumes that prices for business and household R&D follow similar trends and that
growth rates for real household R&D match those of real business R&D. Using these
two alternative deflators and our base case nominal investment series, the resulting real
investment series are reported in figure 3. We refer to these series as our base case real
estimates of investment. These series start at modest levels and rise to $36 and $41
billion (2012 $) by 2017. The series that grows in line with real business R&D (the red
line) increases somewhat more rapidly in most periods and is a bit more volatile than the
series that grows in line with real GDP (the blue line).

Capital Stocks
       We use the perpetual inventory method to construct real capital stocks of
household R&D. Specifically, we assume:

               𝐾" = 1 − 𝛿 𝐾"'( + 𝐼"                                                 (1)

where Kt, It and δ are the real capital stock, real investment, and depreciation rate for
household R&D, respectively. For depreciation, we use a rate of 15 percent, based on
Haskel and Westlake’s (2017, p. 57) estimate for business R&D. To start the iterations
for the perpetual inventory method in equation 1, we need a value of the capital stock in
an initial period. Because we do not have an initial stock estimate, we use the 1949
value of real investment as the initial stock estimate. This assumption will create some
distortion for years relatively close to 1949; accordingly, we only report capital stock
figures beginning in 1970, by which time any distortions should have faded.

        Following this procedure and using our base case estimates of real investment in
household product R&D, the resulting capital stock series are shown in figure 4. These
series show steady and significant growth in the real capital stock of household product
R&D, rising to about $218 and $233 billion by 2016 (2012 $) for the series extrapolated
by GDP and R&D, respectively.


5. How important is household product R&D?
        In this section, we highlight several metrics to demonstrate that household R&D
is big enough to matter and to warrant further attention.

        First, how big is household R&D for developing new products compared with
business R&D for consumer products? von Hippel, Ogawa, and de Jong (2010) used
input-output tables to calculate the amount of business R&D devoted to developing
consumer goods (just products, not services), and they estimated this figure to be $62
billion in 2010. Our estimate for household R&D in 2010 is about $32 billion, more
than half of what businesses were spending. By this metric, household R&D is an
important source of innovation in the consumer product space.



                                                                                          12
        Second, given that we estimate the stock of household R&D to be substantial,
that stock would generate a significant flow of services to households that would be an
unmeasured boost to welfare. To gauge the size of these flows, we use the Jorgenson
user cost formula. In particular, we estimate the service flow as:

                  𝑟 + 𝛿 − 𝜂 𝑃𝐾

where r is the nominal rate of return (assumed to be 7 percent), δ is the depreciation rate
for household R&D (assumed to be 15 percent), η is the expected rate of inflation for
household R&D (calculated as the three-year moving average of the actual percent
change in the deflator for household R&D), and PK is the nominal stock of household
R&D capital. Using this formula, the service flow for 2017 is $47 billion when the
GDP-related extrapolators are used and $50 billion when R&D-related extrapolators are
used. With 126.2 million households in the U.S. in 2017, the $50 billion figure translates
to $396 per household.

         For the reasons discussed above, we believe that these estimates are
conservative. They do not include the service flow from the stock of capital related to
household innovations in services, and our rough estimates suggested that total
household R&D capital (reflecting both product and service innovations) could be three
times as large as that related to product innovations alone. Even if that adjustment factor
is too large, including additional R&D capital related to service innovations would
significantly increase the estimate of the flow of benefits to households.

        Third, how do our estimates compare with those in Miranda and Zolas (2018)?
Miranda and Zolas estimate that the value of household innovations patented between
2000 and 2011 is $5 billion. This figure is far below our preferred estimate of the
nominal capital stock of household R&D of $188 billion in 2011. The most important
source of difference between these estimates is what is covered by each estimate. Our
estimate covers all reported household innovations (based on survey data), while the
Miranda and Zolas figure covers only patented innovations. Between 2000 and 2011,
Miranda and Zolas identify 277,000 innovations patented by households, implying a
yearly average of about 23,000 patented innovations. This figure is a tiny fraction of our
estimate of about 30 million household innovations in the United States in 2010.19 This
relationship is not surprising given that only 8.8 percent of household innovations in the
U.S. receive any intellectual property protection and only a modest fraction of that
fraction would have received patent protection.)

        Fourth, how does the stock of household R&D compare in magnitude with that
of other major categories of household assets? Our preferred estimate of the nominal
stock of household R&D in 2017 is $251.3 billion. This is a little under half the size of



19
  Von Hippel (2017) reports 16 million innovators in the United States in 2010 generating an average of
1.9 innovations per year, implying a total of about 30 million innovations.


                                                                                                     13
the stock of household autos ($545.7 billion)20 and about equal to the size of the stock of
household appliances ($259.6). While household innovations are used in very different
ways than autos and appliances, these comparisons highlight that the stock of household
innovation makes up an important component of household economic activity.

        A final metric for gauging the importance of household R&D is to consider the
diffusion of household R&D to the business sector; that is, the innovations developed in
the household sector that later are commercialized by the business sector. As described
in section 3 above, this path of diffusion appears to be large enough to be consequential.

    Admittedly, all of these metrics for gauging the importance of household innovation
are rough. Nonetheless, each of these metrics illustrates that household innovation is
large enough to warrant further attention.


6. How to Improve Data on Household Innovation
         To date, and in the absence of official statistics collected by governments,
statistics on household innovation have been collected by ad hoc empirical studies such
as those we have described. We believe that it would be highly valuable for the
measurement community to develop more systematic ways to measure household sector
innovation for incorporation into relevant national analyses of innovation going forward.

         Measurement of household sector innovation is not a straightforward task.
Because only a fraction of innovations created by householders are protected by
intellectual property rights such as patents, there is no record of who the innovators
actually are. Further, when a household sector innovation is diffused for free, there is no
price information to serve as a proxy for value. Still further, the number and nature of
adopters are generally not tracked, just as is the case for free diffusion of open source
software, with the exception of special examples such as Greenstein and Nagle’s (2014)
work on software for computer servers. Still, in view of the extent and importance of
household innovation, work toward better measurement clearly would be valuable.
Attempts to assign value to unpriced product flows have already begun, and
improvements will doubtless follow. (See, e.g., Brynjolfsson and Oh 2012, Brynjolfsson
et al. (2018), and Greenstein op cit.)

        We suggest that measurement of household sector innovation expenditures will
involve surveys of householders. Building upon success with nationally-representative
surveys conducted to date, we propose that periodic social surveys could be developed
to explore innovation in the household sector. To gain a rich understanding, these could
ask individuals in the household sector about their innovations and their entrepreneurial
innovation activities, the inputs they expended, the outputs they created, and their
information on what kind and how much diffusion has been achieved. As a near-term
alternative, it may be that, for the specific purposes of the measurement community, just
a few questions added to existing social surveys—such as the American Time Use
20
  A significant share of autos are leased, and these vehicles would be included in the business stock of
autos rather than the household stock.


                                                                                                           14
Survey—could provide the most crucial basic information such as time spent on
developing innovations each year and out of pocket expenses.

       To collect information on commercialization of household sector innovations by
producers, governmental surveys of enterprises could be modified to ask about the
incidence of and the value of adopting designs from household sector innovators. Initial
experiments in this direction have been conducted by adding experimental questions to
Community Innovation Surveys (CIS) in both Finland and Switzerland. These
experiments demonstrate that valuable information can be collected via the CIS.
Specifically, responses to the experimental questions added to the Finland CIS have
shown that producers do report adoption of customer designs as the basis for new
commercial products, and that this can be important for their success in the marketplace
(Kuusisto, Niemi, and Gault 2014, Statistics Finland 2016, Appendix tables 6 and 7).


7. Conclusion
        We have argued that household R&D is an important type of innovation that
largely has been overlooked in research related to national accounts. Indeed, it is not
counted as investment in the literatures on household production and human capital.
Based on survey data for 2010 for the U.S., we develop time series estimates of nominal
investment, real investment, and real capital stocks for household R&D. Our preferred
estimate of real investment in household R&D in 2017 is $41 billion (2012 $), and our
estimate of the real capital stock in that year is $233 billion.

       We fully recognize the tentative and incomplete nature of our time series
estimates given that they embed a host of assumptions. Yet, they illustrate an important
point. Namely, that household R&D is large enough to be consequential for household
welfare and likely generates spillovers to the business sector that, in some industries,
could be quite important. We believe that additional focus on gathering the necessary
data and refining estimates of this type of intangible capital would enhance our
understanding of household and business activity and innovation.




                                                                                      15
References

Abraham, K. and C. Mackie, “A framework for nonmarket accounting,” in D. W.
Jorgenson, J. S. Landefeld, and W. D. Nordhaus (eds), A New Architecture for the US
National Accounts, vol. I., 2006.

Barro, R. and J. Lee, “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 1950-
2010,” Journal of Development Economics, 104©, 184-98, 2013.

Bengtsson, Lars “How big and important is consumer innovation in Sweden? – A
comparison with five other countries,” Lund University Working Paper, 2016.

Bridgman, Benjamin, “Accounting for Household Production in the National Accounts:
An Update, 1965-2014,” Survey of Current Business, February 2016.

Brynfolfsson, E., Eggers, F. & Gannamaneni, A., “Using massive online choice
experiments to measure changes in well-being.” National Bureau of Economic Research
working paper no. 24514, 2018.

Brynjolfsson, Erik. and Joo Hee Oh, “The attention economy: measuring the value of
free digital services on the Internet,” presented at the 33rd International Conference on
Information Systems, Orlando, FL, 2012.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Seon Tae Kim, and JooHee Oh, “User Investment and Firm Value:
Case of Internet Firms”. Proceedings of the Workshop on Information Systems and
Economics, Milan, December 2013.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, American Time Use Survey – 2017 Results, released June 28,
2018.

Chen, Jin, Yu-Shan Su, Jeroen P.J. de Jong, Eric von Hippel, “Household Sector
Innovation in China: Impacts of Income and Development” MIT Sloan School of
Management Working Paper, 2018.

Christian, Michael S., “Net Investment and Stocks of Human Capital in the United
States, 1975-2013,” working paper, available at:
https://www.bea.gov/papers/pdf/Christian%20human%20capital%2020160104.pdf.

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Intangible Capital and U.S.
Economic Growth,” Review of Income and Wealth, Series 55, Number 3, pp. 661-685,
2009.

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Measuring Capital and Technology:
An Expanded Framework,” in Measuring Capital in the New Economy, edited by Carol
Corrado, John Haltiwanger, and Daniel Sichel, NBER and University of Chicago press,
2005.



                                                                                            16
Coyle, Diane and Leonard Nakamura, “Towards a Framework for Time Use, Welfare
and Household-centric Economic Measurement,” ESCoE Discussion Paper 2019-01,
2019.

de Jong, Jeroen P.J. “User innovation by Canadian consumers: Analysis of a sample of
2,021 respondents,” Unpublished paper commissioned by Industry Canada 2013.
de Jong, Jeroen P.J., Eric von Hippel, Fred Gault, Jari Kuusisto, and Christina Raasch
“Market failure in the diffusion of consumer-developed innovations: Patterns in
Finland.” Research Policy 44, no.10 p. 1856-1865, December, 2015

Diewert, E. and Fox, K. (2017), “The Digital Economy, GDP, and Consumer Welfare,”
presented at the NBER Summer Institute CRIW Workshop, July 17-18.

Fraumeni, Christian, and Samuels (2017), “The Accumulation of Human and Nonhuman
Capital Revisited,” in RIW Dec 2017.

Fursov, Konstantin, Thomas Thurner, and Alena Nefedova “What user-innovators do
that others don't: A study of daily practices” Technological Forecasting & Social
Change 118 p. 153–160, 2017.
Gallman, Robert E., “Gross National Product in the United States, 1834-1909,” in
Output, Employment, and Productivity in the United States after 1800, National Bureau
of Economic Research, p. 3-90, 1966.

Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, Women and Economics, 1898.

Goolsbee, A. and Klenow, P. J. (2006), “Valuing consumer products by the time spent
using them: An application to the Internet,” American Economic Review, 96, 108-113.

Greenstein, Shane, and Frank Nagle, “Digital dark matter and the economic contribution
of Apache” Research Policy 43 p. 623–631, 2014.

Halbinger, Maria “The role of makerspaces in supporting consumer innovation and
diffusion: An empirical analysis” Research Policy in press 2018.

Haskel, Jonathan and Stian Westlake, Capitalism without Capital, Oxford University
Press, 2017.

Hemenway, K., Calishain, T., 2004. “Spidering Hacks.” O’Reilly Media Inc.,
Cambridge, MA.

Ironmonger, D. 2000. “Household production and the household economy.” Research
paper, University of Melbourne, Department of Economics. Accessed January 16, 2019.
https://minerva-
access.unimelb.edu.au/bitstream/handle/11343/33646/65772_00000059_01_759.pdf?seq
uence=1&isAllowed=y



                                                                                         17
Jorgenson, Dale, and Barbara Fraumeni (1989), "The Accumulation of Human and
Nonhuman Capital, 1948-84," in Robert Lipsey and Helen Stone Tice, eds., The
Measurement of Saving, Investment, and Wealth (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).

Jorgenson, Dale and Steven Landefeld (2006), “Blueprint for Expanded and Integrated
U.S. Accounts: Review, Assessment, and Next Steps,” in A New Architecture for the
U.S. National Accounts, edited by Dale Jorgenson, Steven Landefeld, and William
Nordhaus, NBER and University of Chicago Press, p. 13-112.

Kendrick, John (1976), Formation and Stocks of Total Capital, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Kim, Y. Consumer user innovation in Korea: An international comparison and policy
implications. Asian Journal of Technology Innovation 23 (1): p. 69–86, 2015.

Landefeld, J. S., B. M. Fraumeni, and C. M. Vojtech, “Accounting for Household
Production: a Prototype Satellite Account Using the American Time Use
Survey,” Review of Income and Wealth, 55(2), 205–225, 2009.

Leontieff, Wassily, The Structure of the American Economy, 1941.

Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics: An Introductory Volume, 1920.

Miranda, Javier and Nikolas Zolas (2017), “The Impact of Household Innovation Using
Administrative Data,” NBER working paper No. 25259.

Nakamura, L. I., Samuels, J. D. and Soloveichik, R. H. (2017), “Measuring the “free”
digital economy within the GDP and productivity accounts,” Philadelphia Federal
Reserve Bank working paper No. 17-37..

National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2017), “Advancing
Concepts and Models for Measuring Innovation,” Proceedings of a Workshop,
Washington, D.C.

Nordhaus, W., “Principles of national accounting for nonmarket accounts,” A new
architecture for the US national accounts, 2006.

OECD/Eurostat (2018), Oslo Manual 2018: Guidelines for Collecting, Reporting and
Using Data on Innovation, 4th Edition, The Measurement of Scientific, Technological
and Innovation Activities, OECD Publishing, Paris/Eurostat, Luxembourg.

Ogawa, S., and K. Pongtanalert, “Visualizing Invisible Innovation Content: Evidence
from Global Consumer Innovation Surveys” Working paper, Kobe University 2011.



                                                                                       18
Oliveira, Pedro and Eric von Hippel (2011) “Users as Service Innovators: The Case of
Banking Services” Research Policy, vol. 40, Nr 6, pp. 806-818.

OpenAPS Outcomes https://openaps.org/outcomes/ (accessed Oct 10, 2018)

Pigou, Arthur, The Econoomics of Welfare, 1932.

Poissonnier, A. and Roy, D. (2017), Household Satellite Account for France. Review of
Income and Wealth, 63: 353–377. doi:10.1111/roiw.12216

Stiglitz, J. E., A. Sen, and J.-P. Fitoussi, “Report by the Commission on the
Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress,” Discussion paper, 2009.

Vanoli, A., Une histoire de la comptabilité nationale—A History of National
Accounting. La Découverte—IOS Press (English translation), 2002.

von Hippel, Eric, Free Innovation, MIT Press, 2017.

von Hippel, Eric, Jeroen P.J. de Jong, and Daan Rademaker, “Household Sector
Innovation” Mohammed Bin Rashid Centre for Government Innovation, UAE, (July,
2017)

von Hippel, Eric, S. Ogawa, and P.P.J. de Jong, “The age of the consumer innovator,”
Sloan Management Review 53 (1); p. 27-35, 2011.

von Hippel, Eric, Jeroen P.J. de Jong, and Stephen Flowers “Comparing business and
household sector innovation in consumer products: Findings from a representative
survey in the UK.” Management Science, Vol. 58, No. 9, p. 1669–1681, September,
2012.




                                                                                       19
20
21
22
23
