NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD
Abhijit Banerjee
Paul Niehaus
Tavneet Suri
Working Paper 25598
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25598

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

We thank Michael Faye and Alan Krueger, our collaborators on the GiveDirectly basic income
evaluation, as well as Ashu Handa, Renana Jhabvala, and Claudia and Dirk Haarmaan for helpful
discussion. Mansa Saxena provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25598.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Abhijit Banerjee, Paul Niehaus, and Tavneet Suri. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Universal Basic Income in the Developing World
Abhijit Banerjee, Paul Niehaus, and Tavneet Suri
NBER Working Paper No. 25598
February 2019
JEL No. O1
ABSTRACT
Should developing countries give everyone enough money to live on? Interest in this idea has
grown enormously in recent years, reflecting both positive results from a number of existing cash
transfer programs and also dissatisfaction with the perceived limitations of piecemeal, targeted
approaches to reducing extreme poverty. We discuss what we know (and what we do not) about
three questions: what recipients would likely do with the incremental income, whether this would
unlock further economic growth, and the potential consequences of giving the money to everyone
(as opposed to targeting it).
Abhijit Banerjee
Department of Economics, E52-540
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu
Paul Niehaus
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
pniehaus@ucsd.edu

Tavneet Suri
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-517
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
tavneet@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Do we really need to know what would happen if the extreme poor were given a basic income?
One could argue we do not. One of the central goals of development economics has been to
understand how to raise the incomes of people who are poor. A sustainable program for universal
basic income (henceforth UBI) does that by definition. Asking whether the effects are “good” or
“bad” amounts to asking whether we should be trying to raise the incomes of the poor in the first
place.
The reality, however, is that much of the spending on development is on issues like nutrition,
health and education which may or may not be the priorities of the people it aims to help. This
is partly because many of the taxpayers in both rich and poor countries who ultimately pay for
these programs, as well as many of those who implement them, worry that if they simply gave
away money the recipients would use it in ways they do not like. Most pessimistically, they might
become dependent on the transfers, or waste them on alcohol, revelries or other frivolous needs.
Pragmatically, then, the case for or against UBI must include the evidence on how the money would
be spent.
Of course, even if you accept raising incomes as a goal and that a basic income tautologically
achieves it, you need not support UBI. There could be other ways of raising incomes that are more
cost-effective – that is, better ways to get people a dollar than simply giving them a dollar. Some
people may be unable to pursue income-generating opportunities because of a missing market for
credit or insurance, or because of the psychological burdens of poverty itself. UBI may be more or
less effective than alternatives at relaxing these constraints to growth. On a grander scale, largescale infrastructure investment of the type popular in the early days of development could be a
more effective way to raise incomes.
And even if basic income is the best solution for some people, it is not obvious that it is universally
best. A targeted basic income could be a better use of scarce resources. This in turn depends on
the effectiveness of targeting.
This paper, then, examines what we know and what we do not about these three issues. We
do not take on a fourth question, which is whether it would make sense to replace many of the
existing major siloes of government development spending – nutrition, healthcare and education,
for example – by a single transfer, allowing people to buy these on the market. This is mainly
because while some developing countries like India and Pakistan have a large private sector in
health and education, in many other countries this is not currently an option. As a result, while we
know that in some countries the private sector actually provides quality comparable to the public
sector at a lower cost, this may not be true elsewhere. We thus consider UBI as an incremental
anti-poverty intervention.
To anticipate what people would do with incremental income and whether this would align with
the goals of policy-makers and taxpayers, we draw on the large body of high-quality evidence on
the impact of cash transfers in developing countries. The evidence from these studies has been
very positive, with little evidence of the negative outcomes mentioned above and positive effects on
1

a very wide range of outcomes – education, health, entrepreneurship and so on. But the specific
results also vary greatly within and between studies, highlighting the fact that UBI is unlikely to
be cost-effective at achieving any particular narrow policy goal.
To examine how a UBI might affect the growth of income from other sources, we draw on the
large literature in development economics on the constraints that limit investment and risk-taking
and how to relax them. We consider both financial constraints such as imperfections in the markets
for credit or insurance and also psychological constraints such as hopelessness or limited bandwidth.
For any particular constraint there is a plausible argument, and typically some evidence, that UBI
could help relax the constraint. At the same time, it seems unlikely that UBI would be the most
cost-effective way to relax any particular constraint. If we knew the issue constraining Abhijit was
a missing credit market, for example, then intervening directly in those markets should do more.
The growth argument for basic income as we see it is precisely that we know very little about what
constrains Abhijit specifically, as opposed to Paul or Tavneet who may face different problems,
or about how to precisely target the interventions to each of them that will best alleviate their
constraints. UBI might make sense because it will usually help a bit, and never entirely miss the
mark. And, of course, the opportunity cost of basic income as a growth intervention is low, since
the bulk of the fiscal outlay is simply a progressive transfer.
Finally, we consider the merits of universal as opposed to targeted income transfers. This is a
radical idea in the context of today’s social protection schemes, almost all of which of which are
targeted. The usual (and inarguable) point is that resources are scarce and that all else equal it is
beneficial to concentrate them where they will do the most good. But universality is administratively simpler, a virtue especially for states with limited capacity, and may have benefits in terms
of incentives and social cohesion. Given the evidence on informational and implementation issues
with de facto targeting, we argue that there may be a stronger case for universality than is often
thought.1
We focus throughout on the effects of UBI on those who receive them. Of course, any policy
proposal to implement UBI (or any other intervention, for that matter) must also specify from where
the money will come. The net impact of the policy is then the sum of effects on net recipients and
net payers. But because the options for funding a UBI are so varied – one could raise revenue
from any number of incremental taxes, cut spending from any number of existing programs, or run
larger deficits, for example – there is no simple answer to the “costs” of a UBI policy. It would
all depend on the details. Specific proposals will need to be evaluated drawing on what we know
about specific costs (e.g. the effects of a higher income tax). Ghatak and Maniquet (TBD) in this
volume provide further discussion of these issues.
We also focus exclusively on developing countries; separately in this volume, Hoynes and Roth1

Grosh et al. (2008) articulate what we take as the mainstream view when they write that “for the most part,
programs can focus resources on the poor to a moderate or high degree without incurring unacceptably high errors
of exclusion and administrative, private costs, and/or incentive costs, although not all do so. Factoring in judgments
on social and political costs is harder, partly because their metrics are so different, and partly because discussions
about them are often more polemical than quantitative, but the widespread and increasing interest in targeting from
policy makers suggests that these costs are not preclusive.

2

stein (TBD) consider UBI in developed countries. In many ways the issues are of course quite
different. Interest in UBI for wealthy countries has been motivated in part by fears of pending
labor market disruptions due to automation and artificial intelligence, rather than concern with
eliminating extreme poverty. Wealthy countries with more developed financial markets arguably
face fewer constraints on productive investment and growth, and their governments have the capacity to target benefits more finely and reliably, weakening some of the arguments for simplicity
which we consider here. That said, in other ways, developing countries already look like one possible future for the developed ones: few people hold stable full-time jobs, many work a variety of
part-time gigs instead, and as a result, public policy has never been based on an assumption of
universal full-time employment. Perhaps in this there is something the rich countries can learn
from the poor.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews existing evidence on the impacts
of cash transfers in developing countries and its strengths and weaknesses as a predictor of the
potential effects of a UBI. Section 3 discusses constraints on further income growth and the merits
of UBI in relaxing them. Section 4 discusses the pros and cons of universality relative to finergrained targeting, and Section 5 offers some concluding observations on the political economy of
UBI pilots to date.

2

Would a basic income do what funders want?

In the developing world, large-scale basic income schemes could plausibly be financed from (some
combination of) repurposed foreign aid, repurposed domestic tax revenue, or new tax revenue –
though they would place serious demands on any of these sources. Consider the set of low-income
countries (LICs) as categorized by the World Bank. From 2012-2016, the median amount of PPPadjusted per capita Official Development Assistance received was $77 and the 90th percentile was
$210.2 In comparison, median and 90th percentile PPP-adjusted tax revenue in 2016 were $286
and $464, respectively.3 If we include both low- and lower-middle-income countries, these figures
become $616 and $1,522, respectively. Clearly, funding anything close to a UBI would require a
substantial share of available resources. Some countries undoubtedly have scope to raise additional
revenue, but in general low-income countries raise substantially less revenue as a share of GDP
than wealthier ones, likely because their capacity to do so is limited (Gordon and Li, 2009).
A decision to fund a UBI from any of these sources would involve complex processes with many
stakeholders. Beliefs about the impacts of a UBI would likely play an important role. Technocrats
might need to be convinced to hand over money to the poor that they otherwise could have used to
design and implement projects in their own areas of expertise and motivation - projects designed
to achieve narrower goals for health, education, nutrition, and so on. Taxpaying voters would need
to be convinced to support “handouts” despite commonly held concerns that they would reduce
2

Authors calculations from OECD.Stat (https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?datasetcode=TABLE2A, accessed
14 August 2018) and the World Development Indicators (World Bank, 2016).
3
Author’s calculations from the World Development Indicators (World Bank, 2016).

3

recipients’ own initiative, or trigger self-harmful behaviors such as drinking or drug use. Polling
suggests, for example, that voter support for spending foreign aid on cash transfers drops if even
small amounts would be spent on alcohol.4

2.1

What we know

Strictly speaking, there is very little evidence on the effects of UBI in developing countries. We
are aware of only three schemes that can truly claim to be UBI in a developing country: one for
two years in nine villages in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, one in two villages in Namibia,
and Iran’s nation-wide cash transfer introduced in 2011 to offset the withdrawal of food and fuel
subsidies. None of these has been experimentally evaluated. All existing experimental evaluations
study transfers that were different from UBI in some potentially consequential way. We emphasize
two dimensions in particular. Existing transfers have not been universal but rather targeted,
both to subsets of households (through means testing, ordeals, conditions, etc.) and to specific
adults within those households (often the female head). Second, existing transfers typically last
for relatively short time periods, as opposed to the long-term commitment envisioned by UBI
advocates. Both these differences could lead to important differences in impacts. These questions
remain open; an experiment being conducted by the NGO GiveDirectly in Kenya, which we are
currently evaluating, will be the first to our knowledge to examine the effects of transfers given to
all adults within selected communities and over more than a decade.
That said, there is a lot of useful information to be garnered from analyses of existing cash transfer
programs in developing countries. With the most current available data as of 2018, the World
Bank identified 552M people living in the developing world who receive some form of cash transfer
from their government (authors calculations using Ivaschenko et al. (2018)). While none of these
schemes were (to our knowledge) labelled as UBI, they all shared the common and crucial feature
that recipients were given the freedom to do what they want with their money. Many transfers
(particularly in South and Central America) were paid out conditional on certain conditions being
met, but many others (particularly in Africa) were not (Ivaschenko et al., 2018). And in some
cases - pensions, for example - these transfers have a structure (size, frequency, and duration) quite
similar to UBI payments, though they are not universal.
What have we learned from the evaluation of these schemes? We do not attempt a full synthesis,
as the literature is vast and others have recently reviewed it (e.g. Bastagli et al. (2016)). Rather,
we highlight two basic themes that bear on the policy discussion of UBI.
First, evaluations generally have not found the negative impacts that many feared. Reviewing
evidence on “temptation goods,” Evans and Popova (2017) find that transfers had on average
reduced expenditure on temptation goods by 0.18 standard deviations. In other words, far from
4
See “Using Aid for Cash Transfers: What Do 10,000 People in 28 Countries Think?” Center for Global Development. https://www.cgdev.org/blog/what-do-10000-people-28-countries-think-using-aid-cash-transfers,
accessed 25 June 2018. Also related, Prather (2017) finds lower support for aid in cash than in kind among US
and UK voters. Ikiara (2009) and Moore (2009) discuss the importance of perceived impact for the political viability
of cash transfer programs in Kenya and Nicaragua, respectively.

4

blowing their transfers on alcohol and tobacco, recipients appear to drink and smoke less. This
finding in no way diminishes the seriousness of substance abuse as an issue for the poor, but it
does suggest that lack of money may be a cause of substance abuse rather than a constraint on
it. Turning to “dependency,” Banerjee et al. (2017b) review studies that measured the effects of
transfers on labor supply, perhaps the most concrete measure of recipients’ efforts to improve their
own lives. From the recipients point of view, of course, time is valuable and spending that time
earning money comes at a real cost; it might be very good for them to be able to substitute some
unearned for earned income. That said, Banerjee et al. (2017b) find no systematic evidence that
transfers discourage work.
Second, evaluations have found a great diversity of positive impacts. To give some sense, a
partial list of outcomes affected in a positive way in one study or another according to the ODI
review includes income, assets, savings, borrowing, total expenditure, food expenditure, dietary
diversity, school attendance, test scores, cognitive development, use of health facilities, labor force
participation, child labor migration, domestic violence, women’s empowerment, marriage, fertility,
and use of contraception, among others. Which particular outcomes changed varies substantially
from experiment to experiment, and of course this variation in average treatment effects across
experiments understates the underlying variety in individual effects within them. Experiments let
us estimate mean effects within (sub)populations, but cannot tell us how any particular person
spent their transfer, since we cannot observe that person’s counterfactual spending.
This variety implies that recipients value the flexibility that cash transfers provide: they reveal a
preference for many different things. It also implies that a UBI is unlikely to appeal to a technocrat
seeking cost-effective ways to increase any particular, narrow outcome. If recipients spend 20% of
transfers on health care, for example, then there will likely be some intervention that spends 100%
of its budget on health and is more cost-effective at improving it. The technocratic argument for
basic income would rather be that its impacts on a variety of different outcomes were collectively
a “good buy.”5

2.2

What we do not know

None of the existing studies has experimentally evaluated a long-lasting UBI. The impacts of such a
UBI could be different in (at least) three important ways from the impacts of existing cash transfer
schemes.
5
Concretely, suppose a group of technocrats are each responsible for increasing a different outcome, and that they
currently have available a targeted intervention for each outcome i that increases that outcome by {τ i } units per
dollar and has no effects on other outcomes j 6= i. Now suppose that giving away money has some impact on every
outcome, given by {τ i } per dollar. It may be the case that cash is not cost-effective for any particular outcome, in
the sense that τ i < τ i for all or most outcomes i, in which case no one technocrat would choose to use it to achieve
her objective. But it may still be cost-effective in the aggregate if the technocrats could agree on a way of dividing
up
cost of the transfers such that they all get a good price per unit of outcome – that is, if there exist weights
P the
ω i = 1 such that τ i ≥ ω i τ i for each i.

5

2.2.1

The importance of being universal

First, universality could matter. The coverage of typical programs today is far from 100%, so that a
nationally universal basic income or even that was universal within poor regions of a country would
be a substantial departure from the status quo. We calculate that the average country in the World
Bank’s ASPIRE database of low- and middle-income countries covered 11% of its population with
some form of cash transfer (Ivaschenko et al., 2018).6 In Kenya specifically, where our evaluation
is set, just 5.3% of all citizens were participating in government-funded cash transfer schemes as
of 2016, despite the fact that Kenya is a regional leader in the use of cash-based social safety net
programming with its National Safety Net Program.7
Mechanically, broader coverage could change the average impact of cash transfers by changing the
identity of the average recipient. Generally speaking, existing programs have tended to target the
poor or vulnerable - widows, the elderly, low-income parents, and so on. The average recipient of a
UBI would thus tend to be less poor and less vulnerable than the recipients of existing programs.
To forecast how exactly this would affect program impacts, we could potentially adjust existing
analyses by re-weighting each observation by an estimate of each household’s (inverse) propensity
to be treated, in an effort to give equal weight to impacts on all sorts of people. This would be a
useful exercise, but it will inevitably yield only very imprecise estimates of the impacts on people
who rarely qualify for the targeted programs, and no information at all about those with no chance
of qualifying at all. Thus, examining impacts on entire populations is important to understand the
effects of a UBI.
More subtly, universality could change impacts if there are interactions between the effects of
one’s own and one’s neighbors (basic) income. Many proponents of UBI believe this is the case
(e.g. Widerquist (2018)). We can say little about this at the moment as very few studies have
simultaneously varied individual treatment status and the overall intensity with which communities
are treated, and then tested for interaction effects. Work in progress by Haushofer et al. (2018) and
McIntosh and Zeitlin (2018) will generate some of the first evidence on this point, and we expect
it will remain an open area for future work.
The prospect of broader eligibility also increases the importance of understanding general equilibrium effects. Presumably, the more people are eligible and the more money flows in to any area,
the larger are the potential effects on prices and wages.8 There is relatively little evidence to date
on how transfers affect local markets. This is certainly in part because many experiments have
been conducted at the individual rather than community or market level, but also because the
transfers involved have been small in proportion to the local economy. The mean cash transfer
program in the ASPIRE database targeted 11% of the population and delivered transfers equal to
18% of recipient household expenditure, so that a typical program transfers an amount less than
6

The population-weighted average is lower still at 9%.
Author’s calculations from the ASPIRE database (Ivaschenko et al., 2018).
8
To be precise, the price effects of interest would depend both on cash flowing in and potentially on cash flowing
out in the form of taxes, to the extent the UBI were financed through taxation. In low-income areas or to the extent
UBI programs were financed using foreign aid, the effects of inflows would predominate.
7

6

11% ∗ 18% = 2% of local GDP (less, since recipients tend to be poorer than the average resident).
Cunha et al. (forthcoming) is one exception; they find evidence that periodic small transfers raised
food prices in the most remote communities in rural Mexico, and not in less remote ones. Work
in progress by Haushofer et al. (2018) randomizes relatively large amounts of money, equivalent to
roughly 15% of annual GDP in treated areas, as lump sums and will quantify effects on a wide
array of prices, as will our own UBI evaluation. More evidence on this point would certainly be
valuable, but given the significant amounts of money required to generate this evidence, it may
need to wait until the scale-up of future government-funded initiatives can be evaluated.
2.2.2

Intra-household allocation

Second, delivering a UBI to each adult in a household (which is what many basic income proposals
contemplate) could have different effects from delivering the same amount of money to a single adult
representative of the household (which is how most existing cash transfer programs function). If the
unitary model of the household were correct then, of course, this distinction would not matter, but
there is ample evidence that many households are non-unitary in consequential ways (Chiappori
and Donni, 2009). Individualizing transfers could thus have important effects, both by changing
who decides how those particular dollars are spent and also by changing the outside options each
family member holds, and thus their influence on various other decisions.
That said, there is only a little direct evidence on whether it matters which adult receives a cash
transfer. In large part, this is because policy designers have typically required that transfers go to
mothers whenever possible, so that there is little variation to study.9 What evidence exists does
suggest that the identity of the recipient matters, but not that one type of recipient is unambiguously
“better” than others. For example, Duflo (2000) find that pension payments to grandmothers but
not grandfathers led to anthropometric gains for granddaughters in the same households in South
Africa, while Akresh et al. (2016) find in Burkina Faso that if anything transfers to fathers had
larger impacts on children’s health, while also yielding greater investment.
One specific open question is how receiving individualized transfers would affect the status of
women, particularly where it is low to begin with. There is some evidence that cash transfers
delivered to women on behalf of their households can increase measures of empowerment and
reduce domestic violence,10 but it is largely unclear how the effects of transfers that follow the
individual even if she (or he) leaves the household might compare.
2.2.3

Duration and longer-term planning

Third, committing to deliver basic incomes for a long period of time could have effects that differ
from the effects of shorter-term transfers themselves. The basic logic of intertemporal smoothing
suggests, for example, that recipients may be less likely to save a marginal dollar today if they
9

A 2012 review identified just 8 high-quality studies examining differences in causal effects by gender, for example
(Yoong et al., 2012).
10
See for example Hidrobo et al. (2016) and the references therein.

7

expect to continue receiving transfers far into the future. Eligibility for the programs studied in the
literature varies but is typically relatively short. Some impose a hard requirement that participants
“graduate” after a few years (e.g. Chiles Chile Solidario – Barrientos (2010)), while others reassess
eligibility every few years to remove those who no longer meet poverty criteria. Programs such
as CCTs aimed at families with school-age children typically provide payments only while those
children are enrolled, e.g. for up to 12 years if primary schooling begins at age 6 and secondary
schooling ends at age 18. Programs aimed at preventing hunger or extreme suffering often operate
only during shocks. Pensions are perhaps the exception: these are essentially UBI payments for the
elderly. However, the labor supply and other decisions of the elderly are likely to be quite different
from those of others.
To understand whether and how duration matters, a key issue is separating the effects of current
transfers from the effects of anticipated future transfers. Our ongoing evaluation of basic income
in Kenya will generate some evidence on this point; in one arm, the transfers will last for two years
while in another they will last twelve, so that differences in outcomes during the first two years of
the study can be attributed to the anticipation of future transfers in the latter group. We are not
aware of other studies that similarly vary duration; a few studies examine how effects evolve over
the fixed, common duration of a given transfer scheme (e.g. Baird et al. (2011)).

3

Constraints on the poor

The current trend in economics is to try to connect all interventions to some narrative about growth
even when it is obvious that it is a stretch. This is unfortunate, both because it blinds us to other
priorities and other narratives that may be more compelling and also because, for the most part, we
know very little about how to make growth happen. That said, we will argue in this section, there
are good reasons why UBI may actually have something important to contribute to the growth
process in poor countries.
The reason has to do with the varied constraints that poor people face. Some cannot save or
borrow the capital needed to finance a productive investment, an education for a child, etc. Some
face risks for which there is no functional insurance market. Some grapple with psychological
constraints – lowered aspirations, or the taxing effects of scarcity. We see this variation reflected
in the program evaluation data, where the same intervention often seems to “work” for some and
not for others.
UBI is unlikely to be the most cost-effective way to alleviate any one of the underlying constraints
on investment. But we currently know little about which constraints bind for whom, or how in
practice to target interventions to the specific people who need them. This is what makes UBI,
which does not try to step on any specific lever, interesting as a pro-growth policy. Add to this
that the “costs” of UBI are relatively low, in the sense that the fiscal outlay largely goes towards
progressive transfers which have intrinsic value, unlike the costs of many targeted interventions
(e.g. training) which represent a pure opportunity cost and are wasted if the intervention is given

8

to the wrong person. Finally, one can think of UBI as a point of departure from which recipients
could tailor benefits to their specific needs – opting to receive several transfers in a single tranche,
for example, if saving is their personal challenge.

3.1

Constrained by lack of credit?

Several strands of research suggest that lack of access to capital constrains some more than others.
At the macro level, one of the biggest shifts in growth thinking over the last fifteen or so years
comes from growing evidence that resources are misallocated in developing countries. Marginal
products of capital (as well as labor and land) are not equalized, contrary to what we expect in a
fully efficient economy.11 . Hsieh and Klenow (2009) structurally estimate marginal products using
firm level data from India, China and the US and show that the marginal products are much more
dispersed in India and China. There are various possible reasons for such results, but the most
obvious theory is that some firms are (differentially) credit constrained and therefore underinvest
relative to others.
At the micro level, an extensive literature on the returns to capital suggests that they are widely
dispersed and very high in some cases, over 100% a year (Banerjee and Duflo, 2005). There is also
strong prima facie evidence of inefficiencies in the financial sector in most developing countries.
Borrowing interest rates in the non-banking sector are often extremely high (see Banerjee (2003)
for several examples). Bank loans are cheaper, but access to them is severely limited – from the
most recent financial inclusion insights surveys, 12% of individuals in India have a bank loan at
the time of the survey, 8% in Bangladesh, 8% in Kenya, 7% in Nigeria, 5% in Tanzania and 5% in
Uganda (Suri and Jack, 2016). The gap between lending rates of the banks and their deposit rates,
which measures intermediation costs, also tends to be much higher in developing countries than in
the developed world.
Yet, these data co-exist with estimates from randomized trials of microcredit showing that borrowers on average do not use loans to grow their businesses. This holds across seven RCTs in
six countries spanning urban and rural, low and middle income settings, a result now confirmed
by the meta-analysis carried out by Meager (n.d.). Does this mean that the small firms served
by microcredit are not credit constrained, perhaps because they have low marginal products and
therefore do not want more capital? That would be consistent with the fact that in several of the
microfinance RCTs take up of credit product was less than 20%.
Heterogeneity is also evident within the microcredit evaluations themselves. Banerjee et al.
(2015) find no impact on average but a strong positive impact on the business earnings of those
borrowers who owned a business before microcredit showed up. This impact in fact grows over
time, even though the control group was itself treated after 18 months, so that after 6 years the
treatment group’s revenues had more than doubled relative to controls Banerjee et al. (2017a). It
appears that the entrepreneurs who chose to set up a business without access to relatively cheap
11

Examples include Banerjee and Duflo (2005), Jeong and Townsend (2007), Restuccia and Rogerson (2008),
Bartelsman et al. (2008), Alfaro et al. (2008), Buera and Shin (2008), and Hsieh and Klenow (2009).

9

credit are very different from those who only did so when microcredit was available. The presence
or absence of such high return entrepreneurs in the experimental sample may explain why some
studies find a positive impact, whereas others do not.
Grants also seem to have (widely varying) effects on investment. In some cases, transfers increase
investments in education even when they are not conditional on attending school (e.g. Benhassine
et al. (2015)). In some cases, households use grants to invest in durable assets such as housing
(Haushofer and Shapiro, 2013). And a growing literature examines the impacts of grants on the
capital stock and profits of microenterprises. The resulting direct estimates of the marginal product
of capital are often large and positive, which is consistent with there being credit constraints. For
example, de Mel et al. (2008) report that a capital grant of $200 to micro-entrepreneurs in Sri
Lanka generates a return on capital of 5.85% per month. Fafchamps et al. (2014) find an even
larger effect in Ghana of a cash grant of $120 to micro-entrepreneurs; sales revenues go up by 15%
per month. McKenzie (2008) report returns that are astronomically high (over 20% a month) from
a similar experiment in Mexico where micro-entrepreneurs were given $140 dollar grants. Bryan et
al. (n.d.) gave a cash grant of $7 to potential migrants in drought-ridden areas of Bangladesh, and
report that the earnings and consumption of their families improved substantially. Blattman et al.
(2014) report on an experiment in Uganda where young men were given grants of about $400 per
head as a part of a group and find large and durable effects on earnings, two and four years after
the intervention. The effect is no longer detectable after nine years, as the control group catches up
by saving and accumulating, but the gap persisted for long enough that it is meaningful to include
in a discussion of constraints on business expansion (Blattman et al., 2018).
On the other hand, a number of apparently very similar studies of cash grants find no evidence
of an impact on earnings (including Karlan et al. (2014) on farmers in rural Ghana, Karlan et
al. (2015) on tailors in urban Ghana, and Berge et al. (2015) on microfinance group members in
Tanzania) or find short-run effects that then fade (including Hicks et al. (2017) in rural Kenya and
Brudevold-Newman et al. (2017) among young women in Nairobi). Haushofer and Shapiro (2018)
have a recent working paper which reports on a three year follow up of a the GiveDirectly cash
transfer experiment, where they report that while within-village estimates of impact are similar to
those after 9 months (Haushofer and Shapiro, 2013), between-village estimates are significant only
for assets, and not for earnings or expenditure. As they discuss, the difference between the within
and between estimates must either reflect negative spillovers or differential sampling or attrition
across experimental groups.
Why is there such variation? No doubt some of this is sampling variation, but some is probably
also systematic differences within the study populations. For instance, it has been argued that
women in many countries face a very different set of constraints in becoming self-employed than
men. de Mel et al. (2008) find no evidence of a positive effect of a cash grant on women, though
there is a large and positive effect on men. Differences in innate talent of entrepreneurs is another
important factor. This may vary based on the outside opportunities available in various locations.
When employment opportunities are better, those who self-select into entrepreneurship are likely

10

to be better suited to the occupation. There is increasing evidence that this can be a very major
factor. For example, de Mel et al. (2008) in their cash grant experiment find returns vary between
0 and 45% per month, Fafchamps et al. (2014), also mentioned above, report returns between 0
and 30% per month. Hussam et al. (2017) gave randomly chosen entrepreneurs in India a $100
cash grant and estimated the impact on their earnings. The estimated returns vary between 0 and
28% per month.12
Taking all the data into account, it seems likely that credit constraints bind for some, and not
for others. Where they do, a UBI potentially provides a source of capital to relax the constraint.
Indeed, there is some evidence that existing social protection cash transfers have been used to
finance productive investments. In Mexico, for example, recipients of Oportunidades cash transfers
invested an estimated 26% of those transfers, raising their long-term consumption (Gertler et al.,
2012). In Zambia, a pair of unconditional cash transfers programs raised earnings by 59% of the
transferred amount, a sizeable multiplier (Handa et al., 2016).
At the same time, a stream of small payments is probably not the best way to structure a cash
transfer if the goal is to finance investment. If someone found it easy to save up small amounts to get
the lump of cash needed to make a major investment, they would not often be credit constrained in
the first place. Many pieces of evidence suggest that saving is in fact hard for some people: they join
clubs to help commit to saving more (e.g. Anderson and Baland (2002)), for example, and prefer
to receive commercial payments in larger tranches (e.g. Casaburi and Macchiavello (forthcoming)).
In the first village to receive UBI transfers from GiveDirectly, some recipients created a savings
club to reverse engineer their streams of small payments into larger lump sums. This suggests that
a UBI could be more effective at alleviating credit constraints if recipients had the option to turn
into a commitment device by, for example, asking to receive several payments lumped together into
one larger tranche.

3.2

Constrained by lack of insurance?

For some, lack of insurance markets may be a binding constraint. Entrepreneurs may shy away from
investing borrowed or owned capital because they want to avoid exposing themselves to business
risk.
Evidence that uninsured risks distort investment and production is mixed. A long line of papers
use observational data to investigate this (e.g. Morduch (1990), Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1993).
Cole and Xiong (2017) has an excellent recent review of this evidence in the context of agriculture.
However, these observational studies suffer two potential issues. First, the presence of risk generates
a whole range of institutional adjustments within the villages Townsend (1995) and even across
villages Rosenzweig and Stark (1989). What we observe in the data therefore is the residual effect
of the risk after many of these adjustments, which may miss a large part of the true cost of risk.
12

Note that in some cases the recipients of these grants already held substantial assets – $8,000 on average in
Hussam et al, for example – begging the question whether they could really be constrained solely by a lack of credit.
To reconcile this with the experimental impacts one must believe that at that level of asset holdings they are still
slowly saving their way towards the efficient scale.

11

Second, the identification is mostly cross-sectional which makes it difficult to control for a variety
of unobserved factors. One exception is Cai (2016), who uses a triple-difference estimation to show
that government subsidized crop insurance in Jiangxi province in China raises the take up of the
high return but high risk tobacco crop.
Early experimental work on insurance was plagued by low take-up rates (which may themselves
suggest heterogeneity in the need for insurance, among other factors). However, there are now a
number of studies that look at the impact of (often highly) subsidized insurance on production
decisions in agriculture. These include Mobarak and Rosenzweig (2013) in India, Cai et al. (2015)
in China, Karlan et al. (2015) in Ghana, and Cole and Xiong (2017). The first two studies find
evidence that insurance causes a switch towards crops that are more profitable but higher risk.
The second two find evidence that insurance leads to higher investment. The study of Bryan et al.
(n.d.) on migrants in Bangladesh, finds that an insured loan, where the repayments are canceled
if the migration project fails because of excess rainfall, has positive effects on migration similar
in magnitude to that of a cash grant of the same amount. However, as we would expect, there is
considerable heterogeneity in the response to insurance. Karlan et al. (2014) find much larger effects
on those who are willing to buy insurance when it price is high (the price was randomized) who
tend to be more risk averse. In Cole and Xiong (2017) on the other hand, the effect is concentrated
among the more educated farmers.
Even where insurance does stimulate risky investment, it is not clear that we should think of
(objective) risk as the only or primary constraint. As an extreme example, take the Karlan et
al. (2015) study that both finds an effect of insurance on investment by farmers and also finds no
such effect from a substantial cash grant, with or without the insurance. They argue that this is
consistent with a model where the farmers are not credit constrained, at least relative to their rather
limited appetite for investment and the insurance they deliver is more or less perfect. While this
is undoubtedly correct, it is also possible that the risky investment in agriculture is a dominated
choice for those farmers who ideally want to invest in something outside agriculture (fixing up their
homes, for example)–after all, the authors report that the extra risk-taking actually led to a loss,
though they are skeptical of the revenue data used in that computation. With the cash grant they
choose that alternative investment. With the insurance, the only way to properly benefit from it is
by taking on extra risk, even if perhaps they would have preferred to devote the extra household
labor used on the farm to the alternative project.
For those whose investments are limited by uninsured risk, the question is whether higher (basic)
incomes would offset this. It seems obvious that someone worried about what they will eat tomorrow
cannot afford to take risks, while someone whose basic needs are met for the foreseeable future
might. It is certainly logically possible that higher incomes could reduce risk aversion (with CRRA
preferences, for example), though to generate substantial under-investment this story must still
explain why the person could not save his or her way to a point where they can tolerate the risky
investment. But the empirical bottom line is that we still know very little about the relationship

12

between income and risky investment.13 This remains an open question for research on UBI and
related schemes.

3.3

Constrained by psychology?

External constraints such as missing markets for credit or insurance have been development economist’s
traditional bread and butter. But what if some people face constraints within their own minds?
For some, poverty may simply tax the mental and emotional bandwidth needed to think through
important decisions. Mullainathan and Shafir (2013) develop this perspective, drawing on studies
of people who are poor both in terms of money and of time or other resources. For example,
farmers in Tamil Nadu, India exhibit diminished cognitive performance immediately before harvest,
when they are poorest, relative to after the harvest when they are flush with cash (Mani et al.,
2013). Mechanisms like these can generate poverty traps in which the poor remain poor because
they cannot afford lumpy bandwidth-conserving investments that the rich make (Banerjee and
Mullainathan, 2008).
For others, the constraints on investment may involve what they want to and believe they can
plausibly achieve – reflecting their hopes, aspirations, confidence, perceptions of self-efficacy, etc.14
Life on $1.90 a day is emotionally draining, laced with perennial frustrations and the occasional
crushing setback. Why then make the sacrifices needed to eke out pennies each day and save
towards an abstract and uncertain “better life,” decades away? To do so would take remarkable
grit (Banerjee and Duflo, 2012).
One clue that these things matter comes from an attempt to directly change aspirations among
subsistence farmers in Ethiopia (Bernard et al., 2018). Researchers showed the participants a
set of four 15-minute documentaries in which families “like them” describe how they were able
to meaningfully improve their lives by working hard and making various routine investments in
farming, micro-enterprise, etc. The films intentionally did not endorse any particular course of
action or communicate information about expected returns. After six months and after five years,
households exposed to these films reported substantially higher aspirations for their futures. More
surprisingly for such a light-touch intervention, they also increased investment in education, assets,
livestock and improved agricultural inputs.
The so-called “graduation” approach is another way to get at these issues. These programs
involve an asset transfer but also a considerable amount of handholding and one-to-one training.
The goal is to prepare people who have enough confidence in themselves to pursue their life goals.
Graduation programs have been shown to have durable effects on earnings in multiple countries,
beginning with Banerjee et al. (2015) who report on separate RCTs in seven countries out of which
they find positive effects in six after three years. Banerjee et al. (2016) reports on the 7-year follow
up of the graduation program in India, where they find continuing positive impacts. Bandiera et
13

A classic cite is Binswanger (1980) who estimates an insignificant, positive relationship between income and
willingness to take financial risks.
14
Lybbert and Wydick (2018) review the history of these concepts.

13

al. (2017) evaluate the same program in Bangladesh and find that the treated are richer and own
more assets both after four and seven years.
Balboni et al. (2019) estimate use the data from the graduation program to estimate the relation
between total assets at the household just after the asset transfer and assets four years after the
intervention and argue that the relationship is consistent with the presence of a poverty trap. They
estimate the intervention was able to lift about two thirds of the treated population out of the
poverty trap, but those who had very few assets to start with did not make it. They argue, based
on this evidence, that the relatively large size of the asset transfer in the graduation program was
important for its success. This observation therefore connects back to the discussion above about
whether UBI should come in a few large tranches or many small ones.
Balboni et al. (2019) do not take an explicit stand on the underlying mechanism behind the
success of the graduation program–but in their model they treat the asset transfer as the key step.
However in the context of the graduation programs there is some evidence that the handholding
was also an important part of the package. Banerjee et al. (2017b) compare a graduation program
with a pure asset transfer and with the provision of a savings opportunity in Ghana and find that
only the former durably raises earnings. For now, at least, it seems that the hand-holding and
training are integral parts of the graduation model.
This could be because the graduation program aims to target the poorest of the poor. Many of
these people have never had an opportunity to be self-reliant in their lives, and the hand-holding
is important in giving them the confidence to try. This also suggests one potential reason for the
gender gap in the effects of a cash grant – perhaps poor women are more likely to lack the confidence
to succeedas a result of the various societal pressures on them. The seven year follow up of the
graduation intervention in India finds evidence that the beneficiaries are starting to move beyond
the original businesses that they were helped to set up and into other lines of trade. This seems
indicative of growing confidence and optimism.
For those who are already in business and/or have a settled occupation, on the other hand, the
future may feel less exciting. They may have already investigated what it would take to break into
the middle class and realized that while there are several relatively small things which will earn
them high returns, the path to building a sizable business remains extremely arduous given that
they have no access to the kind of capital and risk-capital it would take to make it. Therefore,
they may be indifferent to opportunities that are not going to be transformative. This may be
the reason why marginal product varies so much; most people do not care where they stop trying.
They are in a pessimism trap.15
Can this model be consistent with the findings about impacts of the various interventions discussed above? A grant or a grant and insurance might break this pessimism trap by encouraging
the entrepreneurs to try again and thereby start on a rapid growth trajectory (Banerjee and Mul15

One piece of evidence consistent with this view is Hsieh and Klenow (2014) who compare the trajectories of
Indian, Mexican and US firms over time and show a striking pattern; the US firms either shut down after a few years
or become enormous. The Indian firms remain the same size more or less from birth till they shut down, many years
later.

14

lainathan (2010) develop these ideas formally). But it may also lead them to try half-heartedly,
feeling obliged to take advantage of the opportunity that was just laid in front of them, but also
feeling sure that the intervention would not be enough to get them into the middle-class. If that is
the case we might see them going a small distance and then no further,
UBI could be transformative for people bound by internal constraints. Not having to worry
about making ends meet could free up the mental and emotional bandwidth needed to focus on
getting ahead, or re-set hopes and beliefs about the future. Whether this is true or not is, of course,
still to be seen. However, evidence from other cash transfers programs does suggest that they can
profoundly affect mental health for some. In Kenya, larger GiveDirectly transfers reduced levels
of the hormone cortisol, a biomarker for stress which has been linked in other studies to myopic
decision-making (Haushofer and Shapiro, 2013). In a particular poignant example, cash transfers
in Indonesia reduced suicide rates by 18% (Christian et al., forthcoming). Surely transfers that
affect the desire to live can also affect how people choose to live.

4

To target or not

A central question about UBI is whether universality is in fact efficient. For any given budget, is it
better to spread those resources evenly or to give larger amounts to the poorest? Of course, fixing
a budget implicitly sidesteps the (thorny) question of the cost and benefits of changing that budget
via changes in tax policy, cuts to other programs, larger deficits, etc. Hanna and Olken (2018)
as well as Ghatak and Maniquet (TBD) in this issue provide useful related review and analysis of
some of these issues.
We also largely abstract from the details of targeting. There has been a large literature on
different approaches and their effectiveness, ranging from by far the most common, a proxy means
test (PMT),16 to community targeting17 to self-selection.18 A detailed discussion of the relative
merits of these approaches is beyond the scope of this paper; Ravallion (2016) and Hanna and
Olken (2018) provide excellent reviews.
We suspect that universality has several under-appreciated benefits, and targeting several underappreciated limitations. We review three main issues.
First, even in a state with strong capacity to target transfers to households with certain characteristics, it is not clear whether doing so increases their overall impact. Work quantifying the
relationship between impacts and targeted characteristics is limited, as is work on the potential disincentive effects of targeting. It is also unclear how effectively targeting poor households succeeds
in targeting poor people, taking into count the unequal distribution of resources within households
and redistribution of resources across them.
16
In this approach, household are surveyed to enumerate their assets, these responses are used to estimate incomes,
and transfers are then given to those below a given predicted income.
17
This approach refers to simply asking the community who is poorest. See for example Alatas et al. (2012).
18
In this approach, participating in the program involves bearing some cost that makes participation relatively
attractive to the poor. Workfare programs such as the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme in India are
a common example.

15

Second, universality could reduce administrative costs. Targeting well requires data collected
repeatedly, given significant shares of people in developing countries change their poverty status
from year to year. The administrative costs of universality are likely to be far lower, especially
given the ongoing investments emerging market governments are making in digital ID and payment
systems.
Third, universality could improve the “political economy” of redistribution. Government capacity
to implement nuanced targeting schemes is often limited, particularly so in the poorest areas where
it is most important to get it right. In cases like these, making eligibility universal may have a
modest effect on the realized incidence of benefits while at the same time substantially reducing
the scope for corruption and other abuses of power. Broad eligibility could also help build political
bases of support for sustained redistribution.
Overall, we suspect that universality deserves more serious consideration in many contexts, and
that the kinds of targeting that will typically make sense will be relatively simple - tying benefits
to geography, for example, or using small hurdles to disincentivize the very wealthy from opting
in. That said, this is a fundamentally challenging question given how hard it is to obtain rigorous
evidence on the causal effects of different targeting regimes. Besley and Kanbur (1990) wrote that
“policy analyses and research programs utilizing [micro] data, and addressing the issue of targeted
versus universalistic schemes are now pressing.” They were right then and, we feel, still are today.

4.1

Costless targeting with unlimited state capacity

Suppose first that targeting would be implemented by a perfectly efficient and functional state,
without any internal issues of performance, incentives, or administrative cost. This is clearly
unrealistic for developing countries but helps segment the various issues around whether to target
or not.
Targeting the poorest has the obvious advantage of transferring resources to people for whom the
marginal value of money is highest, since they have the least money. Yet things are less clear in a
world of imperfect markets. As we described above, in worlds where markets are imperfect recipients
of transfers may use them to relax binding constraints on growth, for example, by purchasing assets
they otherwise could not have financed or starting businesses they did not have the capital for.
In this case, the welfare impacts of the transfers depend on variation in the opportunities and
constraints each person faces as well as variation in their baseline standard of living (and hence
their marginal utilities). It could well be optimal to make transfers to someone a bit better off
in a community if this will enable them to make a transformative investment in that community.
Existing analysis of optimal targeting has largely ignored this issue, and so we know little about
whether targeting the poor actually optimizes impact on poverty.
If interactions between households are important, then optimal targeting becomes even more
complicated. Transfers to people embedded in existing networks of mutual support may be redistributed within those networks and generate a final distribution different from the one on paper
(e.g. Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009)). As we discussed above, many basic income advocates argue
16

that the effect of entire communities being “in it together” will be greater than the sum of the
effects on individuals treated in isolation. For example, targeting may create bitterness and social
division that might reduce willingness to contribute to the financing of local public goods (Kidd
and Wylde, 2011); universality could have the opposite effect.19 More generally, if own and neighbor’s treatment status are substitutes then this strengthens the case for targeting, while if they are
complements it weakens the case. As of yet we know very little about these interactions.
Targeting may also alter the political viability of basic income schemes – there is a large theoretical literature showing this, reviewing it is beyond the scope of this paper (see Cremer and Roeder
(2015) and Casamatta et al. (2000) for two examples). A program’s beneficiaries typically form
the core constituency willing to fight for its effective implementation of a program, or its continued
existence. If only a small number of the poorest, most disadvantaged and disempowered members
of a society benefit from a program, it may be hard for them to exert much influence over its
future. This is one reason some in India, for example, have fought for the expansion of eligibility in
means-tested programs such as the Public Distribution System, arguing that it would benefit the
poorest to include somewhat better-off people who are influential enough to push back against the
corrupt middle-men who looted the system in the past (e.g. Dreèze and Khera (2010)). Consistent
with this argument, Klasen and Lange (2016) show using data from the Chinese urban Dibao cash
transfer program that a percent increase in the share of people who get benefits increases the budget
available for the program by a third of a percent. Using fixed budget arguments for targeting may
therefore underestimate the benefits of universality.
Finally, targeting may create disincentive effects. As we discussed above, targeting a basic income
relocates where the disincentive effects may fall (though of course, they may be of small magnitude).
Any redistributive scheme can create disincentive effects for some part of the population, depending
on who pays and who receives. For example, in a universal basic income scheme, disincentive effects
would be concentrated among the people who are marginal contributors to the scheme, likely the
upper and upper-middle classes. If instead the basic income transfers were targeted to the bottom
quintile, say, this would lower taxes at the top but create a new disincentive effect to move out
of the bottom quintile. Fundamentally, then the question of targeting is one about where in the
distribution of incomes to locate the disincentive effects and the magnitude of any such disincentive
effects. Unfortunately, we know very little about the incentive effects of targeting regimes in
developing countries, in contrast to work on public finance in developed ones for which this has
been a major focus. They certainly exist; Imbert and Papp (2018) find that the regional targeting of
India’s employment guarantee to rural areas has discouraged rural-to-urban migration, for example
(which may be good or bad, depending on whom you ask). Similarly, Banerjee et al. (2018) look at
the impact of asset based poverty targeting of a program in Indonesia on the purchase of specific
assets (TVs and SIM cards) and find a temporary increase in misreporting of these assets, but no
reductions in sales of these assets, implying disincentive effects for may be small. More work in
19

Related, Walker (2018) finds no effect of targeted lump-sum transfers on public good provision in Kenya, rejecting
economically meaningful magnitudes.

17

this area would be of great value.
Related, there is also a small but growing literature on measurement error and/or strategic misreporting of consumption and asset measures. On the pure measurement error and recall issues,
as an example, Beegle et al. (2012) show that this error can be significant and worse for illiterate
and poorer households. Similarly, Silverio-Murillo (n.d.) uses data on Progressa in Mexico and
shows that if asset modules are asked to the husband, about 10% of households would be classified
as non-poor according to the husband but as poor according to the wife and 8% vice versa. On
strategic mis-reporting, Boozer, Goldstein and Suri (2008) for a small sample in Ghana where
spouses were separately asked about consumption, show that there are some expenditures that
each spouse knows nothing about, which has implications for measuring both static poverty rates
as well as dynamic transitions out of poverty. Similarly, Stecklov et al. (2018) use a field experiment
to show that when surveys are incentivized, households report 15% less assets (with no difference
in assets observable to the surveyors), which the authors interpret as households wanting to appear
poorer).

4.2

Costly targeting

Actual targeting is, of course, neither perfect nor costless. The administrative costs of targeting
can be quite high, especially if eligibility lists are regularly updated and the differentiation they
provide between the poor and non-poor is far from perfect.
Any method of targeting yields both exclusion errors (poor households who are deemed ineligible)
and inclusion errors (non-poor households who are deemed eligible). Hanna and Olken (2018) clearly
show the trade-off between the exclusion and inclusion errors for Indonesia and Peru: to reach 80%
of the truly poor people (i.e. an exclusion error of 20%), there will be an inclusion error of 22-31%.
Of course, keeping the budget the same, to reduce the exclusion error you can increase the number
of people that get transfers, but they will all get a smaller amount. Similarly, Brown et al. (2016)
look at nine countries in Africa and show that transfers using a very simple demographic scoring
system or a basic income do almost as well as a PMT in reaching the poor. Exclusion rates remain
high at 25% and the targeting methods are particularly bad at reaching the poorest. Finally, Klasen
and Lange (2016) conclude that there are small differences between targets based on demographics
and geography and targets based on more complex asset based measures, but both make poor proxy
objectives as they do not relate closely enough to poverty effects. The exclusion errors inherent in
targeting also pose a horizontal equity issue (especially if the rate of exclusion correlates positively
with the depth of poverty) as those who have the same conditions may not be treated the same.
Universality avoids this.
Most targeting measures in developing economies focus on household poverty and not individual
poverty since measuring individual poverty using consumption data is extremely hard and costly to
do reliably. However, focus on the household implies one important assumption: that the poorest
individuals live in the poorest households. If this is not true, then the individual level exclusion
errors may be significantly higher than the error rates mentioned above. There is a small literature
18

that looks at this question, Brown et al. (2017) provide a good review. They also use nutrition
and wealth data from 30 countries in Africa to show that about 75% of under nourished children
and underweight women are not in the poorest quintile of households. Half are not in the poorest
two quintiles. Similarly using data from Senegal that has a somewhat individualized measure of
consumption, De Vreyer and Lambert (2016) show that non-poor households house one eighth of
all poor individuals. If a UBI scheme were to enroll not only all households but all adults within
these households, as is often proposed, it would avoid having to worry about this distinction.
Targeting also comes with costs. Since the share of individuals engaged in the informal sector in
developing countries is high, either as informal workers (not on contract) or in small self-employed
micro-enterprises, the government has virtually no information on which households and poor and
which are not. It therefore has to collect this information in some way (as mentioned the PMT is
the most common) and that process in of itself has costs.
Hanna and Olken (2018) state that the costs of targeting are quite small in Indonesia and Peru,
$42m every three years with annual costs of $1.1m in Indonesia and $10.8m with annual costs of
$1.1m in Peru. Kidd et al. (2017) give a good review of targeting and discuss some of the costs.
For example, the 2009 PMT survey in Pakistan cost $60 million, the PMT survey in Indonesia cost
$60 million in 2011 and $100 million in 2015, Kenya’s Hunger Safety Net Program spent around
$10 million to survey only 380,000 households (4% of the population).
As Kidd et al. (2017) also point out it is rare for PMT surveys to be repeated. For example,
Pakistan’s last PMT was in 2009, Indonesia had a 4 year gap between PMTs and in Mexico in some
areas registration for their conditional cash transfer program (Oportunidades) was not repeated for
over a decade.
This makes accurate targeting even harder given poverty is not a static concept but a dynamic
one. There are a lot of changes in poverty status year on year. For example, Baulch and Hoddinott
(2000) provide an excellent review and show that the group of consistently poor or consistently not
poor in panel data is rather small. They show for three countries (India, Pakistan and Zimbabwe),
where panel data on poverty has been analyzed, these two groups make up 34%, 45% and 40% of
the study population. For income or expenditure quintile data, across seven studies, they show of
the households in the bottom quintile to start, between 18% and 32% move by one quintile over
time and between 24% and 61% move by two or more quintiles. Such dynamics would worsen the
exclusion and inclusion errors of targeting, something a universal basic income would solve by its
very nature. Similarly, Jayne et al. (2002) show that food aid allocations in Ethiopia were very
spatially stable over time but concentrated in areas that were not the poorest in a survey done in a
given year. They show evidence that at least some of this is because of inertia created by the fixed
costs of operations and identifying the poor.
Finally, given the discussion of costs, it is worth asking about the administration or implementation costs of a universal system, i.e. the costs of distributing the transfers themselves. To avoid
double counting, it will be important for developing countries to have a well-functioning universal
identification system, preferably digital, though this will be a one-time cost. This has already hap-

19

pened in India under their Aadhaar biometric system and is slowly happening in other countries,
in some countries funded by donor money not by government budgets. For example, World Bank
pledged $150m to support Morocco’s development of National Population Register which will also
assign a unique identification number. DFID contributed $11m towards Malawi’s recent national
identity card system. If these identification systems are also connected to digital payments systems such as mobile money or digital bank accounts, then the marginal costs of implementing or
distributing the transfers will be close to zero.

4.3

Targeting with limited state capacity

Suppose we take a more pessimistic view of state capacity, appropriate for most countries in the
developing world. In such settings, universality has the added potential benefits of reducing administrative burdens on the bureaucracy (as officials only need to determine who exists, not whether
they also meet eligibility criterion) and in doing so also reducing the scope for the abuse of state
power.
In developing countries, state capacity to implement complex tasks such as targeting is often limited. This can be particularly true in poorer areas, creating unintended regressivity in the allocation
of benefits. Labor payments in India’s mammoth National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme,
for example, are allocated progressively within states due to the self-selection induced by the program’s work requirement, but regressively across states because the better-run states are better
equipped to implement the scheme and “tick the boxes” required to trigger the release of funds
from the central government (Sukhtankar, 2016). Similarly, the benefits from a community-driven
development scheme in Tanzania were distributed much less progressively than they otherwise
would have been because local officials in poorer communities were less likely to apply for funding
in the first place (Baird et al., 2013).
When state capacity to discipline front-line bureaucrats is limited, targeting can also create
opportunities for corruption and other abuses of power. In Karnataka, for example, the officials
tasked with targeting those Below Poverty Line routinely violated the official eligibility criteria.
Petty bribery was widespread, and the resulting distribution of benefits much less progressive than
if the rules had been followed (Niehaus et al., 2013). If the officials had been given less discretion –
and in particular if they had been told to simply enroll everyone – they might have had less leverage
to extract rents. Complex targeting rules also create the risk of confusion eligible households may
not know what to expect and non-recipients may not often know why they are not receiving the
transfers. Banerjee et al. (n.d.) show that informing recipients (and distributors) what they should
expect from the program matters and reduces leakages in the program significantly. These are
among the reasons Dreze and Khera (2010) have argued for simpler approaches – either universal
or “quasi-universal” in which a minority of the most affluent people are declared ineligible using
simple criteria.
In part because of these issues, the de facto targeting of social protection schemes is fairly mixed.
Ivaschenko et al. (2018) estimates that, depending on program type, the average share of social
20

program beneficiaries that come from the bottom quintile of the (pre-transfer) income distribution
is between 33% and 45%. Meaningful proportions of beneficiaries are much better off in relative
terms, including 5-10% in the very top quintile. In some cases, the allocation of anti-poverty dollars
can in fact be quite regressive. In its 2017 Economic Survey, India’s Ministry of Finance pointed out
that the poorest districts, defined as those which collectively contained 40% of the country’s poor,
received much less than 40% of the budget allocation for many of the country’s largest anti-poverty
schemes (Ministry of Finance, Government of India, 2017). These figures suggest that the typical
bureaucracy does not perform all that well when asked to perform a difficult task like targeting,
and might do better if given the simpler task of enrolling everyone.

4.4

The bottom line

Whether and how to target basic incomes will of course ultimately depend on specifics of context.
That said, our reading of what we currently know – and crucially, what we do not – about targeting
suggests that a few principles should typically hold.
First, the benefits of targeting may be overestimated by analyses that do not take into account the
incentives it generates or the realities of implementation on the ground. Universal or near-universal
approaches deserve more consideration than they often receive.
Second, the kinds of targeting that will make most sense will often be relatively simple, such as
geographic targeting. Designers should guard against creating too much discretion for the front-line
staff who implement targeting, including the implicit discretion that is created when a policy is too
complicated for beneficiaries to understand it and hold local officials to account. However, these
targets may perform extremely poorly in reaching the poor.
Third, it may be possible to build small ordeals into the design of programs to create some
targeting by self-selection and hence make programs more progressive. For example, if a government
offered a small basic income to everyone but with some hassle costs involved in collecting it (e.g.
a weekly trip to an ATM), then the wealthier households might simply not bother to participate.
The danger here of course will be to not exclude those for whom the ordeals are simply too difficult
(e.g. the disabled) and so special provision should be made for them.
Finally, we note that the per-person costs of delivering transfers are falling rapidly in many places
due to advances in last-mile digital payments infrastructure. All else equal this will tend to further
increase the appeal of broad or universal targeting.

5

Conclusion: basic income research in political context

In reviewing the issues, we have identified some that are well-understood and others that are not.
As researchers our instinct is of course to fill the gaps. But experiences from earlier basic income
pilots also remind us that the ultimate value of any further research will depend on how it interacts
with politics.
To our knowledge, the first significant pilot of universal basic income in a developing country was
21

conducted in the Otjivero-Omitara area of Namibia between January 2008 and December 2009.
All residents younger than 60 and registered as living in the area as of July 2007 received monthly,
unconditional transfers. A before-and-after analysis by program advocates suggested that rates of
poverty and child malnutrition fell while rates of income-generating activity and children’s school
attendance rose, among other positive changes, in spite of significant in-migration (Haarmann et
al., 2009).
This pilot helped bring the idea of a basic income grant to national prominence. Hage Geingob,
the first donor to the pilot project, successfully ran for president in 2015. He created the Ministry
for Poverty Eradication and Social Welfare and appointed Bishop Zephania Kameeta, the former
Chairperson of Namibia’s BIG Coalition, to head it.20 But basic income now seems to be dying
a quiet death behind the scenes, superceded by a quasi-public food bank initiative. Conservative
voices within the ruling coalition have not altered their stance that giving people money would risk
making them lazy. With hindsight, some activists have come to view Kameeta’s inclusion in the
government as a cynical move to co-opt the basic income movement rather than a real commitment
to implement its proposals.21
A second pilot was conducted between 2010 and 2011 in by the Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA), an Indian NGO, in the state of Madhya Pradesh. Over 6,000 individuals in 9
villages received small monthly transfers over the course of 18 months. Transfers were given to each
individual in the selected villages, including smaller transfers for children. Researchers compared
outcomes for these individuals to those in control villages which were chosen to be similar to the
treatment villages, though not at random. They reported improvements in treated villages on a
wide range of indicators, including financial inclusion, housing and sanitation, nutrition and diet,
health, education, income and assets (Standing, 2013).
The activists who conducted the study, however, had ties primarily to the left-leaning UPA government. That administration lost power in 2014 shortly after the results were released, sharply devaluing those networks. Little happened until Chief Economic Advisor Arvind Subramaniam made
basic income the topic of a full chapter in his 2016-2017 Economic Survey, citing the experiences in
Madhya Pradesh among others. Interest flagged again until early 2019, when the government of the
state of Sikkim announced plans to implement a UBI and the opposition Congress party pledged
to guarantee a minimum income for the poor (not universal) if returned to power. Whether either
initiative comes to fruition remains to be seen.
Limits to eligibility have proven particularly resilient. In Zambia from 2010 to 2013, for example,
the government substantially broadened eligibility for its Social Cash Transfer scheme. It did not
make them universal, but removed means-testing and enrolled all households with children under 5,
orphans, or disabled members. A multi-year experimental evaluation found that the transfers not
only reduced immediate poverty but also had substantial impacts on assets and earnings (?). These
results contributed to increase the scheme’s budget by a factor of 8. But they did not convince the
20

See https://basicincome.org/news/2016/05/setback-for-basic-income-movement-in-namibia/, accessed
16 July 2018.
21
Personal communication, Claudia and Dirk Haarmann. 6 August 2018.

22

government to broaden targeting; in fact, restrictions based on measures of poverty and incapacity
to work were reintroduced (van Ufford et al., 2016).
Iran’s universal cash transfer scheme has proven relatively durable in comparison, but remains
under pressure. Transfers were made universally into individual bank accounts beginning in 2011,
in which year they accounted for a full 6.5% of GDP and about 29% of median household income.
The government has subsequently allowed the real value of the transfer to fall by more than half by
opting not to adjust it for inflation, however, amidst criticism that the transfers reduce the labor
supply of the poor (Salehi-Isfahani and Mostafavi-Dehzooei, 2017).
We are of course in the early days of basic income research in developing countries. The first
results from the first large-scale experimental evaluation, the GiveDirectly initiative in Kenya,
are due in 2019. This and other future studies can draw many lessons from the earlier pilots.
For example, it will be useful to separately estimate impacts on the kinds of people who are not
typically enrolled in targeted schemes in order to understand how impacts vary. But a broader
lesson from these pilots is that the UBI debate is not simply a debate about whether small, regular,
transfers are an effective way to achieve some policy objective. It is as much a debate about what
kind of society people want (and will vote for) as about how to get there.

23

References
Akresh, Richard, Damien De Walque, and Harounan Kazianga, “Evidence from a randomized evaluation of the household welfare impacts of conditional and unconditional cash transfers
given to mothers or fathers,” Working Paper WPS 7730, World Bank Group June 2016.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin Olken, and Julia Tobias, “Targeting the Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia,” American Economic Review,
June 2012, 102 (4), 1206–40.
Alfaro, Laura, Andrew Charlton, and Fabio Kanczuk, “Plant-Size Distribution and CrossCountry Income Differences,” Working Paper 14060, National Bureau of Economic Research
June 2008.
Anderson, Siwan and Jean-Marie Baland, “The Economics of Roscas and Intrahousehold
Resource Allocation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (3), 963–995.
Angelucci, Manuela and Giacomo De Giorgi, “Indirect Effects of an Aid Program: How Do
Cash Transfers Affect Ineligibles’ Consumption?,” American Economic Review, March 2009, 99
(1), 486–508.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler, “Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash
Transfer Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (4), 1709–1753.
,

, and

, “The regressive demands of demand-driven development,” Journal of Public Eco-

nomics, 2013, 106, 27 – 41.
Balboni, Clare, Oriana Bandiera, Robin Burgess, Maitreesh Ghatak, and Anton Heil,
“Why do people stay poor?,” Technical Report 2019.
Bandiera, Oriana, Robin Burgess, Narayan Das, Selim Gulesci, Imran Rasul, and
Munshi Sulaiman, “Labor Markets and Poverty in Village Economies*,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 2017, 132 (2), 811–870.
Banerjee, Abhijit, “Contracting Constraints, Credit Markets, and Economic Development,” in
Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen, and Stephen Turnovsky, eds., Advances in Economics
and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Vol. III 2003.
and Esther Duflo, “Growth Theory through the Lens of Development Economics,” in Philippe
Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, 1 ed., Vol. 1, Part A, Elsevier,
2005, chapter 07, pp. 473–552.
and

, Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty, PublicAf-

fairs, 2012.
and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Limited Attention and Income Distribution,” The American
Economic Review, 2008, 98 (2), 489–493.
and

, “The Shape of Temptation: Implications for the Economic Lives of the Poor,” Working

Paper 15973, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2010.
, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, “Six Randomized Evaluations of Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, January 2015, 7
(1), 1–21.
24

, Emily Breza, Esther Duflo, and Cynthia Kinnan, “Do Credit Constraints Limit Entrepreneurship ? Heterogeneity in the Returns to Microfinance,” in “in” 2017.
, Esther Duflo, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, and Jeremy Shapiro, “The Long term
Impacts of a “Graduation” Program: Evidence from West Bengal,” Technical Report, MIT
September 2016.
, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A Olken, and Sudarno Sumarto, “The (lack of) Distortionary
Effects of Proxy-Means Tests: Results from a Nationwide Experiment in Indonesia,” Working
Paper 25362, National Bureau of Economic Research December 2018.
,

, Benjamin Olken, and Sudarno Sumarto, “Private Outsourcing and Competition:

Subsidized Food Distribution in Indonesia.” (in press).
,

, Gabriel Kreindler, and Benjamin Olken, “Debunking the Stereotype of the Lazy

Welfare Recipient: Evidence from Cash Transfer Programs,” The World Bank Research Observer,
2017, 32 (2), 155–184.
Barrientos, Armando, “Protecting Capability, Eradicating Extreme Poverty: Chile Solidario
and the Future of Social Protection,” Journal of Human Development and Capabilities, 2010, 11
(4), 579–597.
Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta, “Cross Country Differences
in Productivity: The Role of Allocative Efficiency,” 2008. unpublished mimeo.
Bastagli, Francesca, Jessica Hagen-Zanker, Luke Harman, Valentina Barca, Georgina
Sturge, Tanja Schmidt, and Luca Pellerano, “Cash transfers: what does the evidence say?
A rigorous review of programme impact and of the role of design and implementation features,”
Technical Report, Overseas Development Institute 2016.
Baulch, Bob and John Hoddinott, “Economic mobility and poverty dynamics in developing
countries,” The Journal of Development Studies, 2000, 36 (6), 1–24.
Beegle, Kathleen, Joachim De Weerdt, Jed Friedman, and John Gibson, “Methods of
household consumption measurement through surveys: Experimental results from Tanzania,”
Journal of Development Economics, 2012, 98 (1), 3 – 18.
Benhassine, Najy, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Victor
Pouliquen, “Turning a Shove into a Nudge? A ”Labeled Cash Transfer” for Education,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, August 2015, 7 (3), 86–125.
Berge, Lars Ivar Oppedal, Kjetil Bjorvatn, and Bertil Tungodden, “Human and Financial Capital for Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field and Lab Experiment,”
Management Science, 2015, 61 (4), 707–722.
Bernard, Tanguy, Stefan Dercon, Kate Orkin, and Alemayehu Taffesse, “The future in
mind: short and long-run impact of an aspirations intervention in rural Ethiopia,” working paper,
Oxford University 2018.
Besley, Timothy and Ravi Kanbur, “The principles of targeting,” Working Paper WPS 385,
World Bank Group March 1990.
Binswanger, Hans P., “Attitudes toward Risk: Experimental Measurement in Rural India,”

25

American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 1980, 62 (3), 395–407.
Blattman, Christopher, Nathan Fiala, and Sebastian Martinez, “Generating Skilled SelfEmployment in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (2), 697–752.
,

, and

, “The Long Term Impacts of Grants on Poverty: 9-year Evidence From Uganda’s

Youth Opportunities Program,” Working Paper 24999, National Bureau of Economic Research
September 2018.
Brown, Caitlin, Martin Ravallion, and Dominique van de Walle, “A Poor Means Test?
Econometric Targeting in Africa,” Working Paper 22919, National Bureau of Economic Research
December 2016.
,

, and

, “Are Poor Individuals Mainly Found in Poor Households? Evidence using Nutrition

Data for Africa,” Working Paper 24047, National Bureau of Economic Research November 2017.
Brudevold-Newman, Maddalena Honorati, Pamela Jakiela, and Owen Ozier, “A Firm of
One’s Own: Experimental Evidence on Credit Constraints and Occupational Choice,” Working
Paper 7977, World Bank 2017.
Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, “Underinvestment
in a Profitable Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh,” Econometrica, 82
(5), 1671–1748.
Cai, Jing, “The Impact of Insurance Provision on Household Production and Financial Decisions,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, May 2016, 8 (2), 44–88.
, Alain De Janvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Social Networks and the Decision to Insure,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, April 2015, 7 (2), 81–108.
Casaburi, Lorenzo and Rocco Macchiavello, “Demand and Supply of Infrequent Payments
as a Commitment Device: Evidence from Kenya,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Casamatta, Georges, Helmuth Cremer, and Pierre Pestieau, “Political sustainability and
the design of social insurance,” Journal of Public Economics, 2000, 75 (3), 341 – 364.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andr and Olivier Donni, “Non-unitary Models of Household Behavior: A
Survey of the Literature,” IZA Discussion Papers 4603, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA)
November 2009.
Christian, Cornelius, Lukas Hensel, and Christopher Roth, “Income Shocks and Suicides:
Causal Evidence From Indonesia,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Cole, Shawn A. and Wentao Xiong, “Agricultural Insurance and Economic Development,”
Annual Review of Economics, 2017, 9 (1), 235–262.
Cremer, Helmuth and Kerstin Roeder, “Means testing versus basic income: The (lack of)
political support for a universal allowance,” Economics Letters, 2015, 136, 81 – 84.
Cunha, Jesse M, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Seema Jayachandran, “The Price Effects of
Cash Versus In-Kind Transfers,” The Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff, “Returns to Capital in
Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

26

2008, 123 (4), 1329–1372.
Dreèze, Jean and Reetika Khera, “The BPL Census and a Possible Alternative,” Economic
and Political Weekly, 2010, 45 (9), 54–63.
Dreze, Jean and Reetika Khera, “The BPL Census and a Possible Alternative,” Economic &
Political Weekly, 2010, 45.
Duflo, Esther, “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pension and Intra-household Allocation in South Africa,” Working Paper 8061, National Bureau of Economic Research December
2000.
Evans, David K. and Anna Popova, “Cash Transfers and Temptation Goods,” Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 2017, 65 (2), 189–221.
F., J. Kaboski Buera and Y. Shin, “Finance and Development: A Tale of Two Sectors,” 2008.
unpublished mimeo.
Fafchamps, Marcel, David McKenzie, Simon Quinn, and Christopher Woodruff, “Microenterprise growth and the flypaper effect: Evidence from a randomized experiment in Ghana,”
Journal of Development Economics, 2014, 106, 211 – 226.
Gertler, Paul J., Sebastian W. Martinez, and Marta Rubio-Codina, “Investing Cash
Transfers to Raise Long-Term Living Standards,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, January 2012, 4 (1), 164–92.
Ghatak, Maitreesh and Franois Maniquet, “TBD,” TBD, TBD, TBD (TBD), TBD.
Gordon, Roger and Wei Li, “Tax structures in developing countries: Many puzzles and a
possible explanation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (7-8), 855–866.
Grosh, Margaret, Carlo del Ninno, Emil Tesliuc, and Azedine Ouerghi, For Promotion
and Protection: the Design and Implementation of Effective Safety Nets, The World Bank, 2008.
Haarmann, Claudia, Dirk Haarmann, Herbert Jauch, Hilma Shindondola-Mote, Nicoli
Nattrass, Ingrid van Niekerk, and Michael Samson, “Making the difference! The BIG in
Namibia - Basic Income Grant Pilot Project,” report 2009.
Handa, Sudhanshu, Luisa Natali, David Seidenfeld, Gelson Tembo, and Benjamin
Davis, “Can Unconditional Cash Transfers Lead to Sustainable Poverty Reduction? Evidence
from two government-led programmes in Zambia,” Technical Report, UNICEF Office of Research,
Florence 2016. Innocenti Working Paper 2016-21.
Hanna, Rema and Benjamin Olken, “Universal Basic Incomes vs. Targeted Transfers: AntiPoverty Programs in Developing Countries,” Working Paper, Journal of Economic Perspectives
August 2018.
Haushofer, Johannes and Jeremy Shapiro, “Household Response to Income Changes: Evidence from an Unconditional Cash Transfer Program in Kenya,” 2013. unpublished mimeo.
and

, “The Long-Term Impact of Unconditional Cash Transfers: Experimental Evidence from

Kenya,” Working Paper, Busara Center for Behavioral Economics, Nairobi, Kenya 2018.
, Edward Miguel, Paul Niehaus, and Michael Walker, “General Equilibrium Effects of
Cash Transfers in Kenya,” 2018. Pre-analysis plan.

27

Hicks, Joan Hamory, Marieke Kleemans, Nicholas Y Li, and Edward Miguel, “Reevaluating Agricultural Productivity Gaps with Longitudinal Microdata,” Working Paper 23253,
National Bureau of Economic Research March 2017.
Hidrobo, Melissa, Amber Peterman, and Lori Heise, “The Effect of Cash, Vouchers, and
Food Transfers on Intimate Partner Violence: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Northern Ecuador,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2016, 8 (3), 284–303.
Hoynes, Hilary and Jesse Rothstein, “TBD,” TBD, TBD, TBD (TBD), TBD.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403–1448.
and

, “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico *,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

2014, 129 (3), 1035–1084.
Hussam, Reshmann, Natalia Rigol, and Ben Roth, “Targeting high ability entrepreneurs
using community information: Mechanism design in the field,” 2017. unpublished mimeo.
Ikiara, Gerrishon, “Political Economy of Cash Transfers In Kenya,” Technical Report, Overseas
Development Institute 2009.
Imbert, Clément and John Papp, “Short-term Migration, Rural Public Works and Urban
Labor Markets: Evidence from India,” 2018. unpublished mimeo.
Ivaschenko, Oleksiy, Claudia Rodriguez Alas, Marina Novikova, Carolina Romero,
Thomas Bowen, and Linghui Zhu, The State of Social Safety Nets 2018, The World Bank,
2018.
Jayne, Thomas, John Strauss, Takashi Yamano, and Daniel Molla, “Targeting of food aid
in rural Ethiopia: chronic need or inertia?,” Journal of Development Economics, 2002, 68 (2),
247 – 288.
Jeong, Hyeok and Robert Townsend, “Sources of TFP growth: occupational choice and
financial deepening,” Economic Theory, Jul 2007, 32 (1), 179–221.
Karlan, Dean, Robert Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry, “Agricultural
Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints *,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2014, 129 (2), 597–652.
, Ryan Knight, and Christopher Udry, “Consulting and capital experiments with microenterprise tailors in Ghana,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2015, 118, 281 –
302. Economic Experiments in Developing Countries.
Kidd, Stephen and Emily Wylde, “Targeting the Poorest: An assessment of the proxy means
test methodology,” Technical Report, Australian Agency for International Development September 2011.
, Bjorn Gelders, and Diloá Bailey-Athias, “Exclusion by design: An assessment of the effectiveness of the proxy means test poverty targeting mechanism,” Working Paper 56, International
Labour Office 2017.
Klasen, Stephan and Simon Lange, “How Narrowly Should Anti-poverty Programs Be Targeted? Simulation Evidence from Bolivia and Indonesia,” Courant Research Centre: Poverty,

28

Equity and Growth - Discussion Papers 213, Courant Research Centre PEG Aug 2016.
Lybbert, Travis and Bruce Wydick, “Poverty, Aspirations, and the Economics of Hope,”
Economic Development and Cultural Change, January 2018, 66.
Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao, “Poverty Impedes
Cognitive Function,” Science, 2013, 341 (6149), 976–980.
McIntosh, Craig and Andrew Zeitlin, “Using Household Grants to Benchmark the Cost Effectiveness of USAID Programming: An Pre-Analysis Plan,” 2018.
Meager, Rachel, “Aggregating Distributional Treatment Effects: A Bayesian Hierarchical Analysis of the Microcredit Literature.” unpublished mimeo.
Ministry of Finance, Government of India, Economic Survey 2016-17, Oxford University
Press, 2017.
Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq and Mark Rosenzweig, “Labor Market Effects of Selling Rainfall
Insurance to Cultivators and Landless Laborers,” Working Papers, Yale University 2013.
Moore, Charity, “Nicaragua’s Red De Proteccion Social: An Exemplary but Short-Lived Conditional Cash Transfer Programme,” report 17, International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth
2009.
Morduch, Jonathan, “Risk, production and saving: Theory and evidence from Indian households,” 1990. unpublished mimeo.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Eldar Shafir, Scarcity: Why Having Too Little Means So Much,
Time Books, Henry Holt and Company LLC, 2013.
Niehaus, Paul, Antonia Atanassova, Marianne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mullainathan,
“Targeting with Agents,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2013, 5 (1),
206–38.
Prather, Lauren, “The Instrumental Determinants of Foreign Aid Support in Donor Countries,”
Technical Report, UC San Diego April 2017.
Ravallion, Martin, The Economics of Poverty: History, Measurement and Policy, Oxford University Press, 2016.
Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with
heterogeneous establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2008, 11 (4), 707 – 720.
Rosenzweig, Mark and Kenneth Wolpin, “Credit Market Constraints, Consumption Smoothing, and the Accumulation of Durable Production Assets in Low-Income Countries: Investments
in Bullocks in India,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (2), 223–244.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Oded Stark, “Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and Marriage:
Evidence from Rural India,” Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97 (4), 905–926.
Salehi-Isfahani, Djavad and Mohammad Mostafavi-Dehzooei, “Cash transfers and labor
supply: evidence from a large-scale program in Iran,” Working paper 1090, Economic Research
Forum 2017.
Silverio-Murillo, Adan, “Wife vs. Husband: Does It Matter Who Answers the Survey?,” Technical Report.

29

Standing, Guy, “Unconditional Basic Income: Two pilots in Madhya Pradesh,” 2013.
Stecklov, Guy, Alexander Weinreb, and Calogero Carletto, “Can incentives improve survey
data quality in developing countries?: results from a field experiment in India,” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 2018, 181 (4), 1033–1056.
Sukhtankar, Sandip, “India’s National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme: What do We
Really Know about the World’s Largest Workfare Program?,” in “Prodeecings of the BrookingsNCAER India Policy Forum,” Vol. 13 2016, pp. 231–286.
Suri, Tavneet and William Jack, “The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile money,”
Science, 2016, 354 (6317), 1288–1292.
Townsend, Robert M., “Consumption Insurance: An Evaluation of Risk-Bearing Systems in
Low-Income Economies,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1995, 9 (3), 83–102.
van Ufford, Paul Quarles, Charlotte Harland, Stanfield Michelo, Gelson Tembo, Kelley
Toole, and Denis Wood, The Role of Impact Evaluation in the Evolution of Zambias Cash
Transfer Programme, UNICEF, 2016.
Vreyer, Philippe De and Sylvie Lambert, “Intra-household Inequalities and Poverty in Senegal,” 2016. unpublished mimeo.
Walker, Michael, “Informal Taxation and Cash Transfers: Experimental Evidence from Kenya,”
Technical Report, University of California, Berkeley 2018.
Widerquist, Karl, “The Devil’s in the Caveats: A Critical Analysis of Basic Income Experiments
for Researchers, Policymakers, and Citizens,” Technical Report 2018.
Woodruff, Christopher McKenzie David, “Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital and
Access to Finance in Mexico,” World Bank Economic Review, 2008, 22 (3), 457–482.
World Bank, “Tax Revenue,” 2016. data retrieved from World Development Indicators.
Yoong, Joanna, Lila Rabinovich, and Stephanie Diepeveen, “The impact of economic
resource transfers to women versus men: a systematic review,” Technical Report, University of
London 2012.

30

