NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ACTORS IN THE CHILD DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
Daniela Del Boca
Christopher J. Flinn
Ewout Verriest
Matthew J. Wiswall
Working Paper 25596
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25596

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

This research is partially supported by NSF Grant 1357686, the C.V. Starr Center for Applied
Economics, and the Institute of Human Development and Social Change at N.Y.U. We are
grateful to participants in seminars at Syracuse, Minnesota, and the New York Federal Reserve
Bank for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Corina Boar for useful discussions on
the estimation of altruism in the household macroeconomics literature. We are responsible for all
errors, interpretations, and omissions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Daniela Del Boca, Christopher J. Flinn, Ewout Verriest, and Matthew J. Wiswall. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Actors in the Child Development Process
Daniela Del Boca, Christopher J. Flinn, Ewout Verriest, and Matthew J. Wiswall
NBER Working Paper No. 25596
February 2019
JEL No. J13
ABSTRACT
We construct and estimate a model of child development in which both the parents and children
make investments in the child’s skill development. In each period of the development process,
partially altruistic parents act as the Stackelberg leader and the child the follower when setting her
own study time. We then extend this non-cooperative form of interaction by allowing parents to
offer incentives to the child to increase her study time, at some monitoring cost. We show that
this incentive scheme, a kind of internal conditional cash transfer, produces efficient outcomes
and, in general, increases the child’s cognitive ability. In addition to heterogeneity in resources
(wage offers and non-labor income), the model allows for heterogeneity in preferences both for
parents and children, and in monitoring costs. Like their parents, children are forward-looking,
but we allow children and parents to have different preferences and for children to have agevarying discount rates, becoming more “patient” as they age. Using detailed time diary
information on the allocation of parent and child time linked to measures of child cognitive
ability, we estimate several versions of the model. Using model estimates, we explore the impact
of various government income transfer policies on child development.
Daniela Del Boca
Department of Economics and Statistics
University of Turin and
Collegio Carlo Alberto
Lungo Dora Siena 100 A
10153 Turin
Italy
dani.delboca@unito.it
Christopher J. Flinn
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
christopher.flinn@nyu.edu

Ewout Verriest
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6 Floor
New York, NY 10012
ewoutverriest@hotmail.com
Matthew J. Wiswall
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive Madison,
WI 53706
and NBER
matt.wiswall@gmail.com

An appendix may be found at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25596

1

Introduction

In most models of the human capital investment, the subject of the investments is
either a young and passive agent or an adult making investments to increase their own
productivity. For example, Becker’s model of fertility and investment in children views
parents as choosing a quantity of offspring and an average quality (see, e.g., Becker
and Tomes (1976)). However, the canonical model of educational choice and on-the-job
investment views the person in whom investments are being made as the decision-maker
(e.g., Becker (1964), Ben-Porath (1967)).1
Within the child development literature, the vast majority of theoretical models and
empirical studies have considered children to be passive agents, especially when they are
very young, and view parents as the only active decision-makers.2 Empirical evidence
suggests that the effect of parental investments on child development declines during
adolescence (Carneiro et al. (2003), Del Boca et al. (2014)), whereas the effect of time
spent in the child’s self-investment (e.g., homework) increases (Cooper et al. (2006)). It
is during adolescence, in fact, when most teenagers begin taking responsibility for their
own actions, and when they begin to increase their investments in themselves (Dauphin
et al. (2011), Lundberg et al. (2009), Kooreman (2007), Del Boca et al. (2017), Fiorini
and Keane (2014)). A natural and potentially important question to address is the
evolution of the individual from a passive receiver of investment inputs into one whose
actions partially determine their own rate of cognitive development.
In this paper, we attempt to better understand this process and the role that incentives from parents and agents external to the household might play in it. We develop
a model of child and parent interactions, in which both are active agents in the child’s
development process. We estimate this model using detailed time diary information
on the time parents and children each spend investing in the child’s human capital,
and use the estimates of this model to study how policies could affect intra-household
interactions and the path of skill developoment.
The starting point for our analysis is the observation that throughout childhood and
adolescence the amount of time children spend “investing” alone (without their parents)
increases markedly. Using data from 1997-2007 Child Development Supplement (CDS)
of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), we find that the average number of
hours children spend studying alone increases from about 1.4 hours per week (ages
6-8) to about about 6 hours per week for ages 12-15, and in a quarter of households,
teenagers are spending 10 or more hours per week studying on their own.3
We find that this child self-investment time also varies markedly with parental in1

In some cases models of on-the-job investment in which there exist search frictions, it is assumed
that workers and firms jointly invest in the general human capital of the worker and/or match-specific
capital (Wasmer (2006), Bagger et al. (2014), Lentz and Roys (2015), Flinn et al. (2017)). In this
paper we limit attention to the development of cognitive human capital prior to labor market entry,
so that the joint investments are limited to parents and children.
2
This literature is surveyed in Currie and Almond (2011).
3
See Table 3 and Appendix tables. The CDS-PSID data and our time measures are described more
fully in later sections.

1

come. Figure 1 shows the average hours of self-investment time per week by quartiles of
parents’ income. The average study time for the children of the highest income quartile
households is nearly twice as large as that for the lowest quartile households (8.5 vs. 4.5
hours per week). This variation in study time is potentially an important contributor
to differences in cognitive development if it represents a productive investment. The
evidence on the productivity of child self-investment, much of it likely due to homework
assignments in school, generally concludes that this time does in fact have a positive
impact on development.4 Our model contains mechanisms that allow for behaviors that
are consistent with these observed relationships. The model emphasizes the advantages
that better-educated and wealthier parents have in producing child quality directly and
indirectly through the design of incentives offered to the child to increase her study
time.
Our model of parent and child interaction considers a case in which the parents
operate as a single decision-making unit, and we assume that they are able to choose
their period t actions (labor supply, time with children, goods expenditure on children)
prior to the child choosing hers (self-investment time). Thus, household decision-making
has a Stackelberg structure within periods, not unlike the one used in (mostly) static
models of inter-firm competition. The main differences here are that (1) the model
is dynamic with fully forward-looking agents, (2) the parents act altruistically with
respect to the child, and (3) parents and children both value the “public” good of the
child’s cognitive ability. The parent’s altruism and shared public goods moderates the
differences between the (private) objectives of the parents and the objectives of the
child.
By explicitly incorporating the child’s actions into her development process, a number of previously unexamined factors explaining the dispersion in cognitive outcomes at
the end of adolescence can be examined. When modeling the human capital investment
decisions of adults (in themselves or in their children), it is typically assumed that a
common discount factor is applied to an additively separable lifetime welfare function.
Studies by developmental psychologists (e.g., Steinberg et al (2009)) have convincingly
demonstrated that the capacity to delay gratification changes markedly over adolescence, particularly around puberty. Because the motivation to invest depends critically
on how forward-looking an agent is, it is important to allow for changes in this characteristic over the development period, and we use existing evidence to inform our
parameterization of the child’s age-varying discount factor sequence.
4

There is an active debate in the education community about the role of homework in the learning process, and parents and children have their own views on homework that partially determine its
measured effectiveness. In an often-cited overview and meta-analysis of the research on the relationship between homework and cognitive outcomes, Cooper et al. (2006) find that virtually all studies,
whether they be based on cross-sectional survey data or small-scale experimental designs, find a positive (and significant) association between homework time and measures of cognitive performance for
older children and adolescents. The fact that even the (small-scale) experimental studies find such
a relationship means that this relationship is most probably not solely due to selection or omitted
covariates. In the PSID-CDS data, child self-investment time is strongly positively correlated with
cognitive test score measures.

2

We also allow the skill development production function parameters to change across
development periods, reflecting the possibility that time with parents may be declining in productivity as children age, while the productivity of investment by children
themselves may be increasing. In addition, our model of the skill development process allows for persistence in skill development (“skill begets skill”), for both time and
goods (monetary) investments, and for the productivity of parental time to vary by the
parent’s level of human capital, as measured by their schooling attainment.
In our baseline specification, parents make their investment and consumption choices,
as well as the level of expenditure on the private consumption good of the child. Given
these choices, the child then chooses the amount of time to spend in study (selfinvestment), with the remainder of time outside of school consumed as leisure. In
addition to allowing heterogeneity in household resources (wage offers for the mother
and father, and non-labor income), the model allows for heterogeneity in preferences
in leisure, consumption, and child “quality” across households, and also within households, since parents and children can “disagree” on the relative value of the child’s
human capital.
We generalize the model by allowing parents to incentivize their children to provide
more self-investment time, which requires a monitoring cost borne by the parents. This
structure allows even greater scope for parent and child interactions, and we show
that by using this incentive scheme an efficient intra-household outcome is attained.
However, due to the monitoring cost, not all households choose to use this incentivize
scheme. We think of this, loosely speaking, as a “parenting style.” Similar to the recent
models of Doepke and Zilibotti (2017) and Doepke et al. (2019), forward-looking and
partially altruistic parents in our model can choose, at some cost, to influence their
child’s behavior during childhood, affecting the child’s human capital and welfare when
an adult. We draw on models of principal-agent interactions to characterize the parental
actions–their choice of parenting style–as coming from a continuous menu of incentive
mechanisms, allowing parents, at different costs, to exercise a wide range of influences
over their child.
More broadly, our analysis centers on the the interaction between parents, children,
and actors external to the household (which we will often refer to as a social planner)
during the child development process. The interaction between parents and children
has been frequently studied and is deemed to have important consequences for the
welfare and development of children.5 Relatively recent contributions by economists
to this topic include Weinberg (2001), Hotz and Pantano (2015), Hao et al. (2008),
Akabayashi (1996, 2006) and Lizzeri and Siniscalchi (2008). Weinberg (2001) develops
5

Other related studies focus on adolescents’ risky behaviors. Hao et al. (2008) show that all parents,
including the very altruistic, have incentives to penalize older children for their risky behaviors in order
to dissuade their younger ones from engaging in such behaviors. Hotz and Pantano (2015) consider a
model in which parents impose more stringent disciplinary environments in response to their earlierborn children’s poor performance in school in order to deter such outcomes for their later-born offspring.
They provide evidence that the school performance of children in the NLSY-C declines with birth order
as does the stringency of their parents’ disciplinary restrictions.

3

a model in which altruistic parents provide for their child’s consumption and attempt
to influence behaviors of the child that lead to long-term beneficial outcomes for her.
Weinberg shows that poor parents, i.e., those for whom the floor on their child’s consumption is binding, have less scope for influencing the actions of their children. As a
result, Weinberg’s analysis predicts that less well-off parents are more likely to resort
to non-pecuniary incentive mechanisms, such as corporal punishment, to influence their
children. Akabayashi (1996, 2006) develops an incentive model of the parent-child relationship showing the potential for child-abuse. Although our paper does not include
consumption floors that inhibit some parents’ ability to positively influence their child’s
behavior, we do allow for a mechanism that restricts the ability of some households to
use (positive) incentive schemes for their children, and households that do not use them
will generally experience lower growth in the child’s ability. As we shall show, wealthier
households are more likely to use this incentivize device, which tends to further increase
disparities in child outcomes at the end of the development period.
Given that at least some households actively employ incentive systems, it is of interest to investigate how conditional or unconditional transfers offered to the household by
agents external to it modify household behavior, including the “parenting style” chosen.
In terms of designing effective conditional cash transfers systems (CCTs), households
enjoy considerable advantages with respect to external agents with an objective of increasing cognitive ability within a population of households. First of all, the parents
can be assumed to know their own child’s characteristics, in terms of both ability and
preferences. This is a substantial advantage with respect to an external agent who may
only know the distributions of ability and preferences of children and their parents in
the population. A second advantage is in terms of the potential observability of the
effort of the child, which is a direct input to the production process. While no parent
can say with certainty how much “effective time” their child spends in study or other
activities designed to increase her cognitive ability, they clearly have more information
than does an agent external to the household. External agents will largely be constrained to offer outcome-based incentives, at least in more developed societies, and
outcomes are likely to contain substantial amounts of noise which further complicates
the design of effective mechanisms (Del Boca, et al. (2016)).
It is helpful to think of the parents as the “agents” within a standard principal-agent
setting, with the social planner playing the principal. The principal’s objective is to
increase the level of the cognitive ability of children in the population by incentivizing
the household members, parents and child, to provide more productive inputs than they
would in baseline. All three parties value the child’s cognitive ability to different degrees,
and the problem the social planner faces is to design simple policies to achieve its goal
given knowledge of the distributions of preferences and resources within the target
population. We only consider very simple transfer policies of the type that have been
implemented in various forms in the past. The most sophisticated policy we consider is
a CCT policy in which the planner pays any household a fixed amount if their child’s
ability increases by a prespecified amount between ages t and t + 1. Such thresholdbased policies produce strategic behavior in multi-period settings (see, e.g., Weitzman
4

(1980), Macartney (2016)), and for this reason we only consider policies of this type
that are unanticipated by the target population and last only for one period. Even
within this limited class of policies, we find that relatively inexpensive CCT policies
offered by the planner may be very cost effective when the parameters characterizing the
policy are set optimally. Most importantly, we find that one of the reasons for the cost
effectiveness of these policies is in promoting the use of more effective parenting styles, as
characterized by the percentage of parents using an “Internal” CCT, henceforth referred
to as an ICCT, and the elasticity of the reward offered by parents with respect to the
self-investment time of the child. Thus, we discover an important complementarity
between an output-based CCT offered by the social planner, henceforth referred to as
an “External” CCT (ECCT), and the use of ICCTs by parents.
The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we describe the model and characterize the solution in the situations in which the parents can or cannot offer incentives
to their children for self-investment. Section 3 contains a description of the data used
to estimate the model and presents descriptive statistics. In Section 4 we discuss the
estimation method that we employ and the identification of the primitive parameters
describing the model. Section 5 presents the model estimates and discusses withinsample fit. In Section 6, we discuss the design of efficient mechanisms to increase the
cognitive outcomes of children, given our model estimates. We also explore the manner
in which transfers and ECCTs impact household decisions and welfare. We conclude
in Section 7.

2
2.1

Model
Model Primitives

The model consists of two (period/flow) utility functions, one for the parents (jointly)
and one for the child. The production technology for the cognitive ability of the child
has a Cobb-Douglas form, as in Del Boca et al. (2014), with intertemporal linkages
captured by the dependence of period t+1 cognitive ability on period t cognitive ability,
in addition to inputs chosen by the parents and the child in period t. There is no lending
or borrowing in the model, so that expenditures on investment goods for the child and
household consumption in any period t are equal to the sum of all income sources for
the household in period t, including the labor income of each parent and the non-labor
income of the household. We now describe the components of the model more formally.
2.1.1

Environment

There are two agents, the parents and the one child. Although we consider two parent
households, and allow for different time allocation decisions for each parent, we assume
the parents act as a unitary decision-maker. Both the parents and the child make
decisions during each of the M (annual) child development periods, starting with the
birth of the child at period t = 1 and ending at period t = M , when this phase of the
5

child development process concludes. We can think of period M + 1 as the beginning
of the next phase of the young adult’s cognitive development process, which starts with
an initial cognitive ability level of the child of kM +1 . We might think of the next phase
as being one in which the child is the sole decision-maker in her investment decisions.
2.1.2

Preferences

We begin by describing the preferences of the parents, considered as one player, and
the child. Parents are allowed to be altruistic, although we preclude the child from
acting altruistically toward the parents. All utility functions are assumed to be CobbDouglas, which greatly simplifies the solution of the model in the presence of so many
choice variables.
The child’s period t private utility is given by
uc,t = uc (lc,t , xt , kt )
= λ1 ln lc,t + λ2 ln xt + λ3 ln kt ,
where lc,t is the child’s leisure (or play) time in period t, xt is her consumption of a
private good purchased in the market, and kt is the child’s cognitive ability
P3 at the
beginning of period t. The preference weights are all strictly positive and i=1 λi = 1,
an inconsequential normalization. As will also be true with respect to the parents’
utility function, we allow for the vector λ to be heterogeneous in the population of
households with a child, allowing for rich patterns of across household and within
household preference heterogeneity.
Parents have both a “private” utility function and are altruistic toward their child.
The parents’ “private” utility is given by
up,t = up (l1,t , l2,t , ct , kt )
= α1 ln l1,t + α2 ln l2,t + α3 ln ct + α4 ln kt ,
where li,t is the leisure of parent i ∈ {1, 2} in period t, ct is the level of consumption
of
P4
a private good valued only by the parents, each αj is strictly positive, and j=1 αi = 1.
We define this as the parents’ private utility function because it does not include the
altruism component. The “total” period t utility of the parents is given by
ũp,t = (1 − ϕ)up,t + ϕuc,t ,
where ϕ ∈ [0, 1] indicates the extent of the parents’ altruism, with ϕ = 1 indicating
“pure” altruism on the part of the parents, and with ϕ = 0 indicating that they exhibit
no altruistic behavior toward the child. We note that this specification resembles that
of a Benthamite social welfare function for the household, with (1 − ϕ) being the weight
given the parents and ϕ being the weight given to the child. In this sense, we can think
of the parents as having preferences consistent with those of a social planner.

6

Substituting the expression for the child’s utility into the parents’ utility yields the
parents’ period t utility function
ũp,t = α̃1 ln l1,t + α̃2 ln l2,t + α̃3 ln ct + α̃4 ln kt + α̃5 ln lc,t + α̃6 ln xt ,
where
α̃1
α̃2
α̃3
α̃4
α̃5
α̃6

=
=
=
=
=
=

(1 − ϕ)α1
(1 − ϕ)α2
(1 − ϕ)α3
(1 − ϕ)α4 + ϕλ3
ϕλ1
ϕλ2 .

This expression makes clear that, due to parental altruism, the child’s consumption,
leisure, and human capital are “public” goods, that both agents, the parents and the
child, enjoy. We note that for ϕ = 0, the parent’s total utility is simply equal to their
private utility and the parents place no value on the leisure or private consumption of
the child. For ϕ = 1, the parents’ utility function is the same as the child’s, which
implies that all household choices would be made so as to maximize the child’s welfare,
narrowly defined. In such a case, both sets of players have the same objective, and
the problem reduces to a single agent problem. However, this case produces several
counterfactual implications, such as that the parents would consume no leisure and
would set ct = 0 in every period.
An additional crucial aspect of preferences, in particular with regard to dynamic
decision-making, are the agents’ discount factors. We allow the child’s discount factor
to vary with their stage in the development process. This is indicated by the fact that
the child’s discount factor is indexed by t, βc,t , with βc,1 ≤ βc,2 ≤ . . . ≤ βc,M . This
non-standard generality follows studies by developmental psychologists (e.g., Steinberg
et al. (2009)) which have demonstrated that the capacity to delay gratification changes
markedly over adolescence. The parent’s discount factor, βp is not indexed by time and
is assumed to be constant over the course of the development process. For children, the
age-varying discount factor implies that they value their investments in human capital
(versus current leisure and consumption) differently as they age, and in particular
younger children value it less than older children.
Our assumption regarding the child’s discount factor does not imply any type of
time-inconsistent behavior, such as is generated in models with hyperbolic discounting
(e.g., Fang and Silverman (2009)). Given our assumption that the child’s discount
factor sequence is nondecreasing in the child’s age combined with our assumption of
rational decision-making on the part of both parents and children, a young child of age
t makes decisions using the age t discount factor βc,t , however their decisions reflect
their knowledge that the future values of discount factors they use are no less than the
current value. Although this assumption imposes a large degree of rationality on young
7

children, its practical significance may not be great if the current discount factor is low
and larger discount factors only emerge gradually. By making this assumption we avoid
problems of time inconsistency, which may be particularly troublesome when there are
strategic interactions between agents.
We assume the parents and the child also value the level of human capital produced
at the end of the development period, kM +1 . With two sets of agents, we allow there
to be two different terminal value weights, ψc,M +1 and ψp,M +1 , for the child and the
parents, respectively. These terminal weights in period M + 1 are given by
ψc,M +1 = ξc λ3
ψp,M +1 = ξp α4 ,
where ξc and ξp are positive constants to be estimated. The terminal period payoffs for
agent i are given by ψi,M +1 ln kM +1 , i = c, p.
2.1.3

Child Development Technology

The other key primitive of the model is the production technology. The law of motion
for child quality is given by
ln kt+1 = ln Rt + δ1,t ln τ1,t + δ2,t ln τ2,t + δ3,t ln τ12,t + δ4,t ln et + δ5,t ln τc,t + δ6,t ln kt ,
where τi,t is the amount of time parent i ∈ {1, 2} spends in child investment when
the other parent is not present, τ12,t is the time the parents spend in child investment
when the parents are together, et is the amount of child investment goods purchased
in period t, and τc,t is the time the child spends in self-investment. Note that the
production function parameters are indexed by the child’s age, t, allowing them to vary
with the child’s stage of development. Descriptive information from the CDS leads us
to believe that the value of the child’s time in self-investment, τc,t , is increasing in the
age of the child.
In this specification of the production technology, we interpret Rt as total factor
productivity (TFP), and the Cobb-Douglas parameters are allowed to be time-varying
functions of time-invariant, observable characteristics of the parents (e.g. parental
education). We provide more details on the specification when we discuss econometric
issues below.
2.1.4

Constraints

Each parent has an amount of time T to allocate to leisure, investment in the child,
and market work. The time spent in the labor market by parent i = 1, 2 in period t is
given by hi,t , where we allow either or both parents to not work at all. The wage offer
available to parent i in period t is given by wi,t , and the household’s non-labor income
in period t is given by It . Then the total income of the household in period t is
Yt = w1,t h1,t + w2,t h2,t + It .
8

There are no capital markets available for transferring consumption between periods, so
that the household spends all of its period t income on investment goods for the child,
the private consumption of the child, and the private consumption of the parents.6
Then
Y t = e t + x t + ct ,
where we have assumed that the prices of all investment and consumption goods are
equal to 1.
In terms of the time constraints, in each period t = 1, ..., M, for the parents we have
T = li,t + hi,t + τi,t + τ12,t , i = 1, 2,
and for the child we have
T = lc,t + τp,t + τc,t + st ,
where τp,t = τ1,t + τ2,t + τ12,t , the total time spent with the parents in investment
activities, and where st is time spent in school at age t. We assume that st is exogenously
determined, with any child quality gains to schooling reflected in the TFP factors
R1 , ..., RM . In what follows we will define T̃t ≡ T − st , which is the child’s discretionary
time outside of formal schooling.

2.2

Coordination

We begin by assuming the following (noncooperative) decision-making structure. In
each period, the parents are the first movers, and they choose all actions except for
the time spent in self-investment by the child, which is chosen by the child. Because
we assume that all household income is received by the parents, it is natural to have
them make all money expenditure decisions. We also assume that parents can choose
the amount of time they spend with the child, and that the child is obligated to spend
that time with the parents.7
In any period t, the child is the Stackelberg follower and the parents are the Stackelberg leaders. Given the parent’s choices ap,t , the child allocates her available time
between leisure in period t and self-investment, τc,t . The decision rule of the child (re∗
(ap,t ). The parents choose their actions
action function) will therefore have the form τc,t
ap,t given the child’s time allocation rule (reaction function), including their three time
investments with the child, their labor supplies in the period, h1,t and h2.t , and their
6

The private consumption goods of the parents may include goods that are best thought of as
public, in the sense that the child also profits from them. This includes housing, heat, transportation
services, etc. To simplify the exposition of the model, we have assumed that the child does not perceive
these expenditures as contributing to their welfare, so that, in this sense, they are private consumption
expenditures of the parents.
7
Any parent of adolescents could easily take issue with this assumption, but practically speaking,
the assumption will not be that objectionable. This is due to the fact that in the data, time with
parents decreases dramatically over the development period, beginning when the child enters formal
schooling.

9

allocation of household income across their own private consumption, ct , the private
consumption of the child, xt , and expenditures on child investment goods, et .8 Parents and the child are forward-looking, and fully account for the impacts of current
actions on future state valuations. As discussed above, children make decisions fully
understanding that their valuation of future events will be increasing as they age.
In each period t of the development process, the household’s state variables are the
vector Γt = (w1,t w2,t It kt ), which are the wage draws of the parents in the period,
the non-labor income received by the household, It , and the beginning of period value
of child “quality,” or cognitive ability in our application.9 In order to simplify the
problem, the wage and non-labor income processes are assumed to be exogenous with
respect to household actions, although the wage draw of parent i in period t will only
be observed if parent i supplies a positive amount of time to the labor market in period
t.
The value function for the child in periods t = 1, . . . , M is given by
Vc,t (Γt |ap,t ) =

max

τc,t |ap,t ,Cc,t

uc (lc,t , xt , kt ) + βc,t EVc,t+1 (Γt+1 |τc,t , ap,t ),

where ap,t denotes the actions of the parents in period t, which occur prior to the child’s
selection of the value τc,t , and Cc,t denotes the choice set of the child in period t, which
was defined above. The parents’ problem is similarly structured. Being the leaders in
terms of action choices in period t = 1, . . . , M, the parents’ problem is
Vp,t (Γt ) =

max

∗ (a
ap,t |τc,t
p,t ),Cp,t

ũp (l1,t , l2,t , ct .kt , lc,t , xt ) + βp EVp,t+1 (Γt+1 |ap,t ),

∗
where the parents’ actions are chosen given the child’s period t reaction function τc,t
(ap,t )
and their choice set Cp,t .
The functional forms we have specified produce solutions that have attractive properties from the point of view of solving for the decision rules of the agents and for the
estimation of model parameters. However, because of the strategic aspects of the game
played between parents and the child, the solutions for the parents’ problem no longer
have a closed form as they did in Del Boca et al. (2014). We leave these solution details
to Appendix A, and we focus here on some key aspects of the interaction between the
parents and the child.
The child’s reaction function determining their optimal self-investment time τc,t for
any period t is given by
∗
τc,t
(τp,t ) = γt (T̃t − τp,t )
8

(1)

If the parents are not altruistic, i.e., ϕ = 0, the parents’ contribution to the child’s private consumption is not well-defined. That is one technical motivation for at least allowing a minimal level of
altruism on the part of the parents, although we believe most parents exhibit considerable altruism
with respect to their children.
9
Although the child’s discount factors are changing with age, as is the cognitive ability production
technology, these functions are common to all households with the same observed characteristics, and
are not explicitly included in the list of state variables.

10

where T̃t = T − st is the time available to the child outside of formal schooling time
in period t, st , and τp,t is total time spent with the parents in period t, with τp,t ≡
τ1,t + τ2,t + τ12,t . The proportion of uncommitted time in period t that is devoted to
self-investment is given by
∆c,t
∈ (0, 1),
γt =
λ1 + ∆c,t
where
∆c,t = βc,t ψc,t+1 δ5,t ,
which is the present value of the marginal increase in the child’s time investment in
period t. It captures the “return” to self-investment from the perspective of the child.
This return is the product of the child’s discount rate βc,t , the future value of the child’s
human capital ψc,t+1 , and the productivity of self-investment time in producing human
capital. The scalar ψc,t+1 is defined as
ψc,t+1 =

∂EVc,t+1
,
∂ ln kt+1

so that ψc,t+1 represents future utility flows from the child’s human capital as perceived
by the child (including the preference for own human capital, λ3 , and future discount
factors and technology parameters). Appendix A provides the explicit solution for
ψc,t+1 .
The child’s reaction function (1) can be used to determine the rate at which parental
time “crowds-out” child self-investment time, with
∗
(τp,t )
∂τc,t
= −γt .
∂τp,t

This expression indicates that every hour of parental time reduces the child’s selfinvestment time by γt ∈ (0, 1). γt then indicates the degree of parental “crowd-out” of
child self-investment time. From this expression, some intuition for the child’s behavior
in response to her parents’ time spent with her is clear. Impatient children (βc,t ≈ 0)
have a γt ≈ 0 and invest little of their own time in skill development. In this case
there is a low degree of crowd-out. As children become more patient (βc,t increases)
and as they become more productive in increasing their own cognitive ability (i.e., as
δ5,t increases), children spend more time in self-investment for any given amount of
parental time and the degree of crowd-out by parents’ time investments increases.
Although the parents’ choices of actions no longer have closed form solutions, it
remains true that all choices in the model are unique. The reaction function of the
child in terms of her self-investment time is a linear function of the amount of time
that the parents choose to spend with her. Substituting this reaction function into the
parents’ choice problem makes this a single-agent optimization problem that produces
unique solutions for the parents’ choices in the period, ap,t . The choices made by the
parents and child in each period are unique and well-defined under our functional form
assumptions.
11

2.3

Expanding the Policy Space: Internal CCTs

We now reconsider the model after allowing the parents to offer the children contracts
that have the possibility of increasing parental welfare. We can think of these “contracts” as a kind of “parental style.” These policies, to a limited extent, mimic the
kind of policies that an external social actor may offer the household. They will differ
in important ways, however, which may give the parents an advantage over a social
planner in implementing effective conditional cash transfer (CCT) schemes.
There are essentially two major advantages enjoyed by the parents. First, a conditional cash transfer offered by an external agent, who is assumed to be unable to
observe the investments of the household members, must be based on an output measure.10 This means that there is a delay between the investment costs of the household
and the reward. While some parents may have a fairly high discount factor, so that
such a delay in receiving payment is not a major disincentive to effort choices, children
may have low discount factors, and the prospect of a delayed reward may reduce their
incentive to increase current period investments. If the child could be paid immediately for increases in their current period investments, this will make it less costly to
incentivize children to reach any given targeted “quality” level.
Second, the parents have more information concerning the child’s preferences (and
their own) than does an external agent. This allows them potentially to design more
effective CCTs than can an external agent. As we will see, the parents will be able
to design an internal CCT (ICCT) that allows them to obtain their preferred outcome
subject to the child being no worse off than she is in the Stackelberg equilibrium. The
parents have significant informational advantages with respect to the planner. However,
the choices of the planner and the parents in incentivizing child development cannot
be directly compared, since, in general, they have different objectives. In the case of
the external agent, we will assume that their only concern is with some function of the
distribution of child quality in the targeted population, which clearly differs from the
objective of the parents, which is to maximize their discounted stream of payoffs. These
payoffs are only partially a function of their own child’s quality.
We now demonstrate how the use of an ICCT allows the household to achieve a
cooperative, meaning efficient, outcome. In this two-agent setting, the set of efficient
outcomes can be found by allowing each agent to make all of the decisions, subject to a
constraint that the other agent receive a payoff no less than some minimal level. More
formally, let Vi (a1 , a2 ), i = 1, 2, be the payoff to agent i given the actions of herself and
the other agent. We have some baseline behavior, which in our case is given by the
Stackelberg equilibrium outcomes. In the Stackelberg equilibrium, the parents (agent
10

It is true that a number of well-known CCT experiments, such as PROGRESA in Mexico, provide
payments to households for what may be considered as inputs into the production technology of
cognitive development. In that experiment, most payments to parents were given for keeping their
children in school. Even in more developed settings, inputs may be incentivized. One prominent
example is Opportunity NYC-Family Rewards, which incentivized parents to take children to doctors
and dentists. However, the largest incentives were targeted towards outputs, such as a child’s grades
and examination performance in school.

12

1) choose all actions with the exception of the child’s time investment, τc , which is
identified as a2 . Then the welfare outcomes in the Stackelberg equilibrium are given by
V1S = V1 (aS1 , aS2 ); V2S = V2 (aS1 , aS2 ),
where aSj are the (unique) Stackelberg actions of player j. In order to trace out the
Pareto frontier associated with efficient outcomes, we allow one agent, agent 1 for
example, to choose both a1 and a2 , subject to the constraint that agent 2 has no lower
payoff than V 2 . Then one point on the Pareto frontier is given by (V1P (V 2 ), V 2 ), where
V1P (V 2 ) = max V1 (a1 , a2 )
a1 ,a2

s.t. V2 (a1 , a2 ) ≥ V 2 .
As we will show below, in our application the constraint V2 (a1 , a2 ) ≥ V 2 will always be
strictly binding. Then the Pareto frontier is defined by the set of points
(V1P (V 2 ), V 2 ), V 2 ∈ ℵ,
where ℵ is a set of feasible potential welfare levels of agent 2.
Now we discuss how the ICCT fits into this setting. The mechanism we envisage is
a mapping from the observed effort choice of the child, which is their study time τc,t in
period t, into the private consumption of the child in the period, xt . We first observe that
the parents can formulate a simple mapping that allows them to manipulate the child
to choose any τc,t that they desire, for any given (feasible) value of child consumption
xt , conditional on the child participating in the mechanism. This incentive scheme is
not unique. In what follows, we utilize the incentive function,
xt = exp(bt + rt ln τc,t ), t = 1, ..., M.
which contains the two parameters, bt and rt , and has some appealing features from
the point of view of characterization of the household equilibrium and computation.
For any choice of bt and rt , and for any strictly positive τc,t , this function restricts
the consumption of the child to be positive in all periods, which is required under our
functional form assumptions regarding parental and child utility.
In any development period t, given the child’s participation in the incentive scheme,
her best response to this policy function is given by
∗
τc,t
(τp,t , rt ) =

λ2 rt + ∆c,t
(T̃t − τp,t )
λ1 + λ2 rt + ∆c,t

= γt (rt )(T̃t − τp,t ),
where
γt (rt ) =

λ2 rt + ∆c,t
.
λ1 + λ2 rt + ∆c,t
13

We note that when rt = 0, this reaction function is that of the baseline Stackelberg
equilibrium in which the parents make a fixed transfer of xt to the child that is not
∗
tied to the child’s investment time. We see that the function τc,t
is continuous and
differentiable in rt , and that
∗
∂τc,t
λ1 λ2
=
> 0,
∂rt
(λ1 + λ2 rt + ∆c,t )2

so that the function is monotone increasing and invertible. Thus, for any value of τ̂c,t
that the parents desire, there exists a unique value of rt that generates it, subject to
the child participating in the incentive scheme.
Since the parents’ choice of τ̂c,t is attained using only one parameter of the incentive
function, rt , the other parameter, bt , can be used to select the value x̂t desired by the
parents. Then given r̂t (τ̂c,t ), we have
xt = exp(bt + r̂t (τ̂c,t ) ln τ̂c,t ),
so that for any feasible x̂t , we have
b̂t = ln x̂t − r̂t ln τ̂c,t .
For any feasible choice of the parents, (x̂t , τ̂c,t ), there is a unique pair (b̂t , r̂t ) that
implements it.
Proposition 1 The child’s participation constraint is always binding under the ICCT.
Proof. Whether or not an ICCT is employed, the parents make all decisions in the
household in each period given the reaction function of the child that they face. In
either case, the parents’ problem is
Vp,t (Γt ) =

max

∗ (τ
ap,t |τc,t
p,t ,rt ),Cp,t

ũp (l1,t , l2,t , ct , kt , lc,t , xt ) + βp Vp,t+1 (Γt+1 |ap,t ),

where ap,t are the actions chosen by the parents at time t facing the choice set Cp,t
∗
and the reaction function of the child τc,t
(τp,t , rt ). In the case in which an ICCT is used,
rt 6= 0. However, in either case, the objective function of the parents is linear in the log of
the child’s time investment, which is ln(τc,t ) = ln(γt (rt )(T̃t −τp,t )) = ln γt (rt )+ln(T̃t −τp,t )
and in the log of the child’s leisure, ln(lc,t ) = ln(T̃t − τp,t − γt (rt )(T̃t − τp,t )) = ln(1 −
γt (rt )) + ln(T̃t − τp,t ). These are the only terms of the parents’ objective function in
period t that involve the reaction function of the child. Then all of the parents’ first
order conditions used to determine their actions in period t are chosen independently
of the value of rt . This implies that the parents will make all of the same choices in
their (unconstrained) first-best equilibrium with the exception of rt , which is equal to
0 in the Stackelberg equilibrium. In particular, this means that the parents choose the
same level of child consumption in both cases, x∗t . Then given this value, after rt∗ is
chosen, we have
∗
)),
b∗t = ln x∗t − rt∗ ln(γt (rt∗ )(T̃t − τp,t
14

where the asterisks denote the optimal values under the ICCT. Thus all choices with
the exception of rt∗ are the same in the Stackelberg and the ICCT cases.
Since the child receives the same amount of consumption, x∗t in either equilibrium,
whenever her leisure consumption differs from the level that she “freely” chooses in the
Stackelberg equilibrium, her welfare level is lower in her parents’ first-best equilibrium
than it is in the Stackelberg equilibrium. This means that the parents’ first best equilibrium choices are not achievable when the child can exercise the credible option of
choosing the leisure level from the Stackelberg equilibrium.
We now know that when using an ICCT, the parents will be constrained to alter
their first-best choices so as to satisfy the participation constraint of the child. It will
immediately follow that the constrained first-best choice of the parents will have the
attractive property of efficiency.
Proposition 2 The parents’ constrained ICCT choice is efficient.
Proof. When the parents are able to make all choices for both parties, the solution by
definition is efficient since any other feasible choice must reduce the parents’ welfare.
In this case, the parents make all choices for the household under the ICCT, subject to
the participation constraint of the child, which enforces the child’s welfare to be no less
than it is in the Stackelberg case. Thus the parents’ constrained efficient choice lies on
the Pareto frontier and corresponds to the point at which the parents receive all of the
welfare surplus generated by the household moving from an inefficient outcome to an
efficient one.
We have shown that the parents weakly prefer the use of an ICCT to the noncooperative Stackelberg equilibrium. Given the continuity of the distribution of household
preferences, the probability of indifference is zero, so that with probability one parents
achieve a strictly higher welfare outcome under an ICCT than without one.

2.4

Subgame Perfection with an Internal CCT

We now consider whether the Internal CCT is subgame perfect, in the sense that the
mechanism can be supported in this finite horizon setting where the parents may have
the opportunity to renege on the promised level of child consumption given the child’s
choice of τc,t under the contract characterized by (bt , rt ).
We begin by considering the case in which the parents utilize an ICCT in the last
period of child development, M. We have already established that, with probability
one, the parents cannot achieve their first best choice in any period in which the ICCT
is utilized due to the fact that the child’s participation constraint is binding at this
point. This means that the parents have an incentive not to honor the terms of the
contract in period M. This is a common issue in any finite horizon setting.
Our response to the question of commitment in the last period (or any other) is to
rely on the special relationship between children and parents. We have assumed that
parents are altruistic, and in fact if they were “perfectly” altruistic in our setting, there
15

would be no question of commitment since their preferences would be identical to the
child’s. Even when altruism is “imperfect,” it may be reasonable to posit that parents
would not renege on a promise made to their children since it would cause them a great
deal of disutility. While such an argument could not possibly be made in the case of
two competitive firms, it may be more reasonable here.
Assume that reneging on the promised consumption made in the ICCT in period
M would yield the parents a disutility of ζ > 0, so that if they renege on their ICCT
promise in terms of period M child consumption, their period M value is given by
R
Vp,M
(ΓM ) = max uR
p,M (ΓM ) − ζ + βp Vp,M +1 (ΓM +1 ),
xM |ãp,M

where ãp,M are all of the other actions chosen by the parents in period M, including the
contracted value of τc,M from the incentives offered to the child, excluding the amount
of consumption actually given to the child in period M. By reducing the consumption
of the child below the promised amount, the parents can increase their own private
consumption. Notice that the future value of the parents, Vp,M +1 (ΓM +1 ), is assumed
not to change. This is due to the fact that all other choices affecting child cognitive
ability production are assumed to remain the same whether or not the parents renege
on the child’s promised consumption level under the ICCT. Thus the only argument
that changes is the child’s period M consumption level. Let ûR
p,M denote the maximized
value of parental utility in period M if the parents renege and let ûp,M denote their
value of utility in period M if they do not renege, with ûR
p,M > ûp,M with probability 1.
Then the difference in the parents’ value at time M from reneging and not reneging is
given by
R
Vp,M
(ΓM ) − Vp,M (ΓM ) = ûR
p,M − ζ − ûp,M .
Then the parents will not renege, meaning their compliance with the ICCT is guaranteed, when
ζ > ûR
p,M − ûp,M .
In other words, the disutility cost from reneging on the ICCT in period M must be
greater than the short-term utility gain from the parents’ increase in consumption.
We can easily extend this argument to early periods, t = 1, ..., M − 1. We will
assume that the child uses a grim-trigger strategy so that the parents non-compliance
with an ICCT in any period t results in the child not being willing to engage in an
ICCT in any future period. Since the parents’ welfare is unambiguously greater under
an ICCT in any period in which they choose to use one, this means that this represents
an additional non-negative cost to reneging on an ICCT in any period t < M. Denote
this cost by Ct . Then if the parents would never optimally use an ICCT in periods
t + 1, ..., M, then Ct = 0, while if they would employ an ICCT in any of the periods
t + 1, ..., M if the choice was available to them, then Ct > 0. Thus, the difference in the
value of reneging on a period t ICCT and not reneging is given by
R
Vp,t
(Γt ) − Vp,t (ΓM ) = ûR
p,t − ζ − Ct − ûp,t .

16

Then a sufficient condition for the parents to not renege on the child’s promised consumption under an ICCT in any period t, r = 1, ..., M, is
ζ > ûR
p,t − ûp,t , t = 1, ..., M.
We think of the disutility of disillusioning the child by not paying the promised
reward, ζ, as a characteristic of a parent somewhat akin to altruism. For purposes of
estimation, we have assumed that all parents share the same altruism parameter, ϕ,
and for purposes of this discussion we have assumed that all parents share the same
disutility of disillusioning their children, ζ. It may be that parents differ in their value
of ζ, in which case some parents may not be able to offer ICCTs because their direct
utility cost of reneging, ζ, is too low to make such a contract offer credible.

2.5

Choice of Using an Internal CCT

From the parents’ point of view, an internal CCT delivers a higher level of welfare than
does the case in which they make consumption tranfers to the child not explicitly tied
to her choice of investment time. Then shouldn’t all parents use such devices? Papers
by Akabayashi (1996, 2006), Weinberg (2001), Lizzeri and Siniscalchi (2008), Cosconati
(2009), Hotz and Pantano (2015), and Doepke and Zilibotti (2017) specifically focus on
the choices parents make among various forms of interaction with their children. When
modeling parent-child relationships, it is highly desirable to account for population
heterogeneity in these forms of behavior, and to make this choice endogenous. We
describe how we can accomplish this in a very simple and tractable manner within our
framework.
We denote the value of the parents’ period t problem when using an ICCT by
V̄p,t (Γt ), whereas the value of the parents’ problem without an ICCT is denoted by
Vp,t (Γt ). From our discussion above, we know that
V̄p,t (Γt ) ≥ Vp,t (Γt )
for all t and all Γt . In the case of an ICCT, the parents must monitor and measure the
investment time of the child, which we believe is not a costless activity.11 In any period
t in which an ICCT is implemented, the parents’ must pay a utility cost ωt , with the
population distribution of ωt given by Rt (ωt |Zt ), where the distribution Rt can depend
on some observable or unobservable household characteristic vector Zt and where the
support of Rt is R+ , and we assume that Rt is continuously differentiable on its support,
11

This is reminiscent of the often debated assumption of efficiency in cooperative household models.
In the work of Chiappori and coauthors, the assumption is made that all household choices are consistent with efficient behavior. These efficient choices are typically not best responses, and it is natural to
question whether sufficient monitoring exists within the household to implement such arrangements.
Lundberg and Pollak (1993) introduce the notion of cooperation costs in their analysis of household
behavior, in which some households may not cooperate if the utility costs of doing so are sufficiently
high. In a very stylized dynamic setting, Del Boca and Flinn (2012) formulate and estimate a model
in which in equilibrium some households behave cooperatively and others do not.

17

yielding the density rt (ωt |Zt ). In terms of the parents’ period t utility function, it is
modified to be of the form
ûp,t = up,t − χ[ιt = 1]ωt ,
where ιt is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 when the parents use an ICCT
in period t and that takes the value 0 if not. Because the utility cost is independent of
all choices made in the period, the choices made in period t if an ICCT is used will be
independent of the value of ωt . The solution to the parents’ period t problem in this
case is exactly as was described above. By the same token, if an internal CCT is not
used, the choices made are those made in the Stackelberg equilibrium.
We have added another choice to the parents’ choice set in period t, which is ιt .
By the structure of the problem, it is straightforward to characterize this choice. Since
decisions in all future periods are independent of the value of child quality, and since
the only dynamic implication of the choice of using an ICCT or not is in terms of the
child quality sequence, the current period choice of the parents to use an ICCT has no
effect on future decisions. Because of this, the use of an ICCT in period t does not
depend on whether an ICCT will be used in periods t + 1, ..., M. The use of an ICCT in
period t, will affect the distribution of next period’s state vector, Γt+1 . Then the value
of using an ICCT in period t is
up,t (aIp,t ) − ωt + βp Vp,t+1 (Γt+1 (aIp,t , Γt )),
where we have dropped the child’s actions a2 from this expression since the parent
effectively makes all decisions when an ICCT is utilized. The value of not using an
ICCT in period t is
up,t (aSp,t , aSc,t ) + βp Vp,t+1 (Γt+1 (aSp,t , aSc,t , Γt )).
Then the parents will use an ICCT if
up,t (aIp,t ) − ωt + βp Vp,t+1 (Γt+1 (aIp,t , Γt )) > up,t (aSp,t , aSc,t ) + βp Vp,t+1 (Γt+1 (aSp,t , aSc,t , Γt ))
⇒ up,t (aIp,t ) + βp Vp,t+1 (Γt+1 (aIp,t , Γt )) − up,t (aSp,t , aSc,t ) − βp Vp,t+1 (Γt+1 (aSp,t , aSc,t , Γt )) > ωt .
Since the left-hand side of the second line is always positive, every household has a
positive probability of implementing an ICCT in any period t.
To recap, the parents collectively have two choices regarding behavior. By paying
the utility cost ωt in period t, they are able to implement an efficient household allocation of resources in which they receive all of the surplus. If they do not pay this utility
cost, they obtain a welfare level generated in the Stackelberg (inefficient) equilibrium.
Their welfare under the first arrangement in the efficient equilibrium always exceeds
their Stackelberg welfare level. Since child quality is a public good, the amount produced in the cooperative equilibrium will typically exceed the amount produced in the
Stackelberg equilibrium.12 A social planner solely concerned with the distribution of
12

As noted above, there could be preference draws for which the efficient solution would involve a
reduction in the child’s human capital. Given our estimates, the likelihood of such draws is essentially
zero.

18

child quality in the population would generally prefer that all households utilize ICCTs.
We shall return to this point in Section 6, below.

3

Data and Descriptive Statistics

We utilize data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the first two
waves of the Child Development Supplements (CDS-I and CDS-II). The PSID is a
longitudinal study that began in 1968 with a nationally representative sample of about
5,000 American families, with an oversample of black and low-income families. In 1997,
the PSID began collecting data on a random sample of the PSID families that had
children under the age of 13 (CDS-I). Data were collected for up to two children in
this age range per family. The CDS collects information on child development and
family dynamics, including parent-child relationships, home environment, indicators of
children’s health, cognitive achievements, socio-emotional development, and time use.
The entire CDS sample size in 1997 is approximately 3,500 children residing in 2,400
households. A follow-up study with these children and families was conducted in 200203 (CDS-II), and a third wave was released in 2007 (CDS-III). These children were
between the ages of 8-18 in 2003. No new children were added to the study after the
initial wave (Hofferth et al. (1998)).

3.1

Sample Selection

All of our results are based on a selected sample of households that satisfy several
criteria. First, included households are intact over the observed period (i.e. only stable
two-parent households). Second, households have either one or two children. We select
only one child from each household (see below). Third, all children are biological; there
are no adopted children and no step-parents. Fourth, all selected children are at least
three years old during the first wave of the CDS (CDS-I in 1997), because we need access
to an initial Letter Word (LW) score observation. Fifth, all selected children have an
observed LW score in 1997 and in 2002. Some of these also have an observed LW score
in 2007 (CDS-III) as well, although it is not required. Sixth, if a household has two
eligible siblings satisfying the previous two requirements, we select the youngest. This
has two potential advantages: parental labor supply is probably more responsive to the
age of the youngest sibling than the age of the oldest sibling, and we also have a higher
chance of observing the youngest sibling in CDS-III, which enriches the total sample.
We keep only data observations for selected children whose age is between 0 and 16 at
the interview date for waves 1 through 3.
Overall, these selection criteria yield a sample of N = 247 children (or households).
Appendix B contains more detailed information about the sample selection procedure.
Tables 1, 2 and 3 contain some descriptive statistics of our sample of households. Next,
we discuss the various data components in more detail.

19

3.2

Child’s Time Allocation

Starting in 1997, children’s time diaries were collected along with detailed assessments of
children’s cognitive development. For two days within a week (one weekday and either
Saturday or Sunday), children (with the assistance of the primary caregiver when the
children were very young) filled out a detailed 24 hour time diary in which they recorded
all activities during the day and who else (if anyone) participated with the child in these
activities. At any point in time, the children recorded the intensity of participation of
their parents: mothers and fathers could be actively participating or engaging with the
child or simply around the child but not actively involved. In this paper, we partition
productive child time into four categories of inputs: (1) active time with the mother
alone, τ1 , (2) active time with the father alone, τ2 , (3) active time with both parents,
τ12 and (4) the child’s productive self-investment time, τc . Active time with the mother
is defined as the total time where the mother is actively participating with the child,
while the father is either not around or only passively participating. Active time with
the father is defined analogously. Joint parental time is defined as the total time when
both parents are simultaneously participating actively with the child. As such, the
total parental time in investment activities (τp = τ1 + τ2 + τ12 ) comprises all activities
where at least one parent is actively involved. Finally, the child’s self-investment time
is defined as any “productive” activity where neither parent is actively involved, such
as doing homework, studying, reading, solving puzzles or playing educational games.
One or both of the parents could be present in the home during this time, but neither
were actively interacting with the child. For each type of child investment time, we
construct a weekly measure by multiplying the daily hours by 5 for the weekday report
and 2 for the weekend day report (using a Saturday and Sunday report adjustment)
and summing the total hours for each category of time.
It is likely that much of the child self-investment time we observe is due to homework
assignments. Although the time spent in homework assignments is partially under the
control of teachers or others outside of the household, the survey data created by and
analyzed in Cooper et al. (1998) make clear that there is considerable variability in
the amount of homework assigned by teachers in the same grade level, and that all
homework assigned is not completed. Their survey instrument included questions only
related to the completion of homework, and therefore does not measure any other type
of “self-investment.”, such as additional reading a child might do outside of homework
assignments. For these reasons we believe that our measure of self-investment time is
considerably broader than the homework time measures used in previous studies, such as
those surveyed in Cooper et al. (2006).13 Although teachers’ homework assignments are
an important factor, we argue that the level of self-investment observed in a household
is largely determined by the actions of the parents and the child.
13

The data produced by the National Educational Longitudinal Study (NELS) and other secondary
databases that are most frequently used in assessing the relationship between study time and outcomes
specifically ask for time spent in completing homework. Thus broader measures of child self-investment
time cannot be constructed using these data sources.

20

Table 3 shows how these four types of time investment evolve as children age. We
see a clear decrease in both mothers’ and fathers’ active time with their children as they
age, although this decreasing trend is not so obvious for joint parental time. As children
age, we see a clear increase in their average self-investment time. Taken together, the
evolution of these four time investment choices highlights the intuitive notion that
children become more independent as they age.
In the bottom row of Table 3, we show how the child’s school time (st ) evolves with
child age. Although we observe school time in the CDS data, we believe these data to
be relatively noisy. Table B-1 shows the detailed distribution of reported school time
for every child age. Given the implausibly wide data range of these reported school
times, we only use the median of these reported values (conditional on child age t),
and use that as a measure to define the child’s effective time endowment at age t as
T̃t = 112 − med(st ). Appendix B contains more details on how we constructed school
time.

3.3

Parental Labor Supply, Wages and Income

By linking the time survey data from the CDS to the labor supply and income data
from the PSID, we can complete the parents’ weekly time allocation. We define weekly
labor hours of mothers and fathers (h1 and h2 , respectively) as the total yearly reported
number of labor hours for each spouse, divided by 52. Parental “leisure” is the residual
time not spent working or with the selected child. This “leisure” time can include time
spent exclusively with a non-sample child, if the household has more than 1 child. Note
that we do include any time spent with the sample child, even if that time is also spent
with siblings.14 From the perspective of the sample child, this definition of parental
“leisure” is inconsequential: time spent exclusively with other children does not directly
influence their own development.
Using the main PSID data, we define hourly wages (w1,t and w2,t ) as the total yearly
reported income from labor for each spouse, divided by their total yearly hours. Nonlabor income (It ) is defined as the total yearly household income minus the yearly labor
incomes reported for each spouse.
The monetary values have been deflated and are expressed in terms of 2007 dollars.
All wage and income information is used in estimating the model. Note that since
the PSID was only administered every two years after 1996, we do not have yearly
data for labor supply and income. For the time use surveys and the children’s test
scores which we only observe every 5 years, these gaps in the data become even more
salient. Our econometric implementation (which relies on the Method of Simulated
Moments, discussed in Section 4) accomodates this data structure and makes use of all
the available information we have.
Table 1 contains the unconditional averages of the parents’ hourly wages and weekly
non-labor income. Table 2 summarizes the parents’ labor supply behavior for various
14

See Del Boca et al. (2014) for an analysis of the allocation of time across siblings.

21

child ages, both on the extensive and intensive margins. Whereas fathers’ labor supply
does not seem to vary much with the child’s age, mothers work fewer hours when
the child is very young (age 3). Note that the composition of our sample includes
households with two children for which, depending on the observable time survey and
test score data for the children, we do not always select the youngest sibling. This may
partially explain why we do not see a very clear upward trend in maternal labor force
participation as the child ages, as has been documented in other studies. Finally, the
first two rows of Table 3 contain the unconditional average work hours of either spouse,
i.e. averaging over both working and non-working parents.

3.4

Skill Measures

Given the wide range of ages to which the Woodcock Johnson Letter-Word (LW) test
was administered, we use this test as our measure of child development. We use the
raw scores on this exam rather than the age-standardized scores, and allow our model
describe the development process. The test contains 57 items (so that in terms of our
discussion in Section 4, N Q = 57), and the range of possible raw scores is from 0 to
57. Our econometric framework accommodates the discreteness and the particular floor
and ceiling of this test score measure. Table 1 shows the unconditional average test
scores taken from each CDS wave. Figure 2 shows how the average test scores increase
smoothly with child age.

4

Econometric Implementation and Identification

In this section, we discuss the functional form assumptions we make use of in estimation,
how we use the combined PSID and CDS data to identify the parameters characterizing
the model, and describe the estimation method.

4.1
4.1.1

Econometric Specification
Preferences

Household preferences are assumed to be fixed over time. However, we do allow for a rich
distribution of heterogeneity in the utility functions of the parents and the child. Each
household’s utility parameters (α for parents, λ for child) are assumed to be an i.i.d.
draw from the distribution G(α, λ; θ), where G is a parametric distribution function
characterized by the finite-dimensional parameter vector θ. For the parents’
preferences,
P
the four-dimensional vector α = (α1 α2 α3 α4 )0 is defined such that j αj = 1, αj > 0,
j = 1, . . . , 4. Similarly, P
the child’s preferences are given by a three-dimensional vector
0
λ = (λ1 λ2 λ3 ) , where j λj = 1, λj > 0, j = 1, 2, 3. These restrictions are standard
and ensure that utility is increasing in each argument and the summations impose an
inconsequential normalization on the utility functions of the parents and the child.

22

We allow a large degree of flexibility in the distribution G. The distribution is
generated by the latent vector of random variables v = (v1 v2 ... v5 ), where v has a
multivariate normal distribution with mean vector µv and covariance matrix Σv . The
normal random variables v map into the preference parameters as follows:
exp(v2 )
exp(v1 )
, α2 =
,
1 + exp(v1 + v2 + v3 )
1 + exp(v1 + v2 + v3 )
1
exp(v3 )
, α4 =
,
α3 =
1 + exp(v1 + v2 + v3 )
1 + exp(v1 + v2 + v3 )
exp(v5 )
1
exp(v4 )
, λ2 =
, λ3 =
.
λ1 =
1 + exp(v4 + v5 )
1 + exp(v4 + v5 )
1 + exp(v4 + v5 )
P4
This
mapping
ensures
that
all
preference
parameters
are
positive
and
that
i=1 αi =
P3
λ
=
1.
The
vector
µ
and
the
matrix
Σ
contain
a
total
of
20
free
parameters,
v
v
i=1 i
so that the distribution of G is quite flexibly parameterized. In practice, we found it
difficult to obtain precise estimates of these 20 parameters, and as a result we have
imposed a few restrictions on the parameters appearing in the covariance matrix of
v. In particular, we have fixed σ1,5 = σ2,5 = σ3,4 = 0. Although this constrains
certain elements of the v vector to be independently distributed under our normality
assumption, the nonlinear mapping of v into the parameter space describing preferences
generates dependence between all preference parameters, but with dependence between
the parameters α1 and λ2 , α2 and λ2 , and α3 and λ1 more restricted. These parameter
pairs consist of valuations of leisure by one agent (either the parents or the child) and
the value of consumption of the other, which we do not expect to be strongly related.
We also estimate three additional preference parameters (ξp , ξc , κ). The first two
parameters enter into the terminal (heterogeneous) valuations of child human capital,
kM +1 , by the parents (ψp,M +1 = ξp α4 ) and the child (ψc,M +1 = ξc λ3 ), respectively. The
third parameter, κ, governs the distribution of the instantaneous utility costs associated
with implementing an internal CCT. The utility cost, ω, is assumed to stay fixed over
time but can vary across households.15 For each household, the value of ω is drawn
from an exponential distribution with mean and standard deviation κ. These three
parameters (ψp,M +1 , ψc,M +1 , κ) are assumed to be the same for all households. Taken
together, this implies that the distribution of household preferences is characterized by
20 free parameters.
Finally, we allow for differences in the discount factors between parents and children,
allowing for different degrees of “patience.” The child’s discount rate is allowed to be
age-varying, with the child’s level of patience increasing as she ages. The discount
factors are determined outside of the model using experimental data generously supplied
by Laurence Steinberg of Temple University. These data are described in Steinberg et
al. (2009).
α1 =

15

It is straightforward computationally to allow there to be time varying cost ω , but we believe that
this characteristic of households is likely to be highly persistent.

23

4.1.2

Production Technology

As noted above, we allow the production function parameters to vary with the age of
the child and with respect to the educational levels of the parents in household h. We
economize on parameters by assuming that the input-specific productivity parameters
are given by
δh,1,t =
δh,2,t =
δh,3,t =
δ4,t =
δ5,t =
δ6,t =
Rt =

exp(γ1,0 + γ1,1 (t − 1) + γ1,2 sh,1 )
,
1 + exp(γ1,0 + γ1,1 (t − 1) + γ1,2 sh,1 )
exp(γ2,0 + γ2,1 (t − 1) + γ2,2 sh,2 )
,
1 + exp(γ2,0 + γ2,1 (t − 1) + γ2,2 sh,2 )
exp(γ3,0 + γ3,1 (t − 1) + γ3,2 sh,1 + γ3,3 sh,2 )
,
1 + exp(γ3,0 + γ3,1 (t − 1) + γ3,2 sh,1 + γ3,3 sh,2 )
exp(γ4,0 + γ4,1 (t − 1))
,
1 + exp(γ4,0 + γ4,1 (t − 1))
exp(γ5,0 + γ5,1 (t − 1))
,
1 + exp(γ5,0 + γ5,1 (t − 1))
exp(γ6,0 + γ6,1 (t − 1))
,
1 + exp(γ6,0 + γ6,1 (t − 1))
γ7,1 − γ7,0
γ7,0 +
1 + exp(−γ7,2 (t − γ7,3 )

where h indexes the household and sh,1 and sh,2 are the mother and father’s years of
schooling, respectively. The productivity of the input is restricted to be monotonic in
the age of the child, with the characteristics of the parents potentially entering as shifters
of the profile. The parental schooling levels, meant to roughly capture the human capital
levels of the parents, only appear in the δ productivity parameters connected with the
time inputs of the parents (with mother’s schooling appearing in the mother’s time
productivity parameter, father’s schooling in the father’s time productivity parameter,
and both parents’ schooling in the joint time productivity parameter). Our specification
is intended to capture the possibility that parents with higher human capital can provide
higher quality time inputs to their children. For the Total Factor Productivity process
(Rt ), we have adopted a flexible generalized logistic parametrization which imposes
monotonicity in the child’s age.
4.1.3

Wage Offers

The parental hourly wage offer processes are assumed to have the following structure
for each parent i = 1, 2, in household h
ln wh,i,t = η0,i + η1,i ageh,i,t + η2,i sh,i + εh,i,t
where ageh,i,t is the age of parent i when the child is age t. η1,i is a the age coefficient for
parent i, and η2,i is the labor market “return” to schooling for parent i. The wage shocks
24

are assumed to be serially uncorrelated draws from the following joint distribution:

 0 σ 2 σ
w
,w
(εh,1,t , εh,2,t ) ∼ N
, w1 1 2 2
σw1 ,w2 σw2
0
where σw1 ,w2 (= ρ12 σw1 σw2 ) is the contemporaneous covariance between the parental
wage shocks. Any correlation between these disturbances (ρ12 6= 0) could arise through
assortative mating on unobservable determinants of wages and from the parents inhabiting the same local labor market. Although we assume the shocks are independent
over time, this is not implied by the model structure and is not a necessary assumption
for identification of the key model parameters. We can allow for temporal dependence
at some computational cost.
4.1.4

Non-Labor Income

We restrict non-labor income Ih,t to be non-negative for all households and periods.
We assume non-labor income is a function of the parent’s ages and their schooling.
In particular, we first define the probability of household h having a strictly positive
non-labor income level in period t as
P r(Ih,t > 0) =

exp(ζh,t )
1 + exp(ζh,t )

where
ζh,t = µ1 + µ2 ageh,1,t + µ3 age2h,1,t + µ4 ageh,2,t + µ5 age2h,2,t + µ6 sh,1 + µ7 sh,2 .
If non-labor income is positive, the level of non-labor income is determined as follows:
ln Ih,t = µ8 + µ9 ageh,1,t + µ10 age2h,1,t + µ11 ageh,2,t + µ12 age2h,2,t + µ13 sh,1 + µ14 sh,2 + εIh,t ,
where the shock εIh,t is assumed to be i.i.d. N (0, σI2 ) for all h, t.
The non-labor income parameters can be identified outside of the remaining model
structure because the non-labor income process is strictly exogenous and Ih,t is observed
for all households. We estimate the 15 parameters governing this non-labor process in
a first step, and bootstrap all parameters of the full model repeating this first step
for each bootstrap data draw in order to account for sampling variation in this initial
step. To simulate the non-labor income process we use simulation, first drawing from a
Bernoulli distribution with probability P r(Ih,t > 0) to determine if income is positive
or 0, and, if positive, then drawing again from a Normal distribution to simulate the
level of non-labor income.
4.1.5

Measuring Child Quality

Rather than assume the stock of child quality (or skills) are perfectly measured in our
data, we allow for only imperfect measures. To derive the mapping between unobserved
25

(latent) child quality, kt , and measured child quality, kt∗ in our data, we build on the
approach utilized by psychometricians (see, e.g., chapter 17 in Lord and Novick, 1968).
Consistent with prior research on this subject, we consider child quality to be inherently
unobservable to the analyst, although we assume that it is observable by household
members, since it is a determinant of the household utility level and is a (potential)
input into the decision-making process.
Most cognitive test scores, such as the one used in our empirical work, are simple
sums of the number of questions answered correctly by the test-taker. If a child of
age t has a quality level of kt , the probability that they correctly answer a question
of difficulty d is p(kt , d). It is natural to assume that p is non-decreasing in its first
argument for all d and is non-increasing in its second argument for all kt . Taking the
model to data, we assume that the test used in the empirical analysis consists of equally
“difficult” questions, and we drop the argument d for simplicity.
Given a cognitive ability test consisting of N Q items of equal difficulty, the number
of correct answers, kt∗ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N Q} is distributed as a Binomial random variable
with parameters (N Q, p(kt )). Note that the randomness inherent in the test-taking process implies that the mapping between latent k and observed k ∗ is stochastic, and that
a child of latent skill kt has a positive probability of answering each question correctly.
For a child of latent skill kt , the expected number of questions she answers correctly
is given by p(kt )N Q. Our measurement model then achieves two goals: (i) we map
a continuous latent child quality defined on (0, ∞) into a discrete test score measure
imposing the measurement floor at 0 and ceiling at N Q < ∞, and (ii) we allow for the
possibility of measurement error so that a child’s score may not perfectly reflect her
latent quality. Previous research has often used linear (or log-linear) continuous measurement equations, e.g., Cunha and Heckman (2008), Cunha et al. (2010), Agostinelli
and Wiswall (2016). Our approach differs from this in using a measurement process
that explicitly recognizes the discrete and finite nature of the test score measure.
In order to identify the model, we do have to take a position on the form of the
function p(kt ). In addition to it being nondecreasing in kt , we would like it to possess the
properties: limkt →0 p(kt ) = 0 and limkt →∞ p(kt ) = 1. We choose the following function
that satisfies these restrictions:
p(kt ) =

exp(λ0,t + λ1,t ln kt )
1 + exp(λ0,t + λ1,t ln kt )

(2)

where λ0,t and λ1,t > 0 are measurement parameters.16
16

An alternative, but equivalent, formulation that makes clear the role of measurement error is to
write that a child of latent quality k answers a test item correctly if λ0 + λ1 ln k +  > 0, and incorrectly
otherwise.  in this formulation is the stochastic measurement error. If  takes on an i.i.d. extreme
value distribution, then the probability of answering a test item correctly takes the familiar form given
by (2).

26

4.2

Identification

We next discuss how the primitive parameters of the model can be recovered using the
observed data. Given the complexity of the model, we focus on some key identification
issues and provide some basic intuition, rather than attempting to provide a rigorous
proof of identification. Since we do not utilize a likelihood-based estimator and since
the model is nonlinear in parameters, a rigorous demonstration of identification is problematic in any case. In general, our identification strategy relies on the availability of
rich data from the PSID-CDS on parental and child time allocation, wages, non-labor
income, and measures of child cognitive ability. However, even with these data, we face
four major identification challenges: (1) the classic non-random selection problem associated with the observation of wage offers only for those who are employed, (2) the fact
that children’s skills/quality are not directly observed but only imperfectly measured
in our data, (3) the existence of gaps in the time series coverage of the panel data that
we utilize, and (4) the household’s choice of whether to use an ICCT is not observed
directly.
4.2.1

Wage Offers and Non-Labor Income

The wage offer processes of the parents, although exogenous, cannot be estimated
directly outside of the model due to the well-known problem of endogenous selection.
The log wage offer process is given by
w
ln wh,i,t = Zh,i,t
ηi + εh,i,t , h = 1, ..., N ; i = 1, 2;
w
is the vector of observed covariates of parent i in household h at time
where Zh,i,t
t, ηi is a conformable parameter vector, and εh,i,t is normally distributed with mean
0 and variance σw2 i , and where E(εh,1,t εh,2,t ) = σw1 ,w2 . The disturbances are otherwise
independently distributed over time and across households. Although we have access to
wage observations for multiple periods, wage observations are non-randomly missing due
to the significant number of corner solutions associated with labor supply choices. This
type of systematic selection is particularly troublesome when preferences are treated as
random in the population. In this case, observing a parent not supplying time to the
labor market is consistent with that parent’s wage offer being low, the household utility
function weight on that parent’s leisure being high, that parent’s time with the child
being highly productive, or for a number of other reasons. In order to “extrapolate”
preferences and wages when a large number of households have at least one parent out of
the labor force requires parametric assumptions on both parents’ wage offer functions.
Under our model specification, we can “correct” our estimator of model parameters for
the non-randomly missing data using the DGP structure from the model. In this case,
both the wage processes and the parameters characterizing preferences and production
technologies must be simultaneously estimated.
This is not the case with respect to non-labor income. Since we have assumed that
this process is strictly exogenous, and that Ih,t is observed for all time periods in which

27

non-labor income data is available for household h, we can estimate this process outside
of the model. Identification is achieved both through time-series and cross-sectional
variation in the PSID data.
4.2.2

Production Technology

It is typically straightforward to consistently estimate production function parameters
if the output level and all inputs are observed, and if the choice of inputs is not a
function of any stochastic component of the production technology. For our cognitive
ability production technology, we allow for mis-measured child skills (the output of the
skill technology) and an additively separable disturbance term that is independently
distributed with respect to the inputs. Identification first requires solving the generic
problem of indeterminacy due to the fact that latent child quality/skill k does not have
any natural units. This can be accomplished by normalizing for one age t̃ the λ0,t̃ , λ1,t̃
measurement parameters. We choose the normalization λ0,t̃ = 0, λ1,t̃ = 1, thus fixing
the location and scale of latent skills at all ages kt to the age t̃ measure. Second,
we cannot separately identify an age-varying measurement system (parametrized by
the λ0,t , λ1,t parameters) from age-varying production function primitives δ1,t , . . . , δ6,t
and Rt . We solve this under-identification problem by assuming that the measurement
system is age-invariant as in Agostinelli and Wiswall (2016), and assume λ0,t = 0 and
λ1,t = 1 for all t.
For purposes of discussion, we will assume that we have access to the normalized
measures of child quality at two ages, t and t + 1. Then we can write the log production
function for household h as
ln kh,t+1 = ln Rt + ln Zh,t δt + φt ln kh,t + εh,t ,
where εh,t is the disturbance term for household h at age t, ln Rt is the age t log of
TFP, ln Zh,t is the row vector of log time and money inputs selected by household h in
period t, δt is a conformable column vector of technology parameters, and φt is a scalar
parameter measuring persistence of the process at age t. Under our modeling assumptions, households are heterogeneous in preferences but all share the same production
technology, with the exception that the productivities of certain time inputs are allowed
to depend on two parental characteristics, the schooling levels of the mother and father,
in a parametric manner. For now, we will ignore this dependency, but will conclude
this section by arguing that this generalized production function is still identified given
our parametric assumptions.
Under the assumptions of Cobb-Douglas preferences and a Cobb-Douglas growth
technology, we have seen that the input choices of a household at age t are not directly
a function of the current level of child cognitive ability, so that conditional on all other
household characteristics, Zh,t and kh,t are independent. Of course, unconditionally they
are not, since both depend on state variables that exhibit temporal dependence.17 We
17

Choice variables in Zh,t are related to the level of child skill indirectly through the parental

28

assume that the disturbance term εh,t is mean independent of the inputs and current
period ability level, so that E(εh,t |Zh,t , kh,t ) = 0, ∀(h, t), and we assume that εh,t is
independently distributed over time for each household. These are not particularly
strong assumptions, since we know that the investment decisions of the household are
independent of TFP, and the term ln Rt + εh,t can be viewed as household-specific TFP.
if all of the arguments in Zh,t are available in the PSID and CDS data, given measures
of kh,t+1 and kh,t , OLS estimates of the parameter vector (ln Rt δt φt ) are both unbiased
and consistent. Even though for each household h we only have two or three points in
time at which k and Z are measured, consistently estimating the age-specific parameter
vector is possible given sufficiently large numbers of households at each age t, viewing
the entire sample as constituting a synthetic cohort of children and parents progressing
through the development process.18
We have described the best case scenario for estimating the age-specific production
function parameters, and now we describe some of the complications we face in the
actual estimation of these parameters.
Systematically Missing Data Although our model period is annual, gaps in the
CDS data that make it impossible to use successive observations on child quality along
with inputs to identify the production parameters directly. We observe an imperfect
measure of child quality in 1997 (a score on a cognitive test), along with the factor
utilization levels in that year, but we only observe the next measure of child quality
five years later in 2002; for some households we also have a third observation in 2007.
In between these dates, input decisions have been made and levels of child quality have
been determined; these input decisions depend on wage and non-labor income draws in
the intervening years.
One approach to accommodating the gaps in the time series of our panel data is to
reduce the number of decision-making periods, collapsing the dynamic model to just
a few periods (a single period for early and another for late childhood, say). Given
the rapid changes in child development, even during a single year, we instead prefer to
assume that the decision-period frequency is annual. In this case, we measure the initial
child quality and input decisions at age t, and only observe subsequent child cognitive
ability at age t + 5. After repeated substitution, we have
t+4
t+4
ln kh,t+5 = a1 ({ln Rs }t+4
s=t ) + a2 ({Zh,s }s=1 ) + a3 ln kh,t + a1 ({εh,s }s=t ),

(3)

wage offers, non-labor income, and household preferences. For example, highly educated parents have
higher wage offers and non-labor income and their children have higher levels of latent skill. Our model
captures all of these fundamental relationships.
18
One issue is that we do not have complete data on expenditures on child specific goods, an element
of Z. As we discuss below and detail in the Appendix, we lean on our model structure, in particular
the implication that chid good expenditures in any period are a given function of household income,
up to some unknown preference parameters. These preference parameters are identified from other
household behavior (time allocation choices), as discussed below.

29

where
a1 ({Xs }t+4
s=t ) = Xt+4 + φt+4 Xt+3 + φt+4 φt+3 Xt+2 + φt+4 φt+3 φt+2 Xt+1
+φt+4 · · · φt+1 Xt ,
t+4
a2 ({Zh,s }s=t ) = Zh,t+4 δt+4 + φt+4 Zh,t+3 δt+3 + φt+4 φt+3 Zh,t+2 δt+2
+φt+4 φt+3 φt+2 Zh,t+1 δt+1 + φt+4 · · · φt+1 Zh,t δt ,
a3 = φt+4 · · · φt .
The main problem confronting us is the lack of information on the sequence of
inputs Zh,t+1 , ..., Zh,t+4 . The input choice of household h at any time t depends on a
subset of the state variables characterizing the household, which we denote by Γ̃h,t =
(wh,1,t wh,2,t Ih,t Υh ), where Υh denotes the values of the preference parameters for the
household, which is a draw from the preference parameter distribution G. As we know,
the input decision in period t does not depend on the value of kh,t or of previous values
kh,t−1 , kh,t−2 , ..., conditional on Γ̃h,t . The state variables wh,1,t , wh,2,t , Ih,t are functions of
exogenous shocks and observable household characteristics that evolve deterministically
over time. Let the value of these covariates at any time t be given by Hh,t . As we
have seen above, we have written the wage offer processes of the parents and the nonlabor income process as parametric functions of Hh,t . For the moment, assume that the
parameters of these three exogenous processes are known, and further assume further
that the preference parameter distribution G is also known. Then we can form the
expected values
E(Zh,s |Hh,s ), s = t + 1, ..., t + 4,
where the expectation is taken with respect to the shocks to the wage and income
processes at time s and the preference parameter distribution G. Then we can define
the expectation of the function a2 as follows:
t+4
Ea2 ({Zh,s }t+4
s=t |{Hh,s }s=t+1 ) = E(Zh,t+4 |Hh,t+4 )δt+4 + φt+4 E(Zh,t+3 |Hh,t+3 )δt+3
+ φt+4 φt+3 E(Zh,t+2 |Hh,t+2 )δt+2 + φt+4 φt+3 φt+2 E(Zh,t+1 |Hh,t+1 )δt+1 + φt+4 · · · φt+1 Zh,t δt .

Then (3) becomes
t+4
t+4
ln kh,t+5 = a1 ({ln Rs }t+4
s=t ) + Ea2 ({Zh,s }s=t |{Hh,s }s=t+1 ) + a3 ln kh,t
t+4
t+4
t+4
+a1 ({εh,s }t+4
s=t ) + [a2 ({Zh,s }s=t ) − Ea2 ({Zh,s }s=t |{Hh,s }s=t+1 )],

(4)

where the expression on the last line, which is the composite disturbance term, is meanindependent of Zh,t and {Hh,s }t+4
s=t+1 . In this case, OLS estimation of (4) yields consistent
estimates of the parameters characterizing the function a1 and the combination of
parameters
δt+4 , φt+4 δt+3 , φt+4 φt+3 δt+2 , φt+4 φt+3 φt+2 δt+1 , φt+4 · · · φt+1 δt , t = 3, ..., 12.
We have a reasonably large number of children in each age group t = 3, ..., 12 in 1997.
This means that as we vary the initial t, we have consistent estimates of δ7 , δ8 , ..., δ16 ,
30

among other combinations of parameters. The δs , s = 7, ..., 16, are parametric functions
of s. Ignoring the dependence on parental education for the moment, they are functions
of only two parameters for each input, since the production parameter associated with
an input j (j = 1, ..., 5) at age t is
δj,t =

exp(γj,0 + γj,1 (t − 1))
.
1 + exp(γj,0 + γj,1 (t − 1))

Having consistent estimates for δj,t , t = 7, ..., 16, allows us to consistently estimate γj,0
and γj,1 for each input j. The same argument applies with respect to the identification
of the scalar parameters, φs , since these are specified as a two-parameter function of s.
The ln Rs process is specified as a four-parameter function of s. Given the consistent
estimates of the φ sequence, these four parameters are identified as well. In fact, all
of the parameters in the production technology are over-identified under our functional
form assumptions.
4.2.3

Preference Parameters

In this subsection, we make the argument that under certain ideal conditions regarding data availability, the distribution of preferences G is nonparametrically identified.
This is due to the simple structure of the choice problem and the fact that, given all
of the state variables of the problem, including household preferences, the actions of
the household are uniquely determined. Our argument is slightly complicated by the
possibility that the household may be behaving “non-cooperatively” or cooperatively,
and there is no direct information in the data that indicates which behavioral rule the
household is utilizing. We will begin by assuming that all households are operating in
the non-cooperative Stackelberg equilibrium.
The choices of household h in period t are summarized by the actions ah,t . The
+1
investment process that determines the sequence of {kh,s }M
s=1 is the only endogenous
dynamic process in the model, so that the decision rules determining time allocations
in the household in any period s, s = 1, ..., M, are very simple to characterize given
knowledge of the state variables in each period s, and no decisions actually depend on
the value of kh,s in any period. Due to the fact that we introduced the joint time of
the parents, τh,12,t as an argument in the production technology, there is not a closed
form solution to the household choice problem in period t, as there was when this
argument was not present in the more restrictive model contained in Del Boca et al.
(2014). Nonetheless, there is a unique mapping from the state variables of the problem,
including preferences, in period t, Γh,t = (wh,1,t wh,2,t Ih,t kh,t αh ), where ah denotes the
vector of preference parameters for household h, and ah,t , so that ah,t = a∗ (Γh,t ). If all
actions ah,t were observable in period t, as well as wh,1,t , wh,2,t , and Ih,t (kh,t need not
be observed since period t decisions are not a function of kh,t ), then a∗ is invertible in
terms of the preference parameter vector, with
αh = (a∗ )−1 (ah,t |wh,1,t wh,2,t Ih,t ).
31

The argument for the invertibility of this function follows Del Boca and Flinn (2012).
Given this invertibility in terms of αh , observations from only one period for each sample
household can be used to back out the vectors αh , h = 1, ..., N. Given that households
are randomly sampled from the population of all intact households with children, then
the empirical distribution of the αh is a nonparametric maximum likelihood estimator
of G, or ĜN . Asymptotically, we have limN →∞ ĜN = G at all points of continuity of G.
Since we are assuming that G is absolutely continuous everywhere on its domain, then
ĜN is a consistent estimator of G.
Missing Data and the Estimation of G In point of fact, the PSID and the
CDS do not include information on all of the household’s choices in any period t. In
particular, we do not observe all of the actions chosen by a household h in any period t.
Given the CDS data, we do have an observation on all of the time allocations, including
hours worked of the parents, time parents spend with the child, and the child’s time
“investing” by herself. We do not have direct information on the private consumption of
the parents and the child, ch,t and xh,t , respectively. In order to simplify the computation
of the model solution and to enhance identification of the model, we have assumed that
there are no capital markets available for borrowing or saving. This means that total
expenditures in the period are equal to total income, so that
xh,t + ch,t + eh,t = wh,1,t hh,1,t + wh,2,t hh,2,t + Ih,t .
Since we observe all of the arguments on the right-hand side, and since a measure of eh,t
is available in the CDS data for the years in which it is administered, we only observe
total household consumption, xh,t + ch,t , and not the individual amounts consumed by
the parents and the child within each household h.19 By our assumptions regarding the
time endowment of the parent’s and child’s and the types of activities to which time
can be devoted, we can infer the quantity of leisure consumed by parents and the child
as the time remaining after all other activities have been accounted for.
If xh,t and ch,t were observed for all households, and if all parents in the population of
intact households with children supplied positive amounts of time to the labor market in
some period t (so that hh,1,t > 0 and hh,2,t > 0), then G is nonparametrically identified.
Since we only observe, xh,t + ch,t and since we do observe corner solutions in the data,
G is not nonparametrically identified. We have parameterized the distribution G in
a flexible manner, but with enough explicit restrictions on the relationships between
19

We are not explicitly considering the additional problem that the information on the wages, work
hours, and non-labor income of the parents is not collected in the same year as is the information
taken from the CDS, which includes the time allocations in investment and the expenditures on the
child for investment, eh,t . The first CDS interview is conducted in 1997, whereas the other information
taken from the core survey of the PSID is available in 1996 and 1998. Our model of wages and
non-labor income allows for life-cycle changes. And given wages, work hours, and non-labor income
are reasonably stable over such a brief time period, the fact that the information is not collected at
exactly the same point in time should not cause major problems in inferring the stable preference
weights associated with the arguments of the parents’ altruistic utility function.

32

preference parameters draws to enable a separate valuation of x and c even when we do
not observe the separate consumption expenditures. It is also important to note that
we have not attempted to estimate the altruism parameter, but instead are fixing at
the value of ϕ = 13 . Attempting to estimate this parameter would make identification
of the parameters characterizing G even more challenging.
We do not use the information on eh,t provided in the CDS in estimating the model,
which increases the need for parametric restrictions on G. We did not use this information because we thought that the reported values were far too low to be believable.
In our opinion, this is due to respondents under-reporting indirect expenses associated
with the child’s presence in the household, such as expenditures on housing and food.
In our accounting framework, such expenses would be considered investments in the
child.
Unobserved “Parenting Style” Even under ideal conditions, that is, when
all decisions of the parents and the child are observed, the fact that households may
either be “non-cooperative” or “constrained-efficient” in their behavior is problematic
in terms of the non-parametric identification of G. This problem is discussed at length
in Del Boca and Flinn (2012), where households choose between these two different
modes of behavior and where the choice of the household was unobservable. In their
nonparametric setting, they showed that there existed two mappings from the observed
actions to the parameters characterizing the household, one corresponding to each mode
of behavior. In this case, each mapping must be used to determine the parameter values
that would have generated it under the assumed form of behavior, and then each is
evaluated to determine whether the assumed mode of behavior would have been the
one chosen under those parameter values. In some cases, each of the two generated
parameter vectors is consistent with the assumed behavioral rule being preferred by
the household, which is essentially a case of multiple equilibria. This problem does not
occur if G is being estimated parametrically. Thus, even if information on all household
choices ah,t was available to us, parametric assumptions on G are required to resolve
the indeterminacy associated with the unobserved behavioral regime of the household.
4.2.4

Monitoring Cost Distribution

We do not observe whether a particular household is using an ICCT in any given
period. If we did have knowledge of the “parenting” style used, the estimation of a
single parameter cost distribution would be fairly straightforward. For each household,
first compute the difference in period t value functions of the parents when they use an
ICCT and when they do not. Denote these differences by ∆Vh,t , where the subscript
h denotes the household, h = 1, ..., N. From our discussion in Section 2, we know that
these values are all nonnegative. Now assume that the distribution of the cost of using an
ICCT, ω, is a one-parameter distribution defined on the non-negative real line, and for
simplicity assume that it is an exponential distribution, so that R(ω) = 1 − exp(−σω),
with σ > 0. Then the probability that household h employs an ICCT in period t is
33

p(∆Vh,t > ω) = 1 − exp(−σ∆Vh,t ). If the sample proportion of households using an
ICCT in period t is defined as pN (ιt = 1), this is given by
N

−1

N
X

p(∆Vh,t > ω) = N

−1

h=1

N
X

(1 − exp(−σ∆Vh,t )).

h=1

The expression on the right hand side of the equation is
Pabsolutely continuous and
monotone increasing in the parameter σ, with limσ→0 N −1 N
h=1 (1−exp(−σ∆Vh,t )) = 0
PN
−1
and limσ→∞ N
h=1 (1 − exp(−σ∆Vh,t )) = 1. Thus for any pN (ιt = 1) ∈ (0, 1), there
exists a unique value of σ, σ̂(pN (ιt = 1)), such that
pN (ιt = 1) = N −1

N
X

(1 − exp(−σ̂(pN (ιt = 1))∆Vh,t )).

h=1

Since plimN →∞ pN (ιt = 1) = p(ιt = 1), the proportion using an ICCT in the population,
then plimN →∞ σ̂(pN (ιt = 1)) = σ̂(p(ιt = 1)) = σ. Thus σ̂(pN (ιt = 1)) is a consistent
estimator of σ.
This argument has been largely heuristic in the sense that we have implicitly assumed that the ∆Vh,t are known. Of course, these quantities are all estimated, and
are complex functions of most of the parameters that characterize the model. They
are not, however functions of σ. If consistent estimates of the ∆Vh,t are available, the
identification argument we have made is applicable. Given knowledge of the use of an
ICCT by each household in the sample, the parameter σ can be consistently estimated
in a second stage, after the ∆Vh,t have been estimated.20
This identification argument is not directly applicable in the present setting, since
the use of an ICCT by an household is unknown. Instead, the marginal distribution of
choices and outcomes represents a mixture of the two situations, one in which an ICCT
is being used and the other in which it is not. In addition to all of the other parameters
of the model, the parameter σ is an important component of the “endogenous” mixing
distribution.21 When σ → ∞, then the cost distribution becomes degenerate at the
point ω = 0, and all households would utilize an ICCT in every period. When σ → 0,
all households would not use an ICCT in any period, and the Stackelberg equilibrium
would be the one characterizing all observed choices in the data. To the extent that
allowing a type distribution allows more flexibility in describing the data and improves
model fit, we can expect to recover an estimate of σ that is strictly positive and bounded
from above.
When the use of an ICCT in period t by any household is unobserved, it is no longer
possible to estimate σ in a second stage after all other primitive parameters have been
20

This is the route followed in Flinn and Mullins (2015), for example, when estimating a schooling
cost distribution.
21
The term endogenous in this case refers to the fact that the primitive parameters of the model
determine the distribution of types, which in this case refers to whether an ICCT is being used in
period t. Exogenous mixing, which is commonly utilized, would assert that there is a distribution of
types that is not a function of the other primitive parameters of the model.

34

estimated. Instead, all parameters must be estimated simultaneously. An example of
this type of estimation can be found in Del Boca and Flinn (2012).

4.3

Computation of the Model Solution

Unlike DFW (2014), our model does not have a simple closed form solution for all
endogenous choices. Instead we use a mixed numerical and analytic solution, in which
we compute some endogenous choices on a fine grid and compute other solutions analytically given these choices. We then substitute these choices into the utility function
to determine the relative utility of each grid point, and use the maximum utility value
choice as the optimal choice. We leave the details of the multiple-step model solution to
the Appendix. We also report experiments showing that our mixed analytical/numerical
solution approximates the “near” exact solution (using a very fine grid) quite well.

4.4
4.4.1

Estimation
Simulation of the DGP

As we have made clear in the preceding discussion, due to a variety of missing data
problems, it is necessary to estimate all model parameters simultaneously, with the
exception of those characterizing the non-labor income process of the household. These
parameters are estimated in a first-stage, and are used throughout the simulation process that we now describe.
In discussing the identification of the cognitive ability production process, we assumed that the preference parameter distribution G was known, along with the wage
and income process parameters. This information was needed in order to compute the
expected values of the a2 functions. We do not actually use the regression function
(4) to estimate the parameters of the model. Instead, we simulate the entire data
generating process (DGP) of the model for given draws of all of the random variables
characterizing the DGP. Using R simulation paths for each household, we then construct a number of sample moments from the overall sample of N × R histories that
are compared with the same moments computed from the actual data consisting of N
histories, one for each sample household.
We require the wage offer functions for the two parents, with the rth replication for
household h at time t given by
w
wh,i,t (r) = exp(Zh,i,t
ηk + εh,i,t (r)), h = 1, ..., N ; i = 1, 2; t = 1996, ..., 2010; r = 1, ..., R,
w
where Zh,i,t
are the covariates for parent i in household h in year t, ηi is a conformable
vector of parameters for parent i, εh,i,t (r) is the rth draw of the disturbance for parent i
in household h in year t, and where R is the number of replications for each household
in the sample. The parameters to be estimated include the vectors η1 and η2 , as well
as the three parameters that characterize the contemporaneous covariance matrix of

35

(ε1 ε2 ), Σε . Similarly, in each period R non-labor income draws are generated for each
household, with these given by
I
, µ̂, εIh,t (r)), h = 1, ..., N ; t = 1996, ..., 2010; r = 1, ..., R,
Ih,t (r) = Q(Zh,t
I
where Zh,t
are the covariates in the non-labor income function for household h in period
t, µ̂ is a conformable parameter vector of estimates of µ (obtained from previous estimation of the non-labor income process), and εIh,t (r) is the rth replication draw for (h, t)
from a Normal distribution with mean 0 and variance σI2 . The R preference distribution
draws for each household h are taken from the distributions G(α λ|ΓG ), where ΓG is
the vector of parameters characterizing the preference distribution. We have assumed
that household preferences are time-invariant and are identically and independently
distributed over households.
We conclude by describing the simulation of the cognitive ability process of the
child in household h. In 1997 when the child is age t, we have access to their test
∗
∗
score kh,t
, which is the number of correct answers out of 57, and kh,t
follows a binomial
distribution with parameters N Q = 57 and p(kh,t ), the probability of a correct answer.
We represent our initial prior for ph,t as the (non-informative) Beta distribution with
parameters (1, 1), which is Uniform on the interval [0, 1]. We then observe the test score
∗
kh,t
, allowing us to update our prior and produce a posterior distribution on ph,t , which
is also Beta (a conjugate distribution for the Binomial). The posterior distribution for
∗
∗
ph,t is then Beta with parameters (1 + kh,t
, (N Q − kh,t
) + 1).
From the posterior distribution of ph,t , we draw R pseudo-random draws of ph,t . Let
p̃rh,t denote the rth draw of p from this distribution. Given our assumed mapping of k
to p, can invert p̃rh,t to obtain
r
kh,t
= exp(λ−1
1 {ln(

p̃rh,t
) − λ0 }).
1 − p̃rh,t

As discussed above, the values of λ1 and λ0 are not identified, and we have fixed them
at λ0 = 0 and λ1 = 1.
r
From this initial value of kh,t
, we then begin the construction of this particular
sample path. When we get to the period of the second measurement (in 2002) when the
child is age t0 > t, the test score is drawn from a binomial distribution with parameters
(N Q, p(kh,t0 )), as described above. We can invert this test score to determine the value
of kh,t0 .
4.4.2

Estimator

The family data that are available consist of a sample of households with observed
characteristics X, which includes time-invariant and time-varying characteristics, as
well as information pertaining to children interviewed at various ages (where child age
is indexed by t). The observed household variables include parental characteristics, such
as the education and the ages of the parents when the child was born. For each mother
and father in the household we observe: hours worked, hours spent with children (both
36

alone and with the other parent), and repeated measures of child quality. We also have
measures of the child’s own self-investment time. In addition, we observe: (accepted)
wages for both parents and total household income, as described below. Although data
on some child specific expenditures are available, we do not utilize them in forming the
estimator.22
The estimator utilizes simulation methods. The Appendix details the simulation and
estimation procedure. In brief, given a trial vector of primitive model parameters and
the initial observed sample characteristics of each household, we simulate S sequences of
agent actions (time allocation and expenditures) and child quality given S draws from
the parametric random variable distributions. Using the simulated data set, we then
compute the analogous simulated sample characteristics to those determined from the
actual sample. The characteristics of any simulated sample are determined by Ω, the
vector of all primitive parameters that characterize the model, and the actual vector
of pseudo-random number draws made in generating the sample paths. Denote the
simulated sample characteristics generated under the parameter vector Ω by M̃S (Ω).
The Method of Simulated Moments (MSM) estimator of Ω is then given by
Ω̂S,N,W = arg min(MN − M̃S (Ω))0 WN (MN − M̃S (Ω)),
Ω

where MN is the vector of sample moments, M̃S are the analogous model simulated
moments determined by the model primitives Ω and the length S vector of pseudorandom draws, and WN is a symmetric, positive-definite weighting matrix.
The moments we use include the average and standard deviation of test scores at
each child age, the average and standard deviation of hours of work for mothers and
fathers at each child age, the average and standard deviation of child investment hours
for mothers and fathers at each child age, and the average and standard deviation of
time investment by the child at each age. In addition, we use the average and standard
deviation of accepted wages and the correlation in wages across parents. We also
compute a number of contemporaneous and lagged correlations between the observed
labor supply, time with children, child quality, wages, and income. It is important to
note that while we do not observe child inputs, labor supply, wages, and income in the
same periods, our simulation method allows us to combine moments from various points
in the child development process into a single estimator. A full list of the moments we
utilize is included in the Appendix.
22

We made this decision because the distribution of reports of child-specific expenditures had what
we considered to be too much mass in the left tail of the distribution. Our interpretation is that
respondents were not properly attributing some of the household expenditures on public goods to
children. In any case, we think that it is difficult for any person, even an economist, to properly
impute these values, and hence did not utilize them when forming the estimator. The implied estimates
of money expenditures on children are larger than those reported, but we think that they are more
representative of total expenditures on children when public good expenditures are “properly” assigned.

37

5
5.1

Model Estimates
Household Preference Parameters

Given the identification issues discussed in the previous section, we assume that the altruism parameter is fixed to ϕ = 13 for all households. This value is relatively consistent
with the broad range of parental altruism parameter estimates that are mainly found in
the household macroeconomics literature.23 This implies that parents value their child’s
utility about half as much as their private utility. The annualized discount factor is
fixed to βp = 0.9 for parents. For children, the discount factor increases with child
age (see e.g. Steinberg et al. (2009)). More specifically, we fix βc,t = 0.705 if t ≤ 13,
βc,t = 0.822 if t ∈ {14, 15}, and βc,t = 0.9 at the final age t = 16. Any investments made
by the parents and the child after the final age M = 16 are not explicitly modeled, but
can be captured by the utility terms specified for this final period, ψi,M +1 , for i = p, c.
Note that while periods are in years, the model is specified in terms of weekly decisions,
which are considered to be invariant within each yearly planning period.
Table 4 presents the estimates of the preference parameters for parents and children. Although preferences of the parents and the child are assumed to be timeinvariant within each household, we allow for population heterogeneity in preferences
across households. Since the primitive parameters of the distributions of parental and
child preferences are difficult to interpret, we instead report the means and standard
deviations of the population distributions of these preferences. The estimates suggest
that the average household puts the most weight on the father’s leisure and private
consumption (about 0.30), followed by the mother’s leisure (about 0.24) and finally
child quality (about 0.16). However, this relative order is altered when taking into
account the fact that all parents are altruistic, which causes them to care more about
child quality than anything else (on average). Indeed, the average total parental weight
on child quality, α̃4 = (1 − ϕ)α4 + ϕλ3 is approximately 0.24, whereas the average
total weight on e.g. parental consumption, α̃3 = (1 − ϕ)α3 drops to about 0.20. Conversely, the average child attaches a relatively high weight to her own leisure and quality
level ((about 0.42 and 0.41, respectively), and values her private consumption the least
(about 0.17). When looking at the dispersion of the estimated preference distributions,
we find that the standard deviations of the parental preferences are relatively low (in
23

Altruism parameters are estimated, or calibrated, most often in macroeconomic studies of household behavior. Moreover, it is usually the case that the altruism parameter is defined as uP + ϕuc ,
whereas we have defined the parents “final” utility as a weighted average of their private utility and
the childs utility, or (1 − ϕ)up + ϕuc . In a model of the child’s decision to leave the household, Kaplan
(2012) finds an estimate of ϕ of 0.039. In Boar’s (2018) study of parents’ precautionary savings for
the child’s risky income, the calibrated value of ϕ is 0.201. In his study of bequests and inter-vivos
transfers, Nishiyama (2002) finds a value of ϕ of 0.512. Finally, Barczyk and Kredler (2018), in a study
of long-term care decisions for elderly parents, find that the calibrated value of parental altruism is
0.692. As can be seen, the range of the estimates is large, and depends on the application and specifics
of the model. Our value of ϕ = 13 in our weighted-average formulation implies a value of ϕ = 0.5 in
the up + ϕuc specification, which puts it in the middle of the range of values found in these studies.

38

the range 0.01 − 0.05) compared to the standard deviations of the child’s preferences
(ranging from 0.05−0.22). This stands in contrast to DFW (2014), who found relatively
high amounts of dispersion in some preference weights.
The estimates related to the household preference correlation matrix suggest that
there is substantial positive correlation of preferences (1) among spouses, (2) among
children and (3) between parents and their children. We find a large correlation between
mother’s leisure and father’s leisure of about 0.30, which is consistent with a theory
of positive assortative matching in the marriage market. The parents’ preference for
consumption is negatively correlated with the preference for the mother’s leisure (about
−0.69), and weakly positively correlated with the preference for the father’s leisure
(about 0.09). Second, the child’s preferences for leisure and private consumption are
positively correlated (about 0.69). Finally, we find some evidence of “intergenerational”
preference correlation as well. Although we have restricted the possible dependence in
these parameters for the purposes of estimation, we find that the child’s preference for
leisure is positively correlated with both the mother’s and the father’s tastes for leisure
(about 0.47 and 0.52, repectively). Conversely, the child’s taste for private consumption
does not seem to be correlated with the parents’ taste for private consumption (about
0.005). The reader should bear in mind that we use no direct observations on the
parents’ or the child’s consumption in estimation, so that this relationship is primarily
identified through functional form assumptions.
Although difficult to interpret, we estimate that the parents’ terminal payoff to
child quality (ξp ) is around 5.20, which is significantly larger than the estimate of
the child’s terminal payoff to child quality, ξc = 0.81. Both of these parameters are
relatively imprecisely estimated, which is unsurprising since they are identified through
functional form assumptions.
Finally, we estimate that the parameter of the (exponential) ICCT cost distribution
is approximately 110, implying that the mean and standard deviation of the ICCT
cost is around κ = 0.009 utils. What this implies in terms of simulated household
behavior can be seen in Figure D-9c, which shows how the average fraction of households
choosing to implement an ICCT varies with the child’s age t. Consistent with some
of the literature on parental rewarding behavior (e.g., Bonke (2013)), we find that the
proportion of parents who actively incentivize their children (for example, to study
more or to receive higher grades in school) by offering monetary rewards increases with
the child’s age. Since the utility cost associated with implementing an ICCT is assumed
to remain constant within a given household, this increasing age trend can be explained
purely in terms of terms of increasing utility benefits to such incentive schemes.

5.2

Child Quality Technology Parameters

In Section 4, we discussed how the Cobb-Douglas productivity parameters for household
h associated with each productive input j (δh,j,t ) are allowed to change monotonically
with the age of the child t, by specifying an intercept (γj,0 ), an age slope parameter
(γj,1 ) for each input, and parental education slope parameters (γ1,2 , γ2,2 , γ3,2 , γ3,3 )
39

for the three parental time inputs. The total factor productivity parameters (Rt ) are
estimated using a more flexible generalized logistic specification. Table D-2 and Figure
3 show the estimates of these production technology parameters. Due to the exponential
transformation, the raw estimates of the intercepts and slopes relating to each input
are difficult to interpret. A larger (i.e. less negative) intercept indicates a higher
initial productivity at the first relevant child age, t = 3. A positive (negative) age
slope estimate implies that the productivity increases (decreases) monotonically with
child age. In Panel 3a, we plot the estimated sequences of the four time inputs as a
function of the child’s age, averaging across all households (i.e. given average parental
education levels). We find that active parental time inputs are highly productive at
young ages, but become less productive as the child ages. Consistent with the literature,
we estimate that maternal time is the most productive of all inputs for very young
children. Joint parental time is initially slightly less productive than maternal time, but
becomes relatively more productive after age 5. Paternal time is less productive than
the other two parental time inputs at all child ages. The absolute levels and decreasing
time trends in the productivity of maternal and paternal time are in accordance with the
findings of DFW (2014). Unsurprisingly, the productivity of the child’s self-investment
time is initially very low. When the child reaches adolescence, however, self-investment
time gradually becomes more productive and matters about as much as the individual
parental time inputs, but remains less productive than joint parental time. Given our
specification of the model, these relative trends make intuitive sense. Once children
start formal schooling and become more influenced by teachers and fellow students,
their time allocation starts to shift away from spending time with parents, and other
inputs start to become more relevant.
Panels 3b and 3c show the degree to which parental education levels shift the productivity parameters at various child ages. Although years of schooling enters continuously
into the parametric specification, the graphs focus on high school graduates versus college graduates (i.e. 12 years versus 16 years of schooling) for simplicity. We notice
little or no effect of maternal schooling on the mother’s individual time productivity.
Conversely, the father’s education level positively affects the father’s time productivity.
For joint parental time, we estimate a small but positive and roughly equal effect of
both the father’s as well as the mother’s education level. This suggests that overall,
higher educated parents spend more quality time with their children, ceteris paribus.
Panels 3d and 3e show the estimated productivity parameters of the two remaining
inputs as a function of child age: material child investments (δ4,t ) and lagged child
human capital (δ6,t ). There is a slight negative trend in the productivity of child
expenditures (although this is hard to compare to the time inputs due to the different
units of measurement). Conversely, we estimate a strong positive time trend for the
productivity of lagged capital. The strong and increasing level of persistence in the
estimated production technology suggests that the self-productivity of skills - or the
principle that “skills beget skills” - becomes more salient as children accumulate more
human capital. This pattern is consistent with DFW (2014).
Panel 3f shows the estimated total factor productivity process (Rt ) as a function of
40

child age. We find that there is an overall positive trend in the TFP, starting out at
approximately 0.47 for the youngest ages, then reaching an inflection point around age
8, and finally stabilizing at around 1.01 at age 12.

5.3

Wage and Non-labor Income Process Parameters

Table 6 provides the estimates of the wage and non-labor income processes. As specified
in Section 4, the (log) wage offer distribution for each spouse depends linearly on their
observable characteristics, i.e. age and completed level of education.24 We estimate
that, for both spouses, each year of education increases the wage by almost 10 percent.
Given the fairly small age range of the parents in our sample, we estimate a flat earnings
profile that is similar for both spouses, where each additional year amounts to a mean
wage increase of about 1.3 percent. Since most parents work full-time in all observed
periods (especially fathers), we could interpret this as the average return on experience.
When compounded over the relevant parental age range of 30 − 50, this would amount
to a total mean wage increase of about 30 percent for each spouse, which is not unreasonable. The remaining three wage parameter estimates (σw1 , σw2 , ρ12 ) determine the
variability of the periodic wage shocks of each spouse, which are allowed to be correlated
with the wage shocks of the other spouse. We estimate that this correlation is strongly
positive at 0.54. This could again be interpreted as evidence of positive assortative
matching in the marriage market. Our estimates also suggest that the fathers’ wage
shocks are more volatile than the mothers’ shocks.
Since there is no endogenous selection on non-labor income as there is on wages,
the parameters of the non-labor income process can be estimated separately from the
rest of the model. We refer to Section 4 for more details on the two-step procedure
used to estimate the non-labor income process, which is tailored to (1) fit the large
observed fraction of households in the data who report a zero non-labor income in any
given year, and (2) capture the observable heterogeneity in non-labor income draws.
The first seven parameter estimates in part (c) of Table 6 indicate that the probability
of having a strictly positive non-labor income in any period increases strongly with
the father’s education level, and is slightly concave in the father’s age in that period.
The remaining parameter estimates show that, conditional on having a strictly positive
non-labor income draw, the mean non-labor income increases by about 4.5 percent
each year, and does not seem to be significantly impacted by the education levels of
the parents. The large standard deviation of the disturbances is not surprising given
the small number of covariates used in the empirical specification.
24

More complex polynomials, including e.g. a squared age term, a birth cohort effect, or an interaction between age and education, turned out to have small and imprecisely estimated coefficients.

41

5.4
5.4.1

Within-sample Fit
Test Scores

Figure D-4 plots the average Letter Word test score as a function of the child’s age,
where the solid line represents actual CDS data and the dotted line represents the
simulated test scores under the model. The estimated model captures the S-shaped
trend in the measured test scores almost exactly. 25
5.4.2

Time Allocations

Regarding the endogenous time allocation decisions of parents and children, the model
is able to fit most of the basic patterns in the data. Table 7 displays the sample fit of
the parental labor supply choices, the three types of parental time investments and the
child’s self-investment time, broken down into four non-overlapping child age bins.
The model correctly predicts that mothers of older children are more likely to supply some positive amount of labor to the market,. For fathers, the model slightly
overpredicts the labor force participation rates, which could be due to the relatively
low variation in paternal labor supply behavior in the data. When looking at the subset
of working parents, the model fits the average weekly hours of supplied labor well for
both spouses. For working mothers, the model again captures the positive trend in
labor supply as children age.
Overall, the model fits the average levels of the three types of parental time investments observed in the data very closely for each of the child age bins. Importantly, the
strong negative trends in the observed maternal and paternal active time investments
are reflected in the simulated data. The increasing trend in the child’s self-investment
time is also captured by the model, although the levels are slightly off at some ages,
possibly due to some outliers in the data.
Figures D-5 and D-6 present a more detailed fit of the labor supply choices and the
various time investments, broken down for each child age. Overall, the relatively close
fit between the data moments and the simulated moments confirms that the results in
Table 7 would be robust to different choices of the child age bins.
5.4.3

Wages and Non-labor Income

Table 8 shows how the simulated model is able to fit the basic moments of the wage and
non-labor income data fairly precisely. Any differences between the data moments and
the simulated moments in this table are due to the fact that we are not only targeting
these unconditional moments, but also several other moments of the wage and nonlabor income distributions where we condition on parental age and education. Figure
25

In general, there are two sources of “noise” in the average level of measured child quality at each
age. First, the average child quality level at each age is an aggregate of the child quality levels for our
sample of heterogeneous households. Second, we are displaying the simulated measure of child quality
using our stochastic measurement model, and the simulated measure is noisy due to the fact that the
number of simulation draws is finite.

42

D-7 shows a more detailed breakdown of the parents’ hourly wages in the data and
under the model, as a function of either the respective parent’s age or their completed
education level. Although these conditional moments are relatively noisy due to small
sample issues in the data, we find that the overall fit is reasonably good. For mothers,
panels D-7a and D-7b indicate that the model captures the increasing wage trend in
both the mother’s age as well as her education level. For fathers, panels D-7c and D7d show that the model also captures the overall increasing trends, although the data
become very noisy for older fathers due to the usual small sample issues.26
As shown in Table 8, the basic unconditional moments of the exogenously estimated
non-labor income process are matched very precisely, including the fraction of strictly
positive non-labor income observations. Figure D-8 shows how various conditional moments are also replicated relatively well. In the first and second rows, we condition on
the father’s age and mother’s age, respectively. In the third and fourth rows, we condition on the father’s and mother’s finished education levels. In each of the panels, we find
that the simulated non-labor income moments fit the data well, whether we consider
the entire sample (left-hand side panels), or focus on the subsample of observations
where the non-labor income is strictly positive (middle panels). The right-hand side
panels show how the simulated data capture the increasing trends in the probability of
reporting a strictly positive non-labor income.
5.4.4

Expenditures, Leisure and Internal CCT Use

In Figure D-9, we present some simulated moments of endogenous variables which are
either not explicitly used in the estimation or not observed in our data set. Therefore,
none of these moments are targeted in our estimation procedure. Each of the four panels
shows average simulated values as a function of the child’s age. Panel D-9a shows how
the average weekly household income (Yt ) increases steadily with child age, and how
this trend is reflected in each of the three expenditure components, although child
expenditures (et ) seem to stabilize at older ages, since this input gradually becomes
less productive for older children. Overall, child consumption amounts to about 21
percent of the total household budget, which is in line with the literature.
Panel D-9b plots the weekly (residual) leisure time enjoyed by each household member. Although mothers tend to spend more time with children than fathers, the lower
female labor supply causes the average mother’s leisure time to be higher than the
father’s, by approximately 12 hours per week. Due to the increase in the child’s exogenously defined school time at age 6, the child’s residual leisure time takes a sharp drop
there. Although irrelevant for the estimation procedure or any of the other results, this
sudden drop in child leisure could be partially smoothed out by adding the observation
that children’s average sleep time (which is exogenously defined as 56 hours per week
for all ages) decreases as they age. Panel D-9c shows the average fraction of households
choosing to implement an ICCT at each t. Given the estimated preference, technol26
We do not simulate wages for very young parents, since the model is only specified for children of
age 3 and above.

43

ogy and ICCT cost parameters, this fraction increases from about 12 percent at age 3
to around 72 percent at age 15. Panel D-9d shows how the average reward function
elasticity (rt ), chosen by the subset of parents who implement an ICCT, increases from
around 0.04 at age 3 to around 0.24 at age 15. Therefore, our estimates support the
notion that, as children age, (1) more parents choose to incentivize their children by
offering a contingent reward system, and (2) the average reward system offers higher,
and not lower, incentives to study. Finally, Panels D-9e and D-9f break down the use
of ICCTs by household (permanent) income tercile. We notice that although the average reward elasticity (conditional on it being positive) does not depend significantly
on household income, the fraction of households using an ICCT at any given child age
does. In particular, households in the highest income tercile are up to 12 percentage
points more likely to use an ICCT than households in the lowest income tercile.

6

The Impact of External Policies on Household
Behavior and Welfare Outcomes

We now study the effect of external resource transfers made to the parents on the
behavior of household members and household outcomes, with particular reference to
child development. There are two important problems that a social planner faces in
attempting to improve aspects of the child cognitive ability distribution by making
monetary transfers to households. The planner does not know the preferences of the
household members, but rather is only assumed to know the distribution of preferences
in the population. Since we assume that the social planner’s preferences are only defined
with respect to the distribution of child cognitive ability, that gives this problem a
principal-agent structure, in that there is asymmetric information regarding household
preferences and actions and because the preferences of household members and the
planner are different. By making a transfer to the parents (the agents), the planner
attempts to influence the distribution of cognitive outcomes in the most cost-efficient
way while taking the actions of the household into account.
The planner is limited in terms of the types of goods that can be transferred, which
are restricted to money or in-kind transfers of child investment goods, et . We restrict
attention to non-coercive policies, which we define as any policy under which the welfare
of the parents (assumed to be the recipients of all transfers) is no less than it would be in
the absence of the policy. In the case of policies that take the form of income transfers
to the household contingent on its behavior, these triggering events must be observable
to the social planner. Since we assume that the internal actions of the household are
not directly observable by the planner, this means that any external CCT, or ECCT in
what follows, must be based on observed child quality in the period(s) before and after
the one-period policy intervention.
In the case of ECCTs, we will consider only threshold-based policies, which specify
a threshold k t+1 (kt ), that is the lowest level of child quality in period t + 1 for which
the parents receive the reward φC . We allow this threshold to be a function of the
44

child’s cognitive ability when the policy is announced, so that we can consider growthbased policies, such as k t+1 (kt ) = (1 + ρC )kt , where ρC is the growth rate required of a
household with current child quality kt to receive the transfer φC .
Before proceeding, we mention a few restrictive features of our analysis. The potential policy space for the planner is enormous, and we only consider a small set of
policies within this space. We do not consider explicit targeting of sub-populations
based on potentially observable characteristics, such as family income or demographic
characteristics. The reader can think of this targeting as having already been done,
with the population we consider being the restricted sub-population of interest to the
planner. Within this group of households with children, we only consider policies that
transfer an identical amount of resources to each household. This may clearly be inefficient if there is substantial variation in resources across households within the target
population. We can think of the initial targeting in terms of observable characteristics,
such as household income or wage rates, as having substantially reduced the variability
in these characteristics within the targeted population.
We will also only consider policies that are targeted to households containing a
child of age t. We limit our attention to “one-shot” policies of this form primarily
because of the complications that arise when examining household behavior when there
are multi-period ECCT policies. It is well known (e.g., Weitzman (1980)) that when
facing a sequence of incentive contracts of this form, the household will engage in
strategic behavior by altering its investments so as to enhance its ability to receive the
reward in future periods. A nice example of this phenomenon in the case of incentive
contracts offered to educators can be found in Macartney (2016). Although there are
no complications in extending unrestricted and restricted transfer policies to a multiperiod setting, since our primary interest is in comparing the performance of these three
types of policies, we limit our attention to a single period for all policy types. The age
upon which we primarily focus is age 15, so that t = 15. We will be examing the impact
of these various policies on child cognitive ability at age 16.

6.1

Unrestricted Income Transfers

The most basic type of transfer that we consider consists of a money transfer of φU to
parents of a child of age t. There are no restrictions on how the parents can spend the
money, so that in the period within which it is received, the transfer increases household
non-labor income to It + φU . Since we do not allow for savings and borrowing in the
model, this additional income must be spent in period t. Since child cognitive ability
is a normal good to the parents, this will result in an increase in child ability in the
following period with respect to its level if the transfer had not be received. From the
viewpoint of maximizing household welfare (from the point of view of the parents), this
is the (weakly) preferred type of transfer policy by the household of the ones that we
will consider.27
27

This comparison is with a restricted transfer policy that offers an in-kind transfer of φU of childinvestment goods and with a conditional cash transfer policy that pays φU when the household satisfies

45

Using the point estimates of the model parameters, we focus on the growth in child
quality between ages 15 and 16 in the baseline and under the unrestricted transfer
policy, while varying the level of the transfers.28 Let gt denote the average growth rate
in child latent human capital between age t and t + 1, which is given by
R
N
r
r
− kh,t
1 X X kh,t+1
gt =
r
N × R r=1 h=1
kh,t
r
is the optimal level of child quality at age t+1 in household h in simulation
where kh,t+1
round r (which is after the transfer has been received in period t), N is the number of
households, and R is the number of simulation rounds. Given our estimates, the growth
rate in child quality between the ages of 15 and 16 in the absence of policy intervention
has a mean of approximately 12.3 percent (see part (a) in Table 9).
In Table 9 we examine the results of an unrestricted transfer of $170 dollars to
week per sample household on a variety of household outcomes, most importantly, the
cognitive ability of the child. Given our emphasis on the use of ICCTs, we also analyze
the impact of this transfer in our baseline model with costly ICCTs and in the case
when ICCTs are not available to any household, which can be thought of as the case
in which the cost of their use is indefinitely large. In the baseline case, the unrestricted
transfer has a relatively small positive effect on the level of child quality at age 16,
0.32 percent. This is in spite of the fact that the investment time of both parents
individual and jointly increases noticeably, as do child expenditures. However, at this
age, the impacts of parental time investments on the growth in the child’s cognitive
ability are modest at best. Expenditures on child investment goods have increased by
3.13 percent in response to the transfer, but child time investments actually decrease
by a small amount.
The most striking impact of the transfer is on the labor supply of the parents, which
falls by almost 8 percent for mothers and by 5.3 percent for fathers. Most of this time is
spent on leisure consumption by the parents, which increases by 2.8 percent for mothers
and 3.8 percent for fathers. Household consumption also increases markedly, with the
parents’ consumption increasing by 3.15 percent and the child’s by 3.1 percent. The
current period utility of both sets of agents increases by a small amount at ages 15 and
16. We see that the proportion of households using an ICCT is unchanged, and the
reward elasticity r15 set when an ICCT is used is also essentially unchanged.
The impact of an unconditional transfer of φU = 170 in the case in which no households utilize an ICCT is largely the same. The increase in the growth rate in child
quality is slightly greater, but this is largely explained by the fact that the average level
of k15 is much lower if households are precluded from using ICCTs. The proportional
drop in child investment time is greater than in the case with costly ICCTs, but smaller

the requirements for receiving the transfer.
28
Recall that we are assuming that all households receive the same amount of the transfer, φU . A
more effective policy given the planner’s objective may be to vary the transfer amount by the observable
characteristics of the household.

46

in absolute terms since the average level of study time is so much lower in the no-ICCT
case than in the costly ICCT case (2.71 hours versus 6.59 hours).

6.2

Restricted Income Transfers

A restricted income transfer can be thought of as an in-kind transfer in which the planner transfers child investment goods (e) directly to the household. This is a restricted
transfer since the method in which it can be used by the household is (potentially)
limited, unlike in the case of an unrestricted transfer. In this case, the parents can still
re-optimize their entire set of choices, but under the additional constraint that the total
expenditures on child goods cannot be less than the amount of the targeted transfer
of φR . Such directed transfers are “restrictive” in the sense that they limit the parents’ ability to increase their private consumption or leisure. The only impact on the
household’s period t problem is that (1) the period t non-labor income is now equal to
It + φR , and (2) the constraint that et ≥ φR . At the household’s period t solution, this
constraint may be binding for some households but not for others, depending on the
parents’ preferences, other primitive parameters of the model, and the period t values of
the state variables, Γt . If the parents are not using an Internal CCT, the optimal child
expenditures in the presence of a restricted transfer policy can be defined as follows:
e∗t = max{

βp ψp,t+1 δ4,t
Yt , φ R }
α̃3 + α̃6 + βp ψp,t+1 δ4,t

where Yt = w1,t h1,t + w2,t h2,t + It + φR . If the parents are using an Internal CCT, we use
a numerical solver to find the optimal child expenditures. Computationally, we treat
the restrictive transfer φR as an unrestrictive transfer (as described in the previous
subsection), and then verify whether the expenditure constraint is satisfied.
No household can be worse off in terms of parental welfare by accepting such a
transfer. When the constraint that e∗t ≥ φR is not binding, then the unrestricted
transfer is equivalent to an unrestricted transfer. When it is binding, the household
must still be better off than in the absence of the transfer, since even at the pre-transfer
choices, if all of the transfer is spent on additional investment in the child, child quality
will increase relative to its pre-transfer level, and this will increase parental welfare since
child quality is a normal good. Although these transfers will never lead to a decrease in
the level of child expenditures, there can still be significant crowding-out by the parents
in the sense that a large portion of the transfer may be diverted to other goods valued
by the household. In comparison to an unrestricted transfer policy, this type of policy
would be expected to be more costly to administer due to the monitoring required to
ensure that the money transfer is spent on child investment, or making in-kind transfers
directly.
In Table 10 we examine the impacts of a restricted transfer φR = 170, the same
amount of transfer income upon which we focused in Table 9 when the transfer was
unrestricted (i.e., φU = 170). There are extremely large differences between the two
tables. In the case of costly ICCTs, child quality at age 16 increases by 1.13 percent
47

with respect to the case of no transfer. The growth rate in child quality increases
by over 12 percent. The time investments of the parents increase in a similar way
as in the case of the unrestricted transfers, albeit a bit more markedly except for the
joint time investment of the parents. The most noticeable change with respect to the
earlier table is in terms of the money expenditures on the child, which increases by
over 50 percent. If baseline expenditure on e15 had been greater than or equal to 170
for all households, then there is no difference between a restricted transfer of 170 or
an unrestricted transfer of 170. We see instead, that average expenditures on e15 were
122.51 dollars before the policy intervention, and this is what accounts for the extreme
large increase in e15 . Child self-investment time also rises markedly, under the policy,
by 4.21 percent relative to the baseline case.
The impact of the transfer φR on household consumption is not as large as the
similar money transfer of φU due to the fact that the parents are constrained in terms
of how the transfer can be spent. Although the labor supply of both parents declines
relative to baseline, the decrease is not as large as in the unrestricted transfer case due
to the restriction on the use of the transfer. As in the case of an unrestricted cash
transfer, the restricted transfer has (almost) no impact on the proportion of households
using an ICCT. However, it has a very large impact on the size of the reward elasticity,
r15 . In the case of a transfer of φR , the reward elasticity increases by 11.68 percent
relative to baseline, in comparison to no change in the unrestricted transfer of φU . This
is what accounts for the large increase in τc under the φR policy.
When ICCTs are not available to the household, the impacts on child quality at
age 16 are roughly the same as in the costly ICCT case. There are smaller increases
in parental time investments than in the φU case, and a slightly smaller decrease in
child investment time. In comparison with the costly ICCT environment, the impact
on parental labor supply and the leisure of household members is slightly more muted.
This is also true regarding consumption and utility levels, although the child has a
slightly higher utility level at age 15 when the parents are unable to offer an ICCT.

6.3

External Conditional Cash Transfers

An External Conditional Cash Transfer (ECCT) specifies a requirement for a household
to receive a monetary reward of φC . In the case of an internal incentive scheme (or
ICCT), the parents specify a reward function x∗t (τc,t ; Γt ), which is a function of the
child’s time input into the development process, τc,t , and the set of characteristics
describing the household environment when the child is of age t, Γt . As in DFW (2016),
we will only consider a few simple types of these reward systems, although the ones we
do consider could be (and have been) implemented in real world settings. We assume
that the requirement that a household must meet in order to receive the cash award of
φC in period t + 1 can be written in terms of a function of the form k t+1 (kt ), and that
the household will receive the reward if and only if kt+1 ≥ k t+1 (kt ). The two leading
examples of the function k t+1 (kt ) are k t+1 (kt ) = k t+1 and k̄t+1 (kt ) = (1 + ρC )kt . In the
first case, the reward is assumed to be a constant quality level specific to age t + 1
48

children, one which is independent of the history of the child’s abilities, {ks }s≤t . In the
second case, all households are required to achieve a growth rate of at least ρC in child
ability between ages t and t + 1 in order to receive the reward.
Since two sets of agents are involved in producing child quality, it is natural to
consider whether the payoff φC should be paid to a single agent (parents or the child)
or whether it might be optimally divided between the two. We restrict our attention
to the case in which parents receive the entire award. This is somewhat of a natural
choice under our informational assumptions. Since the external agent can only observe
child cognitive ability at each age t = 1, ..., M, it cannot utilize input-based CCTs, as
the parents potentially can. Therefore it cannot design a CCT that would remunerate
both parents and the child individually for the quantities of inputs they supply to the
development process.
We will be particularly interested in the manner in which the existence of external
output-based CCTs paid to the parents affects the parental decision to use an ICCT.
Given our model estimates, virtually all parents in our sample use ICCTs to incentivize
their children to self-invest more (rather than less), so that ICCTs produce higher levels
of child ability at age t + 1. Since the parents are responsible for the ICCT decision,
it seems natural for the external agent to make the payments φC to the parents, in
order to increase the likelihood that the household uses an ICCT. Given our model
estimates, we are able to evaluate the extent to which external and internal CCTs are
complements in the production of child cognitive ability. If we interpret the use of an
ICCT as a “parenting style,” our results illustrate the manner in which the policies of
external agents can influence the pattern of interaction between parents and children
inside the household. Therefore, the possibility of using ICCTs has the potential to
greatly amplify the impact of government policy on child development.
6.3.1

No Internal CCTs

We begin by considering the impact of an ECCT on household decisions in the absence
of ICCTs, so that each household behaves in an inefficient manner. We have already
seen that the scope for the parents to influence the choices of the child in this setting is
limited. In particular, we know that they only influence the child’s choice of their time
input through their crowd-out effect on her available time, which is given by T̃t − τp,t .
Thus, the only way that the parents can increase the child’s time input is by reducing
their own, that is, any increase in their own total time input in child production leads
to a decrease in the child’s study time. Their only other avenue to increase child quality
is through increased expenditures on child investment goods, et .
In order to examine the impact of an external CCT in this case, we utilize the
framework developed in DFW (2016). If the reward of φC is received in period t + 1,
the parents’ non-labor income in that period is increased from It+1 to It+1 + φC . The
first case to consider is when the parents’ choices in period t, and the child’s response in
terms of her choice of τc,t in the absence of the external CCT would result in a level of
∗
child quality in period t + 1, kt+1
, that is no less than the threshold required to receive
49

∗
≥ k t+1 . In this case, the household essentially receives an unrestricted
φC , so that kt+1
income transfer in period t + 1 without changing any of their original period t decisions.
∗
The more interesting case is when kt+1
< k t+1 . In this situation, the parents face a
binary choice. First, they can make their original choices (and the child hers) so as to
∗
, which means that they will not receive the reward. Second,
produce the quantity kt+1
assuming no uncertainty in the production process, they can alter their decisions (and
the child’s response) so as to receive the reward φC in the following period. This requires
them to suffer a utility loss in period t for an increase in the continuation value of the
parents in period t + 1, since in that period they will have a higher level of non-labor
income and a higher level of child quality than in the absence of the policy. We define
the maximum value of period t utility subject to the constraint that the household
produce kt+1 units of child quality in period t + 1 (without using an ICCT) as
0
Jp,t
(Γt , kt+1 ) = max α̃1 ln l1,t + α̃2 ln l2,t + α̃3 ln ct + α̃4 ln kt + α̃5 ln lc,t + α̃6 ln xt
ap,t

subject to: kt+1
T
ct + et + xt
∗
τc,t
(τp,t )

=
=
=
=

∗
ft (kt , τ1,t , τ2,t , τ12,t , et , τc,t
(τp,t ))
li,t + hi,t + τi,t + τ12,t , i = 1, 2
w1,t h1,t + w2,t h2,t + It ,
γt (T̃t − τ1,t − τ2,t − τ12,t ).

This formulation of the problem can be used to define the household’s problem when
there is no External CCT, since
0
0
0
Vp,t
(Γt ) = max Jp,t
(Γt , kt+1 ) + βp Vp,t+1
(Γt+1 )
kt+1

and
∗
0
0
kt+1
(Γt ) = arg max Jp,t
(Γt , kt+1 ) + βp Vp,t+1
(Γt+1 ),
kt

∗
where the period t + 1 vector of state variables, Γt+1 , includes kt+1 . The value kt+1
(Γt )
is the baseline level of period t + 1 child quality in the absence of the ECCT program.
∗
When kt+1
< k t+1 , the value of increasing child quality to k t+1 is given by
0
0
0
(Γt , k t+1 ) = Jp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) + βp,t Vp,t+1
(Γ0t+1 ),
Vp,t

where the state variable vector Γ0t+1 includes the value of child quality k t+1 and nonlabor income level of It+1 + φC . Then, in the absence of internal CCTs, the household
will increase child quality to k t+1 if and only if
0
0
(Γt )
Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) > Vp,t
0
∗
0
0
⇒ Jp,t (Γt , k t+1 ) + βp Vp,t+1
(Γ0t+1 ) > Jp,t
(Γt , kt+1
) + βp Vp,t+1
(Γt+1 )
0
0
0
∗
0
⇒ Vp,t+1
(Γ0t+1 ) − Vp,t+1
(Γt+1 ) > βp−1 [Jp,t
(Γt , kt+1
) − Jp,t
(Γt , k t+1 )].
∗
Both sides of the last line are strictly positive when k t+1 > kt+1
.

50

6.3.2

Relationship between External CCTs and the Use of Internal CCTs

In order for a household facing the requirement to produce more child quality in period
t+1 than it would in the absence of the external CCT, it is obviously the case that its use
of one or more of the inputs in the period t production process must be increased relative
to its baseline level. In the single agent case considered in DFW (2016), the parents
would increase all inputs in an efficient manner (i.e., with minimum loss in period t
utility). In the two-agent case considered here, and in the absence of an internal CCT,
an increase in total parental time investments in the child will mechanically lead to a
reduction in the time the child spends investing in herself. Of course, if the value of the
child’s own time investments are low, this may not be a major impediment to reaching
the target k t+1 with minimal loss of current period utility. However, when this is not
the case, increasing parental time investments and decreasing child time investments
may require a significant increase in purchased inputs in period t, et .
Under an ICCT, the parents are able to influence the input chosen by the child,
τc,t by choosing a reward function, subject to an incentive compatibility constraint. In
this case, the parents are not subject to the same mechanical crowd-out effect that is
in effect when there is no ICCT. This allows them to increase the time investments of
the child as they increase their own in any situation where it is optimal to do so. The
period utility cost of implementing an internal CCT is given by ωt > 0 in period t.29
In order to clarify the decisions in this case, it will be useful to distinguish between the
payoff values to the household (1) whether they produce the k t+1 required to receive
φC in period t + 1 and (2) whether they use an ICCT in period t. Let the value of the
1
parents’ problem when using an ICCT be given by Vp,t
(Γt ), where this value does not
include the fixed (to the parents) implementation cost ωt (in utils). As we discussed
0
1
(Γt ) for all Γt . Then in the absence of an external
(Γt ) > Vp,t
previously, we know that Vp,t
CCT, the household implements an ICCT if and only if
1
0
Vp,t
(Γt ) − Vp,t
(Γt ) > ωt .
0
In the case for which no internal CCT is used, we defined Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) as the
value of the households’ problem when it produced k t+1 over the course of period t.
1
Analogously, we define Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) as the value of the households’ problem when it
produces k t+1 during period t and utilizes an ICCT in period t; as above, this does not
1
0
include the utility cost, ωt . We know that Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) > Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) for all target
levels k t+1 . In period t, the household makes choices along two dimensions: (1) whether
to use an internal CCT and (2) whether to produce a level of child quality exactly
equal to the required amount, k t+1 . We will now discuss the conditions required for
the various outcomes to be observed. We will not explicitly condition on the fact that
∗
∗
kt+1
<k t+1 , where kt+1
is the unconstrained choice in the absence of an ECCT, when
parents endogenously choose whether to use an ICCT. Whenever this inequality is not
29

In the estimation of the model, we will assume that the cost of running an ICCT is fixed over time
within a household, so that ω1 = ... = ωM . There is a distribution of these time invariant costs across
households.

51

satisfied, the household can never be better off producing the quantity k t+1 , that is,
the targeted value of k t+1 will never be chosen by those households who will receive φC
next period with no change in their period t decisions. If a household receives φC in
period t + 1, either kt+1 =k t+1 or kt+1 > k t+1 , and in the latter case, we say that φC
received in period t + 1 is an unrestricted transfer.30
Each household must fall into one of the following four distinct cases.
1. (No ICCT, kt+1 6=k t+1 ) In this case, we have
0
1
(Γt ) ≤ ωt
(Γt ) − Vp,t
Vp,t
0
0
(Γt , k t+1 ) − Vp,t
Vp,t
(Γt ) < 0
1
0
Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) − Vp,t
(Γt ) ≤ ωt

The first line is the condition that, in the absence of the ECCT, the parents would
not implement an ICCT. The second line is the condition that the household, in
the absence of an ICCT, would choose not to produce the level k t+1 required to
receive φCCT . The last line is the condition that value of the household producing
k t+1 using an ICCT relative to not using an ICCT and not receiving the reward
is less than the cost of the ICCT.
2. (ICCT, kt+1 6=k t+1 ) In this case, we have
1
0
Vp,t
(Γt ) − Vp,t
(Γt ) > ωt
1
1
Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) − Vp,t
(Γt ) < 0

The first line is the condition that the unconstrained choice of kt+1 yields a higher
value using an ICCT than when not using one. The second line is the condition
that producing exactly k t+1 using an ICCT yields a lower value than not producing
∗
k t+1 . Recall that this condition covers also those individuals for whom kt+1
> k t+1 ,
for which the reward of φC is the same as an unrestricted transfer of the same
amount, φU = φC .
3. (No ICCT, kt+1 =k t+1 ) Here we have the conditions
0
0
(Γt , k t+1 ) − Vp,t
(Γt ) ≥ 0
Vp,t
1
0
Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) − Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) ≤ ωt .

The first condition is that, in the no ICCT state, the value of producing k t+1
∗
exceeds the value of producing kt+1
. The second condition is that the value of
producing k t+1 using the ICCT is less than the value of producing k t+1 without
using the ICCT.
30

It is, in principle, possible for a household to freely choose exactly k t+1 with no ECCT present,
but since preferences are continuous random variables, this is a zero-probability event.

52

4. (ICCT, kt+1 = k t+1 ) The conditions are
1
1
Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) − Vp,t
(Γt ) ≥ 0
1
0
(Γt , k t+1 ) − Vp,t
Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) > ωt
0
1
(Γt ) > ωt
Vp,t
(Γt , k t+1 ) − Vp,t

The first condition is that, when using an ICCT, the value of producing k t+1
is no less than the value of not producing it. The second condition is that the
value of producing k t+1 is greater when using an ICCT than when not. The third
condition is that the value of producing k t+1 using the ICCT exceeds the value of
not using an ICCT and not producing k t+1 units of quality.
6.3.3

Quantitative Results: Growth-based ECCTs

∗∗
∗
denote the equilibrium levels of latent child capital
and kt+1
In what follows, we let kt+1
at age t + 1 in the baseline and in the presence of an ECCT, respectively. In a growthbased ECCT, the planner specifies a triple of policy parameters (t, ρC , φC ). The first
parameter denotes the age at which the policy is announced and implemented. As
mentioned above, to avoid having to consider issues of intertemporal strategic behavior,
we restrict the ECCT policies to be limited to one period and to be unanticipated by
the population of households. Throughout the empirical exercise, we set t = 15. At
this age the child’s time investment is more valuable in producing cognitive ability, and
from our estimates, a large proportion of parents are employing ICCTs. The second
parameter denotes the target growth rate of the child’s (latent) human capital, with
the target for a family with age t child quality of kt given by

k t+1 = (1 + ρC )kt
The last parameter, φC , denotes the financial reward received by the household in period
t + 1 if kt+1 ≥k t+1 .
We will be especially interested in comparing the efficiency of the three transfer
programs: unrestricted, restricted, and conditional, where efficiency will be defined as
the increase in average child ability relative to baseline for a given per capita transfer
payment, with all of our comparisons involving a one-time policy involving families of
15 year olds. Thus, we will be comparing the values of k16 in the baseline with its value
under the policy. The payoff to the unrestricted and restricted policies is relatively
straightforward to determine. Since child quality is a normal good in all households,
the average child quality in the targeted households is a continuous and increasing
function of φU or φR .
In the case of an ECCT, it is somewhat more complicated to determine the cost
of a program because of the variability in the take-up rate. In this case, we begin by
positing a given desired improvement in average growth with respect to baseline. If
baseline average growth in cognitive ability between year t and year t + 1 among our
∗
P
kh,t+1
−kh,t
target population of size N is defined as gt = N −1 N
, then we specify
h=1
kh,t
53

∗∗
P
kh,t+1
−kh,t
, so that we look for the program
a desired growth rate of gt∗∗ = N −1 N
h=1
kh,t
parameters that minimize average per capita cost and that produce an average child
quality growth of gt∗∗ , where the planner restricts himself to choosing gt∗∗ ≥ gt . It is
important to note that the program parameters that are chosen are those that satisfy

(ρC , φC )∗ (g) = arg

min

ρC ,φC
∗∗ (ρ ,φ )=g
s.t. gt+1
C C

NC (ρC , φC )
φC ,
N

(5)

where NC is the number of households that receive φC , N is the size of the target
∗∗
population, and gt+1
(ρC , φC ) is the average growth in child cognitive ability in the
target population under the ECCT. The minimand is average per capita cost. The
take-up rate is NC (ρC , φC )/N.
Because it is difficult to determine the per capita cost of an optimally-designed
ECCT chosen to achieve a growth rate of g, we have solved (5) for a variety of values of
g, and then interpolated the relationship between per capita cost and g in the figures
described below, which examine the relationship between per capita cost and the growth
in child quality in period t + 1 relative to baseline.
In Table 11 we examine the impact of an ECCT offering φC = 250 dollars in the
event that the growth in child quality between ages 15 and 16 is at least ρC = 20 percent,
for the benchmark model of a costly ICCT. In the comparison with the situation of no
ICCT, the growth requirement is reduced to ρC = 17.5 percent because of the lower
baseline growth rate when ICCTs are excluded. In comparison with the φU = φR = 170
cases in Tables 9 and 10, we see dramatic increases in the average level of k16 under
the ECCT policy. With respect to the baseline, the proportional increases in the time
investments of the parents and the child are approximately an order of magnitude larger
under the ECCT than under restricted transfers. Because of the restriction on the use
of the transfer, the expenditures on child investment are higher under the restricted
transfer case.
The parents’ time spent in leisure and at work decline markedly, unlike the situation
under restricted or unrestricted transfers to the household. The child’s time investment
increases by 30.6 percent, as parents are increasingly likely to use ICCTs and to increase
the reward elasticity. The proportion of households using an ICCT increases by 21.7
percent, and the average reward elasticity of all households using an ICCT increases
by 103.59 percent. The consumption of parents and the child fall signficantly at age
15, but recall that meeting the requirement of the ECCT increases household income
when the child is 16 and increases the terminal value of both parents and the child by
increasing the terminal value of child quality. We see that the utility of both parents
and the child at age 16 are increased under the policy.
When there is no possibility of using an ICCT, the ECCT policy still has a substantial impact on average child quality at age 16, increasing it by 2.92 percent. This
is less than what is achieved when it is possible to utilize an ICCT, largely because it
expands the parents’ ability to influence the investment decision of the child. With no
ICCT, increases in the parents’ time investments in the child only serve to crowd out the
54

child’s time investments. With an ICCT, the parents can counteract this by increasing
the incentive offered to their child to study. In the baseline case of a costly ICCT, child
study time increased by over 30 percent even in the face of dramatic increases in the
parents’ own investment time. Instead, in the situation with ICCTs, the child’s time
investment falls by 4.84 percent in response to the large increase in the parents’ time
investments. Other responses of the parents and the child in the no ICCT case are not
as dramatically different from the baseline situation of costly ICCTs.
In Table 12 we compare the impacts of various ECCTs that vary in their per capita
cost and have been designed to meet a particular target gain in average kt+1 with
respect to the baseline of no ECCT. Column (0) contains the baseline situation for the
costly ICCT case. The average growth in latent child ability between ages 15 and 16
is 12.3 percent, with a standard deviation of 4.1 percent. We find that 72 percent of
households are using an ICCT when their child is 15 years of age. Among households
using an ICCT at age 15, the average reward elasticity is 0.239.
Column (1) contains the results from imposing an ICCT that produces a gain in
the average child quality growth of of 2.1 percentage points relative to baseline, or
∗∗
gt+1
= 14.4 percent. This gain is substantially greater than what was realized under
either the unrestricted or restricted transfers of φU = φR = 170, and yet the per capita
cost of this gain is only 36, or 21 percent of the amount given to all families under
the unconditional transfers. The optimal combination of ρC and φC in this case is
ρC = 0.185 and φC = 75, so that even those families who qualify for the transfer receive
95 less than under the unconditional transfers that we examined in Tables 9 and 10.
We see that the standard deviation of child quality at age 16 slightly increases under
this particular ECCT.
The threshold-based CCT pays all parents whose child’s latent ability at age 16
satisfies k16 ≥ k 16 . In some cases, the child would have met the requirement even in
∗
≥ k 16 . In this case, the transfer is
the absence of the program, that is, whenever k16
∗
the same as an unrestricted transfer φU = 75. In other cases, when k16
< k 16 , the
parents may decide to devote additional resources to child investment so as to meet
∗∗
the threshold, and in this case we have k16
= k 16 . In order to judge the effectiveness
of the incentive device, it is important to separate these two cases when we examine
the overall take-up rate. In panel (c) of Table 12, we see that the take-up rate for
this program is 48 percent. In order to receive the transfer, 42.1 percent of the target
population have to increase their pre-policy levels of investment so as to qualify for the
transfer. Under this metric, the incentives built into the program are quite effective.
Our main interest is in the relationship between ECCTs and parents’ decisions to
employ ICCTs. In panel (d), we see that there is an increase in the proportion of
households using an ICCT of 6.1 percentage points with respect to baseline, even with
the rather low transfer amount of φC = 75. Prior to the policy, among the subset
∗
of households who would adjust their baseline level of k16
in order to qualify for the
transfer, 81.6 percent were using an ICCT. However, in the presence of the ECCT,
the proportion of these households that use an ICCT in order to receive the reward,
∗∗
in which case k16
= k 16 , is 96.7 percent. We see that the ICCT is a crucial element
55

of reducing the current period utility loss to the parents of qualifying for the reward
through the incentivization of their child to spend more time studying. This is also
reflected in changes in the average reward elasticity among those households using an
ICCT. In the baseline, this average was 0.239, while under the policy the average reward
elasticity increases to 0.309.
In columns (2) through (4) of Table 12, we report results for more expensive ECCTs.
In column (2), the gain in average growth relative to baseline is 3.2 percentage points,
∗∗
or gt+1
= 15.5 percent, and the per capita cost of this program is 72.2. The optimal
target growth rate for this targeted increase in average quality is ρC = 0.195, and
the reward is φC = 135. In comparison with the baseline of no program, we see that
besides increasing the average level of k16 by 2.39 percent, the standard deviation of
k16 decreases slightly from 5.493 to 5.480. The take-up rate increases to 53.5 percent,
∗
with 93.5 percent of the households receiving the transfer increasing k16
to k 16 . Of the
∗
individuals who would increase k16 to k 16 in order to receive the transfer, 78.2 percent
were using an ICCT before the policy. After the policy, the use of ICCTs among this
subset of incentivized households increases to 97.8 percent. The reward elasticity also
increased substantially among households using an ICCT, to 0.347 from 0.309 under
the less ambitious and costly ECCT in column (1).
These patterns continue to be observed as we increase the size of the targeted change
in average child quality. In columns (3) and (4), the increase in the average growth rate
gt with respect to baseline is 4.2 and 4.8 percentage points, respectively. The per capita
costs of these programs are 115.4 and 146.3, still far less than the unconditional policies
that we considered. We see that under both of these policies, the substantial increase
in average child quality also occurs with a small reduction in inequality, as measured by
the standard deviation of k16 . As was noted when discussing the less ambitious ECCTs,
the increased utilization of ICCTs is crucial in producing a relatively high take-up rate
for modest program costs. As the reward threshold increases, we also see substantial
increases in the reward elasticities, as noted earlier.

6.4

Comparison of the Effectiveness of the Policies

We conclude our policy analysis by examining the cost effectiveness of the unrestricted,
restricted, and conditional cash transfer programs in terms of the gain in the average
growth rate in child quality with respect to baseline (i.e., gt∗∗ − gt ) by per capita cost.
The results are summarized in Figure 4.
In the Figure, we plot six curves, which correspond to the three types of policies with
and without costly ICCTs. As we have seen previously, the existence of an unrestricted
transfer of φU = 170 had no impact on the proportion of households using an ICCT.
In the case of a restricted cash transfer of φR = 170, we saw that there was a negligible
impact on the proportion of households using an ICCT. In contrast, conditional cash
transfer programs of various types, in terms of ρC and φC , increased the usage of ICCTs
markedly. Therefore we expect that the cost-effectiveness advantage of the conditional
cash transfer policy to decrease when ICCTs are not available to households.
56

We see large differences between the programs in terms of cost effectiveness, whether
or not ICCTs are available to be utilized by households. For example, for a per capita
expenditure of 100, an unconditional cash transfer produces well less than an 0.3 percentage point average gain in child quality at age 16, whereas a restricted transfer of 100
produces an average gain of approximately 0.5 percentage points. Instead, the average
gain for an optimally-designed ECCT is approximately 3.8 percentage points . This
advantage decreases if households do not have access to ICCTs, but is still substantial
even in that case.
We have considered very expensive programs as well, up to a per capita cost of 400.
In this case, unrestricted transfers yield an average gain in child cognitive ability at age
16 of less than 1 percentage point, while restricted transfers of that amount are able
to produce slightly more than a 3 percentage point gain. An ECCT of that amount
is able to produce more than a 6 percentage point gain in our baseline model (with
ICCTs available). However, in all cases, we should note that the gains with respect
to increased per capita expenditures are decreasing rapidly at high levels of transfers.
This indicates the limits of these types of programs in a setting in which the social
planner must face intermediaries (parents) with very different objectives.
We have been comparing policies almost exclusively in terms of their impacts on
average child cognitive ability, but inequality is an important consideration, as well.
Even if the superiority of ECCT programs was clearly established in terms of average
quality improvements, we might feel differently about such programs if they greatly
increased inequality in the child cognitive ability distribution. In Figure 5, we plot
the standard deviation of k16 under the various programs with respect to the standard
deviation without any policy. We find that the ECCT program actually acquits itself
well under this criterion, as well. The ECCT decreases variability at any reasonably
costly program level with respect to baseline. Restricted cash transfers actually tend
to increase inequality in kt+1 , whereas unrestricted cash transfers have little effect on
inequality. Therefore, the case in favor of ECCTs (especially when ICCTs are available)
is strengthened. In addition to be the most cost-effective way to increase average child
quality (among the small set of policies that we have considered), they also seem to
reduce inequality in the distribution of cognitive ability.

7

Conclusion

We observe that investments of children in themselves, primarily by studying independently, increase as the child matures. We develop a model of the child’s cognitive
growth in which both parents and children take an active role. Within our modeling
framework, there exist three primary mechanisms that produce such a result. The
first is associated with changes in the productive value of the child’s study time as
she ages, which is consistent with our model estimates. We estimate that the child’s
time inputs become more valuable than the parents’ at later stages of the development
period. A second mechanism is the increase in the child’s valuation of future events,
57

reflected in a non-decreasing discount factor sequence over the development period.
This phenomenon has been well-documented in research conducted by developmental
psychologists. As the child becomes more forward-looking, the incentive to invest in
their own human capital increases. The third mechanism is related to the choice of
parenting styles. By paying a cost, parents can incentivize their children to invest their
time as the parents prefer through linking the child’s consumption to the amount of
time they spend studying. Since the value of this incentive mechanism increases with
the child’s age as their study time increases in value, and since parents tend to place
a higher value on child ability than does the child, the use of these contracts increases
over the development period and produces, generally speaking, higher levels of cognitive
ability than would be produced in the absence of this mechanism.
Our estimates of the model parameters are reasonable and fit the data well given.
We estimate that an increasing share of households use incentive mechanisms to motivate their children to study more as their children age. At the end of the development
period (age 16 in our case), over 80 percent of households utilize this incentive mechanism. Using our baseline parameter estimates, we show that the costliness of using this
mechanism has sizable effects on the population distribution of cognitive ability in the
population at the end of the development process. For households in which the child
is 15 years old, we estimate that 72 percent of households use ICCTs, and that the
growth rate of child quality is 12.3 percent. When we preclude the possibility of using
an ICCT, the growth rate drops to 10.5 percent.
We show that the choice of parenting styles is important when considering the
design of transfers to households that are designed to increase investments in child
cognitive ability. In threshold-based reward systems, in which the parents are given
a monetary transfer if their child exhibits an increase in cognitive ability greater than
some predetermined amount, the use of an ICCT can alleviate the utility cost of reaching
the threshold and receiving the reward. In our policy experiments, we show that the
increase in the use of ICCTs in the presence of these types of external reward systems
can be substantial. Without the potential to use such rewards, these programs would
be less cost effective from the perspective of the social planner.

References
[1] Agostinelli, F. and M. Wiswall, 2016. “Estimating the technology of children’s
skills formation”, NBER Working Paper 2244.
[2] Akabayashi, H., 1996. “On the role of incentives in the formation of human capital
in the family”, Dissertation, University of Chicago.
[3] Akabayashi, H., 2006. “An Equilibrium Model of Child Maltreatment”, Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, Elsevier, vol. 30(6), pages 993-1025, June.

58

[4] Bagger, J. F. Fontaine, F. Postel-Vinay, J.M. Robin 2014 ”Tenure, Experience,
Human Capital, and Wages: A Tractable Equilibrium Search Model of Wage Dynamics”, American Economic Review, 104, 6:1551-96.
[5] Barczyk, B. and M. Kredler, 2018. “Evaluating Long-Term Care Policy Options,
Taking the Family Seriously”, Review of Economic Studies, 85(2), 766-809.
[6] Becker, G. S., 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis”,
Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 70:9-29.
[7] Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes, 1976. “Child Endowments and the Quantity and
Quality of Children”, Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press,
vol. 84(4): S143-62, August.
[8] Ben-Porath, Y., 1967. “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of
Earnings”, Journal of Political Economy, 75(4): 352-365.
[9] Boar, C., 2018. “Dynastic Precautionary Savings”, Working paper.
[10] Bonke, J., 2013. “Do Danish children and young people receive pocket money?”,
Study Papers 57, Rockwool Foundation Research Unit.
[11] Carneiro, P. and J.J. Heckman, 2003. “Human Capital Policy”, in: J. Heckman
and A. Krueger, Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policy?,
MIT Press.
[12] Castillo M., Ferraro P., Jordan J. and R. Petrie, 2011. “The today and tomorrow
of kids: Time preferences and educational outcomes of children”, Journal of Public
Economics, 2011, vol. 95, issue 11, pages 1377-1385.
[13] Cooper, H., Lindsay, J. J., Nye, B., and S. Greathouse, 1998. “Relationships among
attitudes about homework, amount of homework assigned and completed, and
student achievement”, Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(1), 70-83.
[14] Cooper, H., Robinson J. C. and E.A. Patall, 2006. “Does homework improve academic achievement? A synthesis of research, 1987–2003”, Review of Educational
Research, 76(1): 1–62.
[15] Cosconati M., 2009. “Parenting style and the development of human capital in
children”, Dissertation available from ProQuest, AAI3363272.
[16] Cunha, F., Heckman, J.J., and L. Lochner, 2006. “Interpreting the Evidence on
Life Cycle Skill Formation”, in E. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessman,(eds.),
Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 1, 697-812, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[17] Cunha F., and J.J. Heckman, 2008. “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the
Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation”, Journal of Human
Resources, 43(4): 738-782.
59

[18] Cunha, F., Heckman, J.J., and S.M. Schennach, 2010. “Estimating the technology
of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation”, Econometrica, 78(3), 883-931.
[19] Currie, J., and D. Almond, 2011. “Human capital development before age five”, in
David Card and Orley Ashenfelter (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4B,
1315-1486, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[20] Dauphin, A., El Lahga, A.R., Fortin, B., and G. Lacroix 2011. “Are Children
Decision-Makers within the Household?”, Economic Journal, 121:871-903.
[21] Del Boca, D. and C. Flinn, 2012. “Endogenous household interaction”, Journal of
Econometrics, 166, issue 1, p. 49-65.
[22] Del Boca, D., Flinn, C., and M. Wiswall, 2014. “Household choice and child development”, Review of Economic Studies, 81:137-185.
[23] Del Boca, D., Flinn, C., and M. Wiswall, 2016. “Transfers to families with children
and child outcomes”, Economic Journal, 526: F138-F183, October 2016.
[24] Del Boca, D., Monfardini, C. and C. Nicoletti, 2017. “Parental and child time and
cognitive development of adolescents”, Journal of Labor Economics, 35(2):565-608.
[25] Doepke, M., Sorrenti G., and Zilibotti, F. (2019) “The Economics of Parenting,”
NBER Working Paper No. 25533.
[26] Doepke, M. and Zilibotti, F. (2017) “Parenting with Style: Altruism and Paternalism in Intergenerational Preference Transmission”, Econometrica, 85(5): 13311371.
[27] Fang, H. and D. Silverman (2009). “Time-inconsistency and Welfare Program Participation: Evidence from the NLSY”, International Economic Review, 50: 10431077.
[28] Fiorini, M., and M. Keane, 2014. “How the Allocation of Children’s Time Affects
Cognitive and Noncognitive Development”, Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4):
787 - 836.
[29] Flinn, C.J., Gemici A., S. Laufer, 2017. “Search, Matching, and Training”, Review
of Economic Dynamics, 25:260-297.
[30] Flinn, C. and J. Mullins, 2015. “Labor Market Search and Schooling Investment”,
International Economic Review, 56 (2): 359-398.
[31] Hao L., J. Hotz and Ginger Z. Jin, 2008. “Games Parents and Adolescents Play:
Risky Behaviour, Parental Reputation and Strategic Transfers”, Economic Journal, vol. 118(528): 515-555.

60

[32] Hofferth, S., Davis-Kean, P., Davis, J., and Finkelstein, J., 1998. “User guide
for the Child Development Supplement of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics”,
http://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/CDS/usergd.html.
[33] Hotz, V. and J. Pantano, 2015. “Strategic parenting, birth order, and school performance”,Journal of Population Economics, Springer;European Society for Population Economics, vol. 28(4), pages 911-936, October.
[34] Kaplan, G., 2012. “Moving Back Home: Insurance Against Labor Market Risk”,
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 120, no. 3.
[35] Kooreman, P., 2007. “Time, money, peers, and parents; some data and theories on
teenage behavior”, Journal of Population Economics, 20(1): 9-33.
[36] Lentz, R. and N. Roys, 2015. “Training and Search On the Job”, NBER Working
Papers 21702, National Bureau of Economic Research.
[37] Lizzeri, A. and M. Siniscalchi, 2008. “Parental Guidance and Supervised Learning”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123( 3): 1161-1195.
[38] Lord, F. M. and M. Novick, 1968. “Statistical Theories of Mental Test Scores”,
Reading MA: Addison-Welsley Publishing Company.
[39] Lundberg, S. and R. A. Pollak, 1993. “Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market”, Journal of Political Economy,101, no. 6, Dec. 1993, 988-1010.
[40] Lundberg, S., J. Romich, and K. Tsang, 2009. “Decision-making by children”,
Review of Economics of the Household, 7: 1-30.
[41] Macartney, H., 2016. “Incentives in Education and Teacher Effort”, mimeo.
[42] Nishiyama, S., 2002. “Bequests, Inter Vivos Transfers, and Wealth Distribution”,
Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(4), 892-931.
[43] Steinberg, L., Brian, A., Cauffman, E., Graham, S., Wooland, J. and A. Banich,
2009. “Age Differences in Future Orientation and Delay Discounting”, Child Development, 80:28-44.
[44] Wasmer, E. 2006. “General versus Specific Skills in Labor Markets with Search
Frictions and Firing Costs”, American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 96(3), pages 811-831.
[45] Weinberg, B., 2001. “An Incentive Model of the Effect of Parental Income on
Children”, Journal of Political Economy, 109(2) (April), pp. 266-280.
[46] Weitzman, M., 1980. “The Ratchet Principle and Performance Incentives”, Bell
Journal of Economics, 11, issue 1, p. 302-308.
61

[47] Woodcock, R., and M. Johnson, 1989. “Tests of Achievement, Standard Battery”
[Form B], Chicago, IL: Riverside Publishing (Houghton Mifflin).

62

Figure 1: Child Self-investment Time by Income Quartile and Child Age

Source: PSID-CDS combined sample from 1997, 2002 and 2007 interviews and PSID
core data between 1986 and 2010.
Notes: Income quartiles are defined based on weekly household income, after aggregating all observations for a given household into a single income measure. The bars
represent the average weekly child self-investment time for households within each of
the four income quartiles, when the child is either between 9 − 12 years old or between
13 − 16 years old.

63

Figure 2: Average Child’s Letter Word Score

Source: CDS combined sample from 1997, 2002 and 2007 interviews.

64

Figure 3: Estimated Technology Parameters by Child Age
(a) All Time Inputs (avg. across all households)

(b) Indiv. Parental Time, High School vs.
College

(c) Joint Parental Time, High School vs. College

(d) Child Goods

(e) Lagged Child Quality

(f) Total Factor Productivity

65

Figure 4: Counterfactual Simulations: Cost-effectiveness of each policy

Notes: Each line plots the increase in the average growth rate in the child’s latent value
of child quality between the ages of 15 and 16, under a variety of counterfactual policy
experiments where each household receives a one-time transfer at the start of either
period t = 15 (for the UCT and RCT) or t = 16 (for the ECCT). The horizontal axis
shows the average cost per household, in dollars per week. For the ECCT, this is equal
to the product of the transfer amount and the take-up rate. The solid lines correspond
to pure income transfers, where the subsidy simply accrues to the household’s nonlabor income (It ), without any restrictions on how the money should be spent. The
dashed lines correspond to targeted transfers, where the subsidy can only be spent
directly on child goods during the period in which the transfer occurs (et ). The dashdotted lines correspond to External CCTs, where we only plot the convex hull created
by the “optimal” policies, i.e. those achieving the largest gains in average growth of
child quality at every average cost level. In order to see how the presence of Internal
CCTs affects the effectiveness of each type of policy, we compare policy results for
the benchmark model with endogenous (costly) Internal CCTs (i.e. the black lines) to
those implied by the model where Internal CCTs are not available (i.e. the grey lines).
Note that the baseline growth in child quality is lower for the model without Internal
CCTs. For comparison, the vertical axis therefore plots the increase in the average
growth rate relative to the respective baseline growth rate for each of the two models.
All experiments were done using R = 10 simulated data sets.

66

Figure 5: Counterfactual Simulations: Distributional effects of each policy (σ(kt+1 ))

Notes: Each line plots how the standard deviation of the child’s latent value of child
quality at the age of 16 (i.e. σ(k16 )) changes under a variety of counterfactual policy
experiments, where each household receives a one-time transfer at the start of either
period t = 15 (for the UCT and RCT) or t = 16 (for the ECCT). The horizontal axis
shows the average cost per household, in dollars per week. For the ECCT, this is equal
to the product of the transfer amount and the take-up rate. The solid lines correspond
to pure income transfers, where the subsidy simply accrues to the household’s non-labor
income (It ), without any restrictions on how the money should be spent. The dashed
lines correspond to targeted transfers, where the subsidy can only be spent directly
on child goods during the period in which the transfer occurs (et ). The dash-dotted
lines correspond to External CCTs, where we only plot the results for the “optimal”
policies, i.e. those achieving the largest gains in average growth of child quality at
every average cost level. In order to see how the presence of Internal CCTs affects
the effectiveness of each type of policy, we compare policy results for the benchmark
model with endogenous (costly) Internal CCTs (i.e. the black lines) to those implied
by the model where Internal CCTs are not available (i.e. the grey lines). Note that the
baseline standard deviation of child quality is different for the model without Internal
CCTs. For comparison, the vertical axis therefore plots the proportional change in the
standard deviation relative to the respective baseline standard deviation for each of the
two models. All experiments were done using R = 10 simulated data sets.

67

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
PSID-CDS: 1997, 2002, 2007
Mother’s age in 1997
Father’s age in 1997
Mother’s education
Father’s education
Child’s age in 1997
Letter Word raw score in 1997
Letter Word raw score in 2002
Letter Word raw score in 2007

Mean
36.91
39.08
14.63
14.19
6.76
23.37
46.60
50.44

Std.
5.38
6.44
2.09
2.31
2.33
15.49
5.40
3.42

N
247
247
247
247
247
247
247
109

Std.
16.45
11.52
13.32
18.38
160.29

N
2466
2407
1852
2306
2356

PSID-Core: 1986 - 2010
Mother’s work hours per week
Father’s work hours per week
Mother’s hourly wage
Father’s hourly wage
Non-labor income per week

Mean
23.29
42.64
20.13
28.79
88.77

Notes: Parental work hours, wages and non-labor income statistics are averaged over
all years where the child is between 0 and 16 years old, ranging from 1986 to 2010.
Source: PSID-CDS combined sample from 1997, 2002 and 2007 interviews and PSID
core data between 1986 and 2010.

68

Table 2: Parental Labor Supply by Child Age

Child Age
Mothers working
Fathers working
Both working
Child Age
Mothers
Fathers

Fraction Working > 0 Hours
4-5
6-8
9-11

3
0.796
0.990
0.781
3
27.77
43.57

0.766
0.985
0.746

0.787
0.982
0.758

0.816
0.985
0.794

Avg. Hours Working (> 0 Hours)
4-5
6-8
9-11
28.87
43.14

28.97
44.56

29.99
43.33

12-15
0.846
0.961
0.804
12-15
31.77
43.76

Notes: Upper half of the table shows labor force participation rates. Bottom half
shows average labor hours conditional on working positive hours.
Source: PSID-CDS combined sample from 1997, 2002 and 2007 interviews and PSID
core data between 1986 and 2010.

Table 3: Time Allocation by Child Age (Average Hours per Week)
Child Age
Mother’s Work Hours
Father’s Work Hours
Mother’s Active Time
Father’s Active Time
Joint Parental Time
Child’s Self-Investment Time
School Time

3

4-5

6-8

9-11

12-15

22.10
43.13
26.12
13.68
7.17
0.00
11.25

22.12
42.49
20.41
7.92
10.59
0.67
11.89

22.81
43.78
14.32
5.28
9.59
1.42
27.77

24.47
42.70
11.18
4.95
10.10
3.37
31.43

26.89
42.03
6.88
4.18
7.88
6.01
35.17

Notes: Parental work hours, wages and non-labor income statistics are averaged over
all years where the child is between 0 and 16 years old, ranging from 1986 to 2010.
Source: PSID-CDS combined sample from 1997, 2002 and 2007 interviews and PSID
core data between 1986 and 2010.

69

Table 4: Preference Parameter Estimates
(a) Parental preferences

Mean
Estimate
SE
0.240
(0.00195)
0.301
(0.00143)
0.298
(0.00261)
0.161
(0.00066)

Std.
Estimate
SE
0.034
(0.00152)
0.022
(0.00191)
0.007
(0.00147)
0.052
(0.00133)

Leisure (λ1 )
Consumption (λ2 )
Child Quality (λ3 )

Mean
Estimate
SE
0.425
(0.00428)
0.165
(0.00757)
0.410
(0.00338)

Std.
Estimate
SE
0.221
(0.00320)
0.050
(0.00194)
0.184
(0.00133)

(c) Correlations
Correlation of α1 and α2
Correlation of α1 and α3
Correlation of α1 and λ1
Correlation of α2 and α3
Correlation of α2 and λ1
Correlation of α3 and λ2
Correlation of λ1 and λ2
Correlation of α1 and λ2
Correlation of α2 and λ2
Correlation of α3 and λ1

Estimate
0.295
-0.688
0.467
0.086
0.516
0.005
0.688
0
0
0

SE
(0.00383)
(0.01255)
(0.00174)
(0.02009)
(0.00723)
(0.01029)
(0.02187)
-

(d) Other preferences
Altruism (ϕ)
Parents’ Terminal Valuation (ξp )
Child’s Terminal Valuation (ξc )
Mean/Std. of ICCT Costs (κ)

Estimate
0.333
5.198
0.810
0.009

SE
(0.08400)
(0.00983)
(0.00135)

Mother’s Leisure (α1 )
Father’s Leisure (α2 )
Consumption (α3 )
Child Quality (α4 )
(b) Child preferences

Notes: SEs are standard errors computed using a cluster bootstrap sampling each
household with replacement. Parameters without SE are assumed (not estimated)
values.

70

Table 5: Technology Parameter Estimates

Mother’s Active Time (δ1 )

Father’s Active Time (δ2 )

Joint Parental Time (δ3 )

Child Expenditures (δ4 )
Child’s Self-Investment Time (δ5 )
Last Period’s Child Quality (δ6 )
Total Factor Productivity (Rt )

Intercept γ1,0
Slope γ1,1
Mother’s Educ. γ1,2
Intercept γ2,0
Slope γ2,1
Father’s Educ. γ2,2
Intercept γ3,0
Slope γ3,1
Mother’s Educ. γ3,2
Father’s Educ. γ3,3
Intercept γ4,0
Slope γ4,1
Intercept γ5,0
Slope γ5,1
Intercept γ6,0
Slope γ6,1
γ7,0
γ7,1
γ7,2
γ7,3

Estimate
-0.244
-0.252
-0.001
-1.662
-0.239
0.042
-1.259
-0.133
0.020
0.018
-4.219
-0.053
-7.930
0.249
-1.644
0.264

SE
(0.03502)
(0.00683)
(0.00007)
(0.04973)
(0.00846)
(0.00276)
(0.06380)
(0.00127)
(0.00219)
(0.00100)
(0.17291)
(0.00118)
(0.13529)
(0.00942)
(0.01502)
(0.00170)

0.47365
1.01128
1.44493
8.24483

(0.00677)
(0.00414)
(0.13486)
(0.10487)

exp(γ

+γ

(t−1))

i,1
Notes: Productivity parameters take the form δi,t = 0.01 + 0.99 exp(γi,0
, for all
i,0 +γi,1 (t−1))
i = 1, ..., 6 and t = 1, ..., 16. Total Factor Productivity parameters take the form Rt =
γ7,1 −γ7,0
. SEs are standard errors computed using a cluster bootstrap
γ7,0 + 1+exp(−γ
7,2 (t−γ7,3 ))
sampling each household with replacement.

71

Table 6: Wage and Income Parameter Estimates
(a) Mother’s Log Wage Offer
Intercept (η0,1 )
Mother’s Age (η1,1 )
Mother’s Education (η2,1 )
Standard Deviation of Shock (σw1 )
Correlation with Father’s Wage Shock (ρ12 )

Estimate
0.838
0.013
0.098
0.445
0.602

SE
(0.00714)
(0.00022)
(0.00073)
(0.01300)
(0.01705)

(b) Father’s Log Wage Offer
Intercept (η0,2 )
Father’s Age (η1,2 )
Father’s Education (η2,2 )
Standard Deviation of Shock (σw2 )

Estimate
1.364
0.013
0.097
0.542

SE
(0.00446)
(0.00029)
(0.00030)
(0.05838)

(c) Latent Non-Labor Income
Logit - Intercept (µ1 )
Logit - Mother’s Age (µ2 )
Logit - Mother’s Age Squared (µ3 )
Logit - Mother’s Education (µ4 )
Logit - Father’s Age (µ5 )
Logit - Father’s Age Squared (µ6 )
Logit - Father’s Education (µ7 )
Conditional - Intercept (µ8 )
Conditional - Mother’s Age (µ9 )
Conditional - Mother’s Age Squared (µ10 )
Conditional - Mother’s Education (µ11 )
Conditional - Father’s Age (µ12 )
Conditional - Father’s Age Squared (µ13 )
Conditional - Father’s Education (µ14 )
Standard Deviation of Shock (σI )

Estimate
-4.905
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.115
-0.001
0.243
2.207
0.000
-0.000
0.003
0.045
-0.000
-0.001
1.278

SE
(0.11379)
(0.00009)
(0.00007)
(0.00002)
(0.00337)
(0.00010)
(0.00673)
(0.15222)
(0.00004)
(0.00004)
(0.00849)
(0.00413)
(0.00005)
(0.00073)
(0.03250)

Notes: SEs are standard errors computed using a cluster bootstrap sampling each
household with replacement.

72

Table 7: Sample Fit of Time Allocations by Child Age
(a) Probability Work > 0 Hours
Mother

Father

Child Age

Data

Simulated

Data

Simulated

3-5
6-8
9-11
12-15

0.777
0.787
0.816
0.846

0.751
0.798
0.812
0.844

0.987
0.982
0.985
0.961

0.988
0.989
0.991
0.993

(b) Hours Worked if Work > 0 Hours (Avg.)
Mother

Father

Child Age

Data

Simulated

Data

Simulated

3-5
6-8
9-11
12-15

28.45
28.97
29.99
31.77

27.04
27.63
29.70
32.52

43.30
44.56
43.33
43.76

42.31
43.91
43.63
44.77

(c) Active Time with Child (Avg.)
Mother

Father

Child Age

Data

Simulated

Data

Simulated

3-5
6-8
9-11
12-15

21.01
14.32
11.18
6.88

20.85
15.12
12.09
6.99

8.53
5.28
4.95
4.18

8.95
6.58
5.53
3.56

(d) Joint Parental Time with Child (Avg.)
Child Age

Data

Simulated

3-5
6-8
9-11
12-15

10.23
9.59
10.10
7.88

10.34
10.42
11.22
8.92

(e) Child Self-Investment Time (Avg.)
Child Age
3-5
6-8
9-11
12-15

Data

Simulated

0.60
1.42
3.37
6.01

1.39
1.30
2.68
5.49

Notes: Data is actual data. Simulated is the model prediction at estimated parameters.
731997, 2002 and 2007 interviews and PSID
Source: PSID-CDS combined sample from
core data between 1986 and 2010.

Table 8: Sample Fit of Wages and Non-Labor Income
(a) Hourly Wages
Average
Standard deviation

Mother
Data

Simulated

Data

Simulated

20.13
13.32

21.82
13.07

28.79
18.38

30.77
16.24

(b) Weekly Non-labor Income
Data
Average
Standard deviation
Fraction with I > 0

Father

Simulated

89.41
161.77
0.73

87.69
161.46
0.73

Notes: Data is actual data. Simulated is the model prediction at estimated parameters.
Source: PSID-CDS combined sample from 1997, 2002 and 2007 interviews and PSID
core data between 1986 and 2010.

74

Table 9: Comparing Models with and without Internal CCTs: Unrestricted Cash Transfer at age 15
Benchmark
Costly ICCT

Special Case
No ICCT

Baseline

Policy

Baseline

Policy

10.56
12.27

+0.32
+2.90

10.02
10.52

+0.32
+3.37

5.61
3.00
7.83
122.51
6.59

+1.33
+2.10
+2.52
+3.13
-0.88

5.73
3.04
7.90
121.40
2.71

+1.35
+2.14
+2.55
+3.13
-1.01

29.03
70.57
45.07
55.37
51.61

-7.87
+2.81
-5.28
+3.80
-0.50

28.50
70.91
44.58
55.75
55.27

-8.01
+2.78
-5.38
+3.80
-0.54

1695.07
509.68
4.40
4.45
3.67
3.75

+3.15
+3.10
+0.49
+0.02
+0.12
+0.04

1707.52
471.55
4.40
4.45
3.67
3.74

+3.16
+3.13
+0.49
+0.02
+0.12
+0.04

0.72
0.17

+0.00
+0.05

-

-

(a) Child Quality
Level kt+1
Growth rate gt in %
(b) Investments
Mother’s Active Time τ1
Father’s Active Time τ2
Joint Parental Time τ12
Child Expenditures e
Child Self-Investment Time τc
(c) Labor Supply and Leisure
Mother’s Hours Work h1
Mother’s Leisure l1
Father’s Hours Work h2
Father’s Leisure l2
Child’s Leisure lc
(d) Consumption and Welfare
Parents’ Consumption c
Child Consumption x
Parents’ Utility u
ep,t
Parents’ Utility u
ep,t+1
Child’s Utility uc,t
Child’s Utility uc,t+1
(e) Internal CCT Use
Prop. Using Internal CCT
Reward Elasticity r

Notes: This table summarizes the effects of an unrestricted cash transfer of 170 dollars per week to all households at age t = 15. Columns 1-2 present results for the
(benchmark) model where households choose whether to use an ICCT at a given cost.
Columns 3-4 present results for the special case where ICCTs are infinitely costly. For
each model, the “Baseline’ column shows averages taken across all households and simulation rounds, at child age t = 15, in the absence of policy. The “Policy’ column
contains average percentage deviations from the respective baseline column. All experiments were done using R = 10 simulated data sets.
75

Table 10: Comparing Models with and without Internal CCTs: Restricted Cash Transfer at age 15
Benchmark
Costly ICCT

Special Case
No ICCT

Baseline

Policy

Baseline

Policy

10.56
12.27

+1.13
+12.55

10.02
10.52

+0.92
+11.32

5.61
3.00
7.83
122.51
6.59

+2.46
+2.51
+2.28
+50.63
+4.21

5.73
3.04
7.90
121.40
2.71

+0.82
+1.27
+1.51
+51.67
-0.68

29.03
70.57
45.07
55.37
51.61

-5.60
+1.86
-3.69
+2.54
-1.21

28.50
70.91
44.58
55.75
55.27

-4.34
+1.51
-2.91
+2.02
-0.33

1695.07
509.68
4.40
4.45
3.67
3.75

+2.47
-2.44
+0.23
+0.07
-0.29
+0.13

1707.52
471.55
4.40
4.45
3.67
3.74

+2.02
+2.12
+0.27
+0.05
+0.07
+0.11

0.72
0.17

+0.84
+11.68

-

-

(a) Child Quality
Level kt+1
Growth rate gt in %
(b) Investments
Mother’s Active Time τ1
Father’s Active Time τ2
Joint Parental Time τ12
Child Expenditures e
Child Self-Investment Time τc
(c) Labor Supply and Leisure
Mother’s Hours Work h1
Mother’s Leisure l1
Father’s Hours Work h2
Father’s Leisure l2
Child’s Leisure lc
(d) Consumption and Welfare
Parents’ Consumption c
Child Consumption x
Parents’ Utility u
ep,t
Parents’ Utility u
ep,t+1
Child’s Utility uc,t
Child’s Utility uc,t+1
(e) Internal CCT Use
Prop. Using Internal CCT
Reward Elasticity r

Notes: This table summarizes the effects of a restricted cash transfer of 170 dollars per
week to all households at age t = 15. Columns 1-2 present results for the (benchmark)
model where households choose whether to use an ICCT at a given cost. Columns 3-4
present results for the special case where ICCTs are infinitely costly. For each model, the
“Baseline’ column shows averages taken across all households and simulation rounds,
at child age t = 15, in the absence of policy. The “Policy’ column contains average
percentage deviations from the respective baseline column. All experiments were done
using R = 10 simulated data sets.
76

Table 11: Comparing Models with and without Internal CCTs: External CCT at age
15
Benchmark
Costly ICCT

Special Case
No ICCT

Baseline

Policy

Baseline

Policy

10.56
12.27

+3.55
+42.26

10.02
10.52

+2.92
+38.74

5.61
3.00
7.83
122.51
6.59

+20.88
+21.83
+23.23
+25.97
+30.62

5.73
3.04
7.90
121.40
2.71

+21.70
+23.20
+24.91
+32.19
-4.84

29.03
70.57
45.07
55.37
51.61

-2.72
-3.32
-1.63
-3.26
-11.17

28.50
70.91
44.58
55.75
55.27

-2.67
-3.83
-1.50
-3.90
-7.32

1695.07
509.68
4.40
4.45
3.67
3.75

-3.01
-5.10
-1.01
+0.60
-1.62
+0.63

1707.52
471.55
4.40
4.45
3.67
3.74

-3.80
-3.64
-0.81
+0.64
-1.09
+0.46

0.72
0.17

+21.70
+103.59

-

-

(a) Child Quality
Level kt+1
Growth rate gt in %
(b) Investments
Mother’s Active Time τ1
Father’s Active Time τ2
Joint Parental Time τ12
Child Expenditures e
Child Self-Investment Time τc
(c) Labor Supply and Leisure
Mother’s Hours Work h1
Mother’s Leisure l1
Father’s Hours Work h2
Father’s Leisure l2
Child’s Leisure lc
(d) Consumption and Welfare
Parents’ Consumption c
Child Consumption x
Parents’ Utility u
ep,t
Parents’ Utility u
ep,t+1
Child’s Utility uc,t
Child’s Utility uc,t+1
(e) Internal CCT Use
Prop. Using Internal CCT
Reward Elasticity r

Notes: This table summarizes the effects of an external conditional cash transfer which
offers a reward of 250 dollars per week at age 16, conditional on the growth rate in child
quality between age 15 and 16 being at least 20 percent for the benchmark model, and
17.5 percent for the no-ICCT model. Columns 1-2 present results for the (benchmark)
model where households choose whether to use an ICCT at a given cost. Columns 3-4
present results for the special case where ICCTs are infinitely costly. For each model, the
“Baseline’ column shows averages taken across all households and simulation rounds,
at child age t = 15, in the absence of policy. The “Policy’ column contains average
percentage deviations from the respective 77
baseline column. All experiments were done
using R = 10 simulated data sets.

Table 12: External CCTs: Comparing Optimal Policies at Age 15
(0)

(1)

(3)

(4)

ECCT Policy

Baseline
Avg. Cost per Household

(2)

-

36.0

72.2

115.4

146.3

-

0.185
75

0.195
135

0.200
195

0.200
225

Growth Rate gt , Average
Growth Rate gt , St.dev.

0.123
0.041

0.144
0.050

0.155
0.052

0.165
0.052

0.171
0.049

Level kt+1 , Average
Level kt+1 , St.dev.

10.562
5.493

10.734
5.503

10.814
5.480

10.878
5.454

10.915
5.437

-

0.480
0.421

0.535
0.500

0.592
0.564

0.650
0.623

0.720
-

0.781
0.816
0.967

0.814
0.782
0.978

0.845
0.757
0.980

0.864
0.745
0.979

0.172
0.239

0.241
0.309

0.282
0.347

0.317
0.375

0.339
0.392

(a) Policy Parameters
Target growth rate ρCCT
Reward φCCT
(b) Child Capital

(c) Take-up Rate
∗∗
Fraction receiving transfer: P r(kt+1
≥ k t+1 )
∗∗
∗
Fraction affected by policy: P r(kt+1
≥ k t+1 > kt+1
)

(d) Fraction using ICCT at time t
All Households
∗∗
∗
≥ k t+1 > kt+1
Baseline, given kt+1
∗∗
∗
Policy, given kt+1 ≥ k t+1 > kt+1
(e) ICCT reward elasticity (rt ) at time t
All Households
Given rt > 0

Notes: All results are obtained for a growth-based External CCT policy administered
when each child is t = 15 years old, where the parents receive a transfer of φCCT if
the child’s optimal level of latent human capital at age t + 1 under the ECCT policy
∗∗
) is at least (1+ρCCT ) times the baseline level at age t, kt . The optimal
(denoted by kt+1
t + 1 level of child quality in the baseline (in the absence of an ECCT policy) is denoted
∗
by kt+1
.

78

