                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FINTECH AND HOUSEHOLD RESILIENCE TO SHOCKS:
                     EVIDENCE FROM DIGITAL LOANS IN KENYA

                                       Prashant Bharadwaj
                                          William Jack
                                          Tavneet Suri

                                       Working Paper 25604
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25604


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2019




Many thanks to Financial Sector Deepening Kenya for funding this research and to Nikita Kohli
and Layane El-Hor for her superb research assistance. This research was conducted in
collaboration with Innovations for Poverty Action, Kenya. We are also grateful to seminar
audiences at Berkeley Haas, Sloan, The World Bank, Apple University, Microsoft Research,
Michigan, George Washington, University of Washington and MIT for comments. Institutional
Review Board (IRB) approvals for the data collection were obtained from MIT. Suri is the
corresponding author: E62-524, 100 Main Street, Cambridge MA 02142. Email:tavneet@mit.edu.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Prashant Bharadwaj, William Jack, and Tavneet Suri. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fintech and Household Resilience to Shocks: Evidence from Digital Loans in Kenya
Prashant Bharadwaj, William Jack, and Tavneet Suri
NBER Working Paper No. 25604
February 2019
JEL No. O16,O33,O55

                                         ABSTRACT

Developing country lenders are taking advantage of fintech tools to create fully digital loans on
mobile phones. Using administrative and survey data, we study the take up and impacts of one of
the most popular digital loan products in the world, M-Shwari in Kenya. While 34% of those
eligible for a loan take it, the loan does not substitute for other credit. The loans improve
household resilience: households are 6.3 percentage points less likely to forego expenses due to
negative shocks. We conclude that while digital loans improve financial access and resilience,
they are not a panacea for greater credit market failures.


Prashant Bharadwaj                              Tavneet Suri
Department of Economics                         MIT Sloan School of Management
University of California, San Diego             100 Main Street, E62-517
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                         Cambridge, MA 02142
La Jolla, CA 92093                              and NBER
and NBER                                        tavneet@mit.edu
prbharadwaj@ucsd.edu

William Jack
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
37th and O Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20016
Billy.Jack@georgetown.edu
I. Introduction

Economists have long noted the importance of access to credit for consumption smoothing.

While access to credit during a time of financial need can play an important role in improving

welfare, the high cost of credit provision – due to information asymmetries, fixed costs, etc. – is

an often noted barrier in both developed and developing countries. The importance of access to

credit for consumption smoothing purposes is even more salient in developing countries where

income is subject to shocks, where social safety nets are few and unreliable and other financial

substitutes are negligible, and where the outcomes of income fluctuations can be more severe.

In this paper, we are the first to study the effects of a major innovation in the world of consumer

finance in a developing country that dramatically lowers the costs of access and provision of

credit: digital loans.

    Digital loans accessed and delivered through mobile phones hold promise in this area as

they substantially lower some of the costs associated with access to credit on the household

side and also reduce the administrative costs of loans from a lender’s perspective.1 In addition,

in the spirit of the growth of fintech, with the advance of novel data sources, banks may find

it easier to score potential borrowers and offer products that leverage pre-existing mobile plat-

forms, thus reducing the information asymmetries (Bjorkegren and Grissen 2018) and providing

smaller and cheaper loans. Digital loans therefore have the potential to help households facing

shocks smooth consumption by instantaneous access to loans, and given their overall lower cost

(compared to payday loans or village money lenders), are also less likely to put households into

a harmful cycle of debt and bankruptcy. This paper finds high take up of small digital loans

among individuals eligible for it, not crowding out of other forms of credit, and also finds that

access to this product increases household resilience in the face of negative shocks.

    The product we study, M-Shwari, is a fully digital bank account operating over the rails of

mobile money (called M-PESA). It was launched in 2012 through a partnership between the
   1
     One potential reason (among many possible contenders) for the low take up of microfinance in some settings
could be the fixed costs associated with accessing and obtaining loans from microfinance institutions, whether in the
form of group lending dynamics or other access related costs of borrowing.




                                                         2
Commercial Bank of Africa (CBA) and Safaricom (the largest telecom provider) in Kenya. The

take up of M-Shwari has been remarkable: within two years of the launch of the product there

were more than 4.5 million active users (nearly 20% of the adult population) and approximately

10 million accounts had been opened. M-Shwari is credited with making the Commercial Bank

of Africa a major player in the lending market: as of 2017, CBA had over 50% of the loan account

market share in Kenya (Central Bank of Kenya Statistics, 2017). A major draw for signing up

for M-Shwari is the loan product where approved customers have access to small, short-term

(30 day, 7.5% monthly interest rate)2 loans even if they had no banking or credit history. The

average M-Shwari loan size (conditional on having a loan) for individuals in our study sample

is around KSh 480 (approximately 4.8 USD) and the average total value of all loans taken out

over 18 months on M-Shwari is KShs 4,000 (approximately 40 USD). 3

       To estimate the take up and impacts of these loans we use a regression discontinuity (RD)

design. M-Shwari loans are issued based on a strict cutoff in the credit score assigned to cus-

tomers as soon as they open an M-Shwari account (not when they chose to borrow). This score

is unknown to the M-Shwari customer. All the customer knows is whether he/she is eligible

for a loan and how much he/she has been approved for (i.e. the credit limit). This allows us to

use an RD design to evaluate the impacts of access to credit. We show empirically that people

who just qualify and those who barely missed the qualification cutoff are similar along various

observable characteristics. This is to be expected if the credit score threshold is determined ex-

ogenously (or through a complex formula where some of these characteristics might be inputs)

and if people are unable to specifically manipulate their scores to fall on one side of the cutoff.

       For the analysis, we use a combination of survey and administrative data. For the surveys

(conducted in September 2016-January 2017), we draw a sample of customers who opened an

account nearly two years before the survey (between January and March 2015). In these two

years, some individuals who were initially unqualified to receive credit eventually become eli-
   2
     As a comparison, the implied annual interest rates for payday loans in the US are between 400-1000% (Stegman
2007).
   3
     M-Shwari loans constitute a significant fraction of overall loans held by households: in our survey data, the
average overall debt taken out by households over the one year prior to the survey is around KSh 16,000.




                                                        3
gible for the digital loan.4 As the take up of the loan is endogenously determined, we only use

the credit score threshold at the time the individual opened the account to assign probability of treat-

ment. Not everyone who has a credit score above the cutoff takes out a loan; hence, incomplete

compliance implies a fuzzy RD design and we estimate intent to treat (ITT) effects.

       Our results provide several important insights into the impacts of access to digital loans,

including the take up of loans.5 First, access to M-Shwari results in a meaningful expansion of

credit for eligible households. Individuals who qualify for loans are nearly 11 percentage points

more likely to take a loan of any kind (digital or otherwise), off a base of 46% in the control

group who have any loans at all (i.e. from across all loans). Second, this increase in household

credit is entirely due to M-Shwari and we find no evidence of substitution from other forms of

credit (such as informal loans, loans from non-digital bank accounts, or loans from peer-to-peer

banking). M-Shwari has an overall take up of nearly 34% among the eligible population we

study in this paper and within two years (between the opening of the account and our survey),

those who initially qualified for M-Shwari have more 37% more loans.6

       Finally, our most important insight on the impact of greater access and receipt of digital

loans is on resilience. Households who are eligible for the loan, while not more likely to face

negative shocks in the 6 months prior to the survey, are significantly less likely to forego ex-

penditures conditional on having a negative shock.7 Note that nearly 90% of our sample report

having experienced one of these negative shocks over the last 6 months. Households eligible

for M-Shwari are 6.3 percentage points less likely to forego any expenses in response to a neg-

ative shock (approximately 68% of the control group reports having to forego some expenses
   4
      Within the M-Shwari system, the individual’s credit score does not change, but those below the credit score can
save in their accounts to later become eligible for a loan. Since the customer does not know their credit score, all they
see is a change in their credit limit.
    5
      In this paper we use the terms “digital loans” and “loans from M-Shwari” interchangeably. There are other,
non-M-Shwari digital loan products; however, in our sample, 93% of all digital loans are M-Shwari loans.
    6
      We do not study the universe of eligible population. This is because we use an RD design and restrict our
surveys and results to a specific bandwidth around the eligibility cutoff. Hence, the eligible population in our case
is a population that would just be qualified to get a loan and perhaps the more vulnerable populations typically
targeted by microfinance institutions anyway.
    7
      We measure negative shocks by asking households about the death of a household member, the illness of house-
hold member, accidental injury, the loss of employment, violent injury, the failure/loss of business, livestock death,
crop disease /pests, theft/robbery/burglary/assault, fire/house destroyed/damaged, and drought/floods, all in
the 6 months prior to the survey date.



                                                           4
in response to a negative shock). Examining finer categories, they are also less likely to forego

expenses on meals, medicines, and non-food items, although these individual results are not

statistically significant under multiple hypothesis testing.

   We also look at consumption to understand where in a household’s budget the loans may

be spent. We find an increase in the propensity to spend on education. Although this may

seem surprising at first, looking at the data, households report spending the loan, quite often,

on emergencies, especially health events. However, even though households spend the actual

loan money on, say, medication, the marginal dollar from the loan gets spent on the item they

would have adjusted had they not had access to the loan. This happens to be education, a result

that is consistent with Jack and Suri (2014) and Suri et al (2012) who find similar effects when

studying how M-PESA affects consumption smoothing.

   We find economically and statistically insignificant impacts on a host of other outcomes such

as savings and asset ownership, suggesting that at least for the affected population around the

credit cut-off, access to digital credit is not necessarily transformative. However, given the size

of these loans, this is to be expected. Similarly, the size of these loans being small is also in

line with eligible households not being overburdened by debt due to increased access to credit:

the ratio of interest to consumption over a one year period conditional on having a loan is only

1.2%.

   The results on take up are an important contribution to the literature on household finance

in developing countries, most of which has focussed on the issue of relatively low take up in

the context of microfinance (see Banerjee et al 2015). In our survey, households have extremely

poor access to any form of formal credit. Only 6% have had a bank loan over the two years prior

to the survey, only 2% have had a microfinance loan, only 5% have had a loan from a savings

and credit cooperative and only 6% from a ROSCA (peer to peer lending). In addition, we find

that M-Shwari does not substitute for other forms of finance, but truly expands credit access.

Taken together, this suggests that ease of access due to mobile technology could be an extremely

important feature for expanding credit access to populations who do not have access to formal

finance.


                                                 5
   Our results on resilience contribute towards an understanding of the role of small, short term

credit in developed and developing countries. Research in consumer finance on payday loans in

the US for example, finds that while access to credit allows individuals to smooth during certain

shocks (Morse 2009, Zinman 2010), the high interest rates charged by these loans often end up

harming borrowers (Skiba and Tobacman 2009, Melzer 2011). Perhaps as a way to resolve this

concern, many researchers have focussed their attention on regulation of interest rates in this

area or behavioral tools that might help borrowers make better decisions regarding payday

loans (Zinman 2010, Bertrand and Morse 2011). Our results add to this rich space by showing

that fintech innovations in developing countries can dramatically lower the costs associated

with lending and borrowing, leading to high take up and improvements in household resilience.

   In the developing country context, Karlan and Zinman (2011) found that net borrowing in-

creased when microfinance clients were offered individual (as opposed to group) liability loans,

but both business activity and subjective well-being fell as a result, although the loans helped

borrowers cope with risk. Tarozzi et al. (2013) report similarly mixed evidence of access to mi-

crocredit in Ethiopia, although Karlan and Zinman (2010) document that access to consumer

loans improved consumption and some measures of mental health. At a more macro level,

Pande and Burgess (2005) study the expansion of the rural bank branch network in India and

find that it resulted in reduced rural poverty, both through higher deposit mobilization and

credit disbursement. Suri and Jack (2016) report on the poverty effects of the expansion of mo-

bile money in rural Kenya, and in their 2014 paper they find evidence that support networks

operate more efficiently in reducing risk in the presence of mobile money.

   While we find effects on resilience, the lack of effects on investments and savings is in line

with the broader literature on microfinance in developing countries. High returns to capital,

as documented for example by de Mel, McKenzie and Woodruff (2008, 2009) and Karlan et al.

(2014), suggest credit or insurance market failures can limit investment in productive activities.

Failures in the credit market in turn may result from asymmetric information and commitment

constraints, or lack of effective competition and sub-optimal screening policies by suppliers

(Karlan and Zinman, 2009, Jack et al., 2017). But even when poor people in the developing


                                                6
world have access to credit, especially through microfinance institutions, the impacts appear

to be limited. A collection of six randomized evaluations of microcredit programs (Banerjee et

al., Tarozzi et al., Attanasio et al., Crepon et al., Angelucci et al., and Augsberg et al., 2015), as

summarized by Banerjee et al. (2015), confirmed “modestly positive, but not transformative,

effects.” In a different study, Crepon et al. (2013) find that access to credit shifted the source

of income from labor earnings to business profits, but with little impact on total income or

consumption.

   In summary, despite the vibrant literature on traditional credit and microcredit and its im-

pacts, there is no evidence on the impact of digital credit products like M-Shwari, which are

relatively new but growing in importance, especially with the expansion of so-called “fintech”

services. Subject to whatever borrowing limit that is placed on borrowers through the credit-

scoring algorithm, access to credit is, in principle, more immediate and more private than tradi-

tional microfinance delivery mechanisms. Our paper is the first to document how individuals

respond to this kind of credit access.



II. Background on M-Shwari

The growth of mobile money in Kenya has prompted a large response from private sector banks

to build credit products over the rails of mobile money. One very successful product that has

been launched is in Kenya, called M-Shwari, a fully digital bank account offered by the Com-

mercial Bank of Africa (CBA), with remunerated savings and credit services. The account is

linked to M-PESA, the popular mobile money service in Kenya, provided by the mobile net-

work operator, Safaricom, and is opened and operated through a USSD application on an ac-

count holder’s phone. Loans are dispensed into users’ mobile money accounts and the money

can be transferred into and out of their M-Shwari accounts (without cost). The withdrawals and

deposits out of M-Shwari accounts use the existing mobile money infrastructure in the coun-

try. M-Shwari offers both a savings account (as well as a lock box savings account) and the

opportunity to get short term loans.



                                                  7
   M-Shwari has been an important source of competitive advantage for CBA in the banking

industry in Kenya. It has grown their market share dramatically and has been an important

source of revenue for them. M-Shwari has transformed the banking industry in Kenya, with

competitors now providing similar products (though their take up is still low). In Figure 1A, we

show how M-Shwari has changed CBA’s place in the banking industry between 2010 and 2017

(remember M-Shwari was launched in late 2012). CBA’s market share in the number of deposit

accounts and the number of loan accounts has grown tremedously and, as can be seen, from

this figure, it all comes from an expansion in the number of small value deposit accounts, i.e.

M-Shwari.

   The loans disbursed by M-Shwari are uncollateralized and start off at rather small amounts,

with the first loan often as low as KSh 100 (one US dollar) but sometimes as high as KSh 10,000.

Over time, even if an individual starts off with a low credit limit, if they repay and save, they

can grow their limit. Each loan has to be repaid within 30 days and is charged a 7.5% facilitation

fee. Behind the loan approval process is a set of credit approval and scoring rules based on

data on the user’s M-PESA record (they have to have been an active M-PESA used for at least

6 months and use other Safaricom products like voice, data and M-PESA). The credit scoring

process gives individuals a loan limit which increases upon the timely repayment of a loan. If

a loan is not paid on time, the loan is extended for another 30 days with a 7.5% facilitation fee

charged on the outstanding balance. After 120 days of non-payment, the borrower is reported

to the credit reference bureau. Note that any prepaid airtime on the user’s phone and M-PESA

balance cannot be used to clear loans (unless the M-PESA balance is moved to M-Shwari as

savings by the user). However, savings in M-Shwari can be reclaimed towards the loan (though

the savings are never locked for the duration of the loan).

   M-Shwari assigns customers a credit score as soon as they sign up for an account, irrespec-

tive of when they choose to borrow. Customers are not informed of their score but are assigned

a first credit limit (that is based on the underlying score). The formula for the credit limits is

separate from that determining the original credit scores. For customers with scores below the

cutoff for being approved for a loan, they are assigned a zero credit limit. Over time, those


                                                8
with zero credit limits can have their limits upgraded by saving in their M-Shwari accounts. We

describe these credit limits and their evolution in more detail in the next section.

   On the savings side, M-Shwari pays interest that accrues daily but only paid out quarterly.

During the period of this study the annual interest rates were 2% for balances between KSh 1

and KSh 10,000, 3% for balances up to KSh 20,000, 4% for balances up to KShs 50,000 and then

5% for balances above KSh 50,000. This study focuses on evaluating only the credit component

of M-Shwari since the research design is based on using the credit score in an RD framework.



III. Data

For this study, we use three different datasets. First, we use administrative data from the bank

for customers that opened their accounts between January and March 2015. The data was pulled

in July 2016, so approximately 18 months after these customers opened their accounts. Second,

we collect survey data on a sample of these customers. We use the administrative data to draw

a sample of 6,000 individuals to survey. Third, we recently received administrative data on a

random sample of 10,000 M-Shwari customers who opened their accounts between January and

March 2016 where we can follow the entire evolution of their loan histories and credit limits. We

do not have this data for the original survey sample as the bank had concerns about how we

may use these data given we can match it to a wide range of individual characteristics in the

survey and potentially create better credit scores ourselves. In this secton, we describe each of

these three datasets in detail.

   To design the study, we used the first round of administrative data from the bank to conduct

power calculations and to decide the credit score bandwidth that we would sample M-Shwari

clients from. We computed the optimal RD bandwidth using this administrative data for the

outcomes of loan take up and the number of loans. This optimal bandwidth was 10 credit score

points on either side of the cutoff. We therefore designed our final survey sample to have credit

scores in the range of -9 to 10 (covering 10 units of the credit score below the cutoff and ten

above). The administrative data covered a little over 1.1 million total clients, with about 156,000



                                                 9
falling in the chosen bandwidth. For this sample, we know their credit score, whether they took

out a loan and the total number and quantity of loans they took out on M-Shwari over th 18

months since they opened their accounts. We do not know the full evolution of their loans or

credit histories.

       To operationalize a study sample, we asked the bank to draw a random sample of 6,000

clients who opened up an M-Shwari account between January and March, 2015 and whose

credit scores lay between -9 and 10. For 5,000 of these 6,000 clients, we have administrative data

on their credit scores, the underlying M-PESA data that was used to create these credit scores

and some aspects of their loan history with M-Shwari.8

       We then attempted to survey these 6,000 individuals. The surveys were all conducted by

phone (the bank operating M-Shwari does not know the location of their clients) and were con-

ducted between September 2016 and January 2017, more than a year and a half after these indi-

viduals opened their M-Shwari accounts. Tables 1 A-C report some of the basic characteristics

of our sample. Tables 1A and 1B show the summary statistics for our overall sample, and Table

1C shows the summary statistics, splitting the sample into “treatment” (i.e. people who were

just eligible for the M-Shwari loans) and “control” (i.e. those with credit scores just below the

cutoff who are ineligible for the loans).

       In terms of demographics, Table 1A shows that the average person in our sample is 30 years

old and the sample seems balanced on gender (48% male). With regards to cell phone usage

covering the 6 months prior to opening an M-Shwari account, Table 1A shows that the average

customer has total M-PESA transactions of around 4000 KSh (approximately $40), has used a

prepaid airtime loan product given by Safaricom (called Okoa Jahazi) about 17 times, and spends

about 4,700 KSh in prepaid airtime top up amounts. Consistent with the fact that our sample

is drawn from a poorer portion of the overall population (since our sample is restricted to indi-

viduals near the credit score threshold), Table 1A shows that on average, people in our sample
   8
   We only have administrative data on 5,000 clients as the Bank first sampled 5,000 for us randomly from those that
opened an account in this time window. Given the survey non-response rates, we asked the bank to then sample an
additional 1,000 clients, but they did not provide us with administrative data aside from the credit score and phone
numbers for these 1,000.




                                                        10
experience 103 “low days”, which is the number of days the customer has had less than 2 KSh

(USD 0.02) of airtime balance. Individuals in our sample on average have 3 unique entities to

whom MPESA transactions are made, make about 2.9 paybill payments (to about 0.4 unique

paybill clients), and transfer money from 0.18 bank accounts in the 6 month period prior to

opening an M-Shwari account.

   Table 1B shows summary statistics from our survey sample. The average customer lives in

a household with 4.4 members and where the head of the household has approximately 10.8

years of education. This table shows that over 82% of households in the sample had some posi-

tive savings in the previous month (note that however only 65% had positive savings accounts

balances at the time of the survey), and the average amount of savings in these households

was around 7512 KSh (the average current savings balance was around 7,743 KSh). While large

fractions of households in the sample (perhaps predictably) spend positive amounts on things

such as education, clothing, and medical expenses, perhaps more remarkably, households also

face a high likelihood of having negative shocks. Nearly 90% of households report having ex-

perienced some negative shock in the 6 months prior to the survey date. A negative shock in

this case comes from the survey question that asks households about unexpected events they

experienced, including the death of a household member, the illness of household member, ac-

cidental injury, the loss of employment, violent injury, the failure/loss of business, livestock

death, crop disease /pests, theft/robbery/burglary/assault, fire/house destroyed/damaged,

and drought/floods. Over 41% of households report missing a meal in response to these shocks.

A similar fraction of households also respond to shocks by removing a child from school or re-

ducing non-food expenditures.

   Table 1C shows a selection of the variables in Tables 1A and B, but split into “treatment”

and “control” groups, where treatment simply means individuals with a credit score above the

cutoff making them eligible for M-Shwari loans. At first glance, Table 1C shows that individuals

in the treatment group have more outstanding loans, have higher levels of debt, and are more

likely to have an M-Shwari loan (34% vs 21%). Note that the non-zero (21%) share of the control

group with M-Shwari loans arises because our credit score cut-off is recorded at the time of


                                              11
account opening, while loan eligibility itself can evolve over time.

   An important concern when implementing an RD design is manipulation of the running

variable. The chances that individuals can manipulate whether they fall on one side of the

M-Shwari eligibility threshold is unlikely since the credit score is a complex formula using in-

dividuals’ mobile phone and M-PESA data. Figure 1B shows the distribution of credit scores

around the credit score cutoff in our sample of 6,000 individuals. As we mentioned above, we

only drew a survey sample in a narrow window of credit scores, ranging from -9 to 10. It is im-

portant to note that at least visually, there appears to be no evidence of systematic manipulation

of the credit score variable which would result in heaping around the cutoff.

   Figure 1C shows where in the overall distribution of credit scores our sample is drawn from

using the same administrative data we intitally drew the survey sample from. Figure 1C shows

that the RD sample credit scores are drawn from the middle of the credit score distribution and

comprise about 15% of the overall sample of credit scores (i.e. the universe of credit scores for

customers who opened their accounts in the January to March 2015 window). Finally, it is worth

discussing response rates to the phone survey. While survey response rates are rather high (from

a sample of 6,000, we were able to reach 4,136 households, i.e. a 69% completion rate), it is also

important that we find that the non-response is not differential across the cutoff (something we

return to in Table 2B). It is not the case that people who just qualified for the loan were more or

less likely to respond to the survey, relative to people who just missed being qualified.

   In order to learn more about the evolution of loan amounts and limits, we obtained data

from the bank on a completely different sample of individuals. For reasons described above, the

bank preferred to give us subsets of outcome data on different individuals than the universe of

outcomes for the same individuals. Hence, in order to learn about loan limits and the evolution

of loans for individuals, we obtained a sample of about 10,000 individuals who opened their

accounts between January-March 2016 (about one year after our study sample opened their

accounts). This sample is for all credit scores. Of these 10,000, there are 1,468 in our RD window

(approximately 15% of the full sample), and we have data for individuals up to September 2016,




                                                12
approximately 7-9 months after they open their accounts.9 Table 1D contains the summary

statistics on this separate sample and shows that the overall loan amount taken over this period

is around 8,200 KSh which is more than two and a half times the total loan amount taken by

individuals within the RD bandwidth (around 3,200 KSh).

       Figure 1D shows the evolution of number of loans taken by individuals above and below

the RD cutoff. Each black dot therefore represents the average number of loans taken by people

above the cutoff (between a credit score of 1 and 10) at a given date since January 1, 2016.

Similarly, a grey dot represents number of loans taken by people below the cutoff (between a

credit score of -9 and 0) on a given date. The important thing to notice about Figure 1D is that

people below the cutoff do not take out loans in January or February (i.e. right after they open

their accounts), which is consistent with the story that it takes these individuals below the cutoff

some time to improve their credit limit and become eligible for loans. Also, the bank does not

update credit limits in real time or daily. Moreover, Figure 1D shows that over the following

few months, those above the cutoff in January through March are consistently taking out more

loans than those below the cutoff. That is, while those below the cutoff start accessing loans,

they are unable to fully catch up in terms of number of loans at a given point in time.

       Figure 1E provides details on the evolution of credit limits (recall that the previous figure

was about loan amounts) above and below the cutoff. Consistent with the above, credit limits

are positive for those individuals above the cutoff immediately after they open their accounts

(i.e. within the January to March 2016 window), but evolve more slowly for those who are

initially below the cutoff. It is not until in April 2016 that we see positive credit limits emerge

for those below the cutoff. However, for those who make it past the threshold, the credit limits

become quite similar to those who were already above the limit, suggesting that at least within

a short window, those above and below are likely engaging in very similar behavior in terms of

what matters for improving their credit limits. Finally, in Figure 1F we see that nearly all loans

that are taken out within our RD bandwidth are taken at the credit limit. In other words, there
   9
    The cutoff for loan eligibility did not change between the start of our original sample and this newer sample and
neither did the credit score formula.




                                                         13
are very few loans where the loan size is below the credit limit.



IV. Methodology

Here, we briefly describe the RD design we are using. Given the cutoff used to determine loan

eligibility, we follow the standard RD design framework and estimate the following equation:



                        Yi = α + βDi + γ1 (Xi − c) + γ2 (Xi − c) ∗ Di + i                        (1)

   where Yi is an outcome for individual i, and Di is an indicator variable for whether the

individual qualifies for the loan by being above the credit score cutoff, c, and Xi represents

the individual’s actual credit score. Hence, γ1 and γ2 flexibly capture the direct effect of the

“running variable” (in this instance the credit score) on the outcome of interest. Given these

controls, β captures the effect of being just above the cutoff to being just below the cutoff, or the

treatment effect of interest to us. In all the results, we only report the β coefficient. This is the

local linear specification commonly used in RD designs and our main regressions show results

using the optimal bandwidth we used to sample, as described above, as well as half this optimal

bandwidth (the latter for robustness).

   Aside from this standard specification across all outcomes, we also conduct a number of

robustness checks. First, we vary the bandwidth of the estimating equation to show that our

results are robust to a wide range of bandwidths. Second, we check whether a set of pre-

determined variables are discontinuous around the cutoff (i.e. the same specification as the

equation above) to see whether individuals on the left and right of the cutoff have statistically

different characteristics. We find no evidence of such discontinuities.




                                                 14
V. Results

V.1 Balance of covariates

We first show that any pre-determined characteristics in the sample are continuous through

the cutoff. The results are reported Tables 2A and 2B. Put together, Tables 2A and 2B give

us confidence in the idea that the people right around the cutoff are very similar except for

qualifying for loans on M-Shwari.

   In Table 2A, we show results for variables only from the administrative data, in particular,

both characteristics of the user as well as variables on their interactions with Safaricom and

M-PESA (variables that ultimately enter the credit score). For all these variables, it is clear that

they do not change discontinuously around the cutoff, lending support to our empirical strategy.

Columns (1) and (2) report results for the age and gender of the customer. Columns (3) through

(5) report results for variables related to Safaricom prepaid (98% of the market in Kenya is pre-

paid) airtime use by the individual over the six months prior to the individual opening their

M-Shwari account. “Top up” is the amount of airtime purchased, “Number of loans” is the

number of times they have taken out an airtime loan and “Low days” is the number of days

the customer has had less than 2 Kenyan shillings (USD 0.02) of airtime balance on their ac-

count. Columns (6) through (12) show results for variables related to the individual’s M-PESA

record for the six months prior to them joining M-Shwari. In particular, “Value” is the value

of total inflows (money received plus deposits made plus any bank transfers), “1m/6m Bal” is

the average daily balance in the person’s account in the past 1 month/6 months, “Send” is the

number of unique individuals money is sent to via MPESA, “Paybill” is the number of paybill

payments made over M-PESA, “Paybill clients” is the number of unique paybill payments made

(the number of unique organizations the individual has paid on M-PESA using the paybill ser-

vice), and “Bank clients” is the number of unique bank accounts that the customer transferred

money from. Across all these variables in Table 2A, we find no evidence of a discontinuous

jump at the credit score cutoff.

   In Table 2B, given the discussion above, we look at non-response in the phone survey as well


                                                15
as any pre-determined characteristics where we would expect balance. Survey non-response is

reported in column (1) of Table 2B. As can be seen here, there is no differential non-response

on either side of the cutoff. We are therefore less concerned about non-response affecting our

results. In the rest of Table 2B, we draw on the survey we conducted and look at some variables

from the survey that are arguably pre-determined and therefore unlikely to be affected by the

loan (recall that M-Shwari loans are quite small, approximately KSh 554, or 5.5 USD in size so

we do not expect them to affect assets like land).

       In columns (2) through (5), we first look at a number of measures of the demographic status

of the household that the individual in the sample belongs to, in particular household size, the

number of girls in the household, the number of boys in the household and the number of adults.

Across these columns, we find no evidence that demographics are different around the cutoff. In

columns (7) through (12) we look at a number of individual and household characteristics that

are pre-determined and though we find no evidence of a discontinuous change in any of these

variables around the cutoff. In particular, we show this for the age of the individual, whether

the individual is Catholic, the education of the household head, the education of the spouse of

the household head, the number of acres of urban land owned, the number of acres of rural land

owned and whether the household has moved in the last year.


V.2 Outcomes

Next, we look at outcomes.10 We first start with the set of outcomes that we refer to as “first

stage” outcomes. These are the outcomes that focus on the first target of the M-Shwari product:

loans. We therefore look at a number of different first stage outcomes in Table 3, some of which

we also show in Figures 2A and 2B.

       Figure 2A uses administrative data that spans 18 months after individuals open their M-

Shwari account. Note that these graphs use the full sample of M-Shwari clients (not the subsam-

ple around the cutoff for whom we have survey data), and also spans a much larger bandwidth
  10
   We do not show any outcomes by gender. There are no differential impacts based on gender of the respondent.
Results available upon request.




                                                     16
compared to what we use for the rest of the paper. Figure 2A shows in striking clarity the first

stage of our design – individuals whose credit scores fell above the cutoff are significantly more

likely to have taken a loan, have more total loans, and have higher loan amounts.

       Figure 2B shows graphical evidence using survey data (and hence a much smaller band-

width and fewer individuals) that having access to M-Shwari loans leads to higher take up

of credit from any source. This graph shows that the difference in the likelihood of having any

kind of loan between people just below and just above the cutoff is around 11 percentage points,

which is slightly smaller than what we observe in the administrative data, suggesting that there

might be some measurement error in the survey data relative to the administrative data. It is

important to note that people just below the credit score threshold also have loans - indeed the

mean here appears to be around 46%.11 Hence, the digital loan program we evaluate in this pa-

per should be understood to affect households by expanding access to credit, not by introducing

it from a zero base. Indeed, the last panel in Figure 2 also shows this fact – when examining to-

tal household debt, it seems like being above the cutoff increases the debt held (similarly the

middle panel of Figure 2 shows similar results for the total number of loans).

       Tables 3 onwards show the regression analogs of the Figures, estimated according to equa-

tion (1) above. We also present these results for two sets of bandwidths to show that our results

are not driven by choice of bandwidth. While the tables all show coefficients and standard

errors, we also often show p-values that adjust for multiple hypothesis testing (as per the Sidak-

Holm adjustment).

       Table 3A shows the regression analog of Figure 2A (using the administrative data), but esti-

mated over the same sample for whom we have survey data. Column (1) in Table 3A shows that

those above the cutoff are 24 percentage points more likely to have a loan (off a base of nearly 30

percent). Those above the cutoff are also more likely to have more loans overall (1.3 more loans

off a base of 1.9 loans), and have nearly a 1,000KSh more in total loan amounts (the average in

the control group is 1,500KSh, se see Column (3)). In line with the idea that those with higher
  11
    Note this survey question is about any loan, not specifically M-Shwari loans; the mean of M-Shwari loans in the
control in our survey is around 20% which is comparable to what we see in the administrative data.




                                                        17
scores have higher credit limits, the average loan amounts borrowed by individuals above the

cutoff is nearly twice that of those below the cutoff (see Column (5)). Column (7) shows an im-

portant result that people on either side of the cutoff are no different when it comes to default

probabilities on the first loan. This also serves as an important check on the RD design, which

relies on the idea that those on either side of the cutoff are largely similar in terms of underlying

characteristics such as the ability to repay loans, etc.

   Table 3B shows the regression analogs of the graphs in Figure 2B (using our survey data).

This table shows that individuals with credit scores above the cutoff are more likely to take up

any loans (column (1)), as well as have more loans (column (2)) and more total debt though

this is noisily estimated (column (3)), probably because the amount loaned by M-Shwari is ulti-

mately small. The magnitudes from this table’s columns (1) and (2) mirror the magnitudes in the

graphical analysis: column (1) shows that people just above the cutoff are 10.6 percentage points

more likely to hold any loan. Since the approximately 46% of people in the control group hold

any loans (the table shows the control means), being just above the cutoff results in a substantial

increase in the probability of holding any loans.

   In column (4) we look at a log transform of the total amount of debt held since many individ-

uals hold zero debt, and this column shows a significant increase in the debt held by households.

While this result appears to be sensitive to choice of bandwidth, the coefficients are not statis-

tically distinguishable from each other. In column (5) we look at total formal debt (defined as

debt from M-Shwari, other banks, MFIs, savings and credit cooperatives or SACCOs, and rotat-

ing savings and credit associations or ROSCAs). While not statistically significant, these results

show a meaningful increase in overall formal debt held by households. Finally, to address any

concerns that small digital loans may needlessly put people in debt, or become a financial bur-

den through high interest payments, in column (6), we examine total interest paid on all loans

(as a fraction of household daily consumption). Column (6) shows no differential interest bur-

den due to M-Shwari. Column (7) shows that those likely to access loans are not more likely to

turn around and loan to others.

   An important robustness check in RD designs is to show that the choice of the bandwidth


                                                  18
within a reasonable range does not significantly alter the results. While Table 3B itself shows

results for two different potential bandwidths, we show more bandwidths in graphical form

in Figure 4. This figure shows that the RD estimate of interest (the β coefficient) on whether

being above the cutoff leads to holding more loans does not change appreciably when we in-

crementally start reducing the bandwidth from full (-9 to 10) to -8 to 9, -7 to 8, and so on, until

-4 to 5. The stability of the coefficients across the bandwidths provides strong support to the

proposition that our results are not being driven by an arbitrary choice of bandwidth around

the cutoff.

   Table 3C takes a more detailed look at the different types of loans to analyze whether access

to short-term loans from M-Shwari leads individuals to substitute away from other sources of

credit. This is important since we argue that access to M-Shwari leads to an overall expansion

in the access to credit, rather than just a substitution of credit from one form to another (substi-

tution to other credit forms is well studied in the context of payday loan regulation - see Bhutta,

Goldin, and Homanoff 2016 for example). Columns (1)-(5) examine formal sources of credit and

it is clear when we compare column (1) to columns (2)-(5) that all the increase in loans that we

saw in Table 3B is the result of M-Shwari. Columns (2)-(5) show that there are no effects (statisti-

cally as well as in magnitude) on other forms of formal credit, be they from ROSCAs, SACCOs,

other MFIs or banks. Note that these other forms of credit have very low take up to begin with.

Column (6) examines informal loans (from moneylenders, friends, family, employers, employ-

ees, and church or religious groups) and finds small and insignificant impacts on this type of

loan too. Hence, it is likely that access to M-Shwari loans, which have a control group mean of

21%, is an important channel for increasing overall access to credit for this group of individuals.

   Given the size and short-term nature of these loans, the next outcome we examine is whether

these loans help households be more resilient when faced with shocks. In Table 4A we report

results for these outcomes. Column (1) first examines whether households above the threshold

are more likely to experience negative shocks. Not only is the coefficient in column (1) statis-

tically insignificant, compared to the mean, it is economicalIy not meaningful. In column (2),

we use an aggregated measure of whether a household reported having to forego any expenses


                                                19
in responses to a shock (hence we do not report a Sidak-Holm p-value for this column since it

is already an aggregated measure). In columns (3) through (5), we look at whether households

reduced expenditures in certain budget categories in response to negative shocks. As the results

show, households with individuals above the cutoff are less likely to report that any expenses

were foregone (shown in column (2) and graphically this is seen in Figure 3) and medical ex-

penses (column (4)). These loans are therefore useful for mitigating the effects of shocks. Note

the high mean in the control group: approximately 68% of households in the full survey sam-

ple, in general, forego expenses in response to a shock. However, households with individuals

above the M-Shwari loan cutoff are 6.3 percentage points less likely to report foregone expenses,

which relative to the mean, represents a 9% effect. In columns (6) though (8) of Table 4 we look

at other adjustments households may have made in response to negative shocks, in particular

whether they removed a child from school, whether they left a job or whether they sold any as-

sets. Across all these three measures, we find no statistically significant effects of the M-Shwari

loan.

   In Table 4B, we look at whether M-Shwari provides households with resilience to particular

types of shocks since we know from our surveys exactyl what the shocks were. To do this, we

interact each type of shock separately with the cutoff (while controlling for the main effects of

the cutoff and the shock). Therefore, the interaction term (Cutoff X Shock) illustrates whether

households above the cutoff are less likely to forego expenses in response to a specific shock

(which appears as the column title for each regression). The regressions still condition on the

sample that has negative shocks like in Table 4A, so these simply illustrate whether M-Shwari

loans provide better protection for some shocks against others. In line with Table 4A, the main

effects of the score are all negative and significant (both statistically and economically). Given

the relevant interactions, it seems like M-Shwari helps particularly for health shocks (column

(2)) and if there is a death in the household (column (5)). This seems intuitive as these shocks

are typically unexpected and result in significant immediate expenditures.

   Table 5 examines daily per capita consumption along a large set of measures for members of

the M-Shwari account holder’s household, conditional on the household having faced a nega-


                                                20
tive shock in the past 6 months. Note that in this table while we show the p-values for multiple

hypothesis testing, we do not expect all categories of consumption to respond to M-Shwari

loans. Since we have no priors on what categories should respond and what categories should

not, it is not clear that there is much to be made of multiple testing. Yet, for completeness and

for readers who wish to interpret these results as being a culmination of null results, we report

p-values that do adjust for multiple hypothesis testing. The first four columns examine total

expenditures, food expenditures, expenditures on basics12 and expenditures on prepaid airtime

for mobile phones. Not only are the coefficients for these four columns statistically insignificant,

their magnitudes are small. The remaining columns examine whether a household is likely to

report positive expenses along a range of outcomes. While we find no impacts on health (col-

umn (6)), clothing (column (7)), assets (column (8)), temptation good13 expenditures (column

(9)) and alcohol and cigarettes (columns (10)), we find a large and marginally statistically signif-

icant impact on education expenses (column (4)).

       Households just above the cutoff are 5.8 percentage points more likely to report positive

expenditure on education compared to households just below the cutoff (on average, 77% of

households in the control report positive education expenses). In the smaller bandwidth, the

effect is 5.9 percentage points (with a control mean of 77%). These results are shown graphically

in Figure 3 (with robustness across bandwidths shown in the third panel of Figure 4). Although

this may seem surprising at first, looking at the data, households report spending the loan, quite

often, on emergencies, especially health events. However, even though households spend the

actual loan money on, say, medication, the marginal dollar from the loan gets spent on the item

they would have adjusted had they not had access to the loan. This happens to be education, a

result that is consistent with Jack and Suri (2014) and Suri et al (2012) who find similar effects

when studying how M-PESA affects consumption smoothing.

       Finally, Table 6 examines whether increased access to loans affects the financial and real
  12
      We define basics as including expenditures on water, rent, electricity, any form of firewood, fuel, gas and elec-
tricity.
   13
      We define temptation goods as including food consumed outside the household (whether purchased by the
household or gifted), and alcohol and tobacco expenditures (both own expenditures as well as gifts).




                                                          21
assets of the household to which the M-Shwari loan-eligible individual belonged. We find that

such households do not seem to have increased savings along any of these measures. This is

not that surprising given these are short run loans and intended either for emergency purposes

or for working capital in informal micro enterprises. Moreover, the amount of the loan is likely

small in comparison to the average savings in a household. In column (1), we report the effect

of the loan on the number of instruments used by the household to save – this increases by 0.18

and may well correspond to individuals using their M-Shwari accounts to save; hence, this is a

rather mechanical result. Looking at whether these households had any savings last month and

the amount (columns (2) and (3)) we find no evidence that M-Shwari had an impact. In columns

(4) through (7) we look at the self-reported current savings balance, again looking at whether

the household had any savings balance (column (4)), the total amount saved (column (5)) as

well as the total value of assets (column (6)) and the value of productive assets14 (column (7)).

We find no effects of eligibility for an M-Shwari loan on these measures of household savings.15

Neither do we find any effects of savings in M-Shwari accounts themselves (results not shown).



VI. Conclusion

Overall, our results suggest that loans from M-Shwari have high take up rates among those who

are eligible for them, and that they have salient impacts on mitigating shocks. The results con-

firm that these short term digital loans are largely used to pay for schooling and for emergency

purposes and not for business or working capital purposes, at least in the sample of customers

we study within the somewhat narrow window of credit scores around the cut-off. Hence, our

results, like standard RD results, need to be interpreted as relevant to the local bandwidth that

is examined. Given the size and short-term nature of these loans, we find no impacts on other

measures of welfare like assets, wealth, or consumption. This is all the more salient given the

surveys were conducted starting in September 2016, which was at least eighteen months after
  14
    We define productive assets as including phones and accessories, livestock, computers and all types of vehicles.
  15
    We acknowledge that savings are self-reported and are subject to considerable measurement error. However,
our survey questionnaire on this follows the best practices in the literature till date.




                                                        22
these individuals opened accounts on M-Shwari (note that the long term impacts in Suri and

Jack (2016) were after eight years of access to M-PESA). Hence, although these are not truly

long term effects, they are also not short term effects. In relation to Suri and Jack (2014), the

improvements in resilience we see are similar to what the authors find for M-PESA but with the

big difference that M-Shwari is a short term loan that has to be paid back rather soon. Moreover,

remittances examined in Jack and Suri (2014) are informal, and repayment depends on the risk

sharing agreements between individuals.

   A valid concern at the outset of M-Shwari’s loan product roll out was that it would simply

act as a substitute for other loan sources and that this might not increase the total amount of

credit to which households have access. Our results suggest that M-Shwari does indeed expand

the envelope and access to overall credit (since we find significant impacts on the total number

of loans held by households), and the magnitude of this impact on the total amount of loans is

significant.

   Did digital loans deliver? In conclusion, our results show that small loans that are quickly

delivered via mobile technology have high take up (34% of those eligible take up this prod-

uct, and on average within eighteen months, individuals take up six such loans) and can help

households not have to forego expenses due to shocks. Digital platforms for loan delivery seem

to be able to overcome some of the costs associated with traditional forms of credit access and

repayment, and hence, seem to have some measure of success for both financial entities and

clients in this context. Certainly, these small, short-term loans cannot be expected to be transfor-

mative in the sense of improving asset holdings, or helping jump start entrepreneurship among

individuals. Whether this delivery mechanism can help with the take up, delivery, and repay-

ment of larger loans or loans targeted for specific productive purposes (i.e. those that could be

“transformative”) is a crucial next step for research in this area.




                                                 23
References

   Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman (2015): “Microcredit impacts: evi-

dence from a randomized microcredit program placement experiment by Compartamos Banco,”

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 151-82.


   Attanasio, Orzio, Britta Augsburg, Ralph de Haas, Emla Fitzsimons, and Heike Harmgart

(2015): “The impacts of microfinance: evidence from joint-liability lending in Mongolia,” Amer-

ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 90-122.


   Augsburg, Britta, Ralph de Haas, Heike Harmgart and Costas Meghir (2015): “The impacts

of microcredit: evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina,” American Economic Journal: Applied

Economics, 7(1): 183-203.


   Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster and Cynthia Kinnan (2015): “The mir-

acle of microfinance? Evidence from a randomized evaluation,” American Economic Journal:

Applied Economics, 7(1): 22-53.


   Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan and Jonathan Zinman (2015): “Six randomized evaluations of

microcredit: introduction and further steps,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,

7(1): 1-21.


   Bertrand, Marianne and Adair Morse (2011): ”Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases, and

Payday Borrowing,” Journal of Finance.


   Bjorkegren, Daniel and Darrell Grissen (2018): The Potential of Digital Credit to Bank the

Poor. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol 108: 68-71.


   Crépon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Parienté (2015): “Estimating

the impact of microcredit on those who take it up: evidence from a randomized experiment in

Morocco,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 123-50.



                                              24
   de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Chris Woodruff (2008). Returns to capital in microen-

terprises: Evidence from a field experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 1329–1372.


   de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Chris Woodruff (2009). Are women more credit con-

strained? Experimental evidence on gender and microenterprise returns. American Economic

Journal: Applied Economics 1, 1–32.


   Jack, William and Tavneet Suri (2014): “Risk sharing and transactions costs: evidence from

Kenya’s mobile money revolution,” American Economic Review 104(1): 183-223.


   Jack, William, Michael Kremer, Joost de Laat, and Tavneet Suri (2017): “Borrowing require-

ments, credit access, and adverse selection: Evidence from Kenya,” Working Paper.


   Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman (2010). Expanding credit access: Using randomized

supply decisions to estimate the impacts. Review of Financial Studies 23, 433–464.


   Karlan, Dean, Morduch, Jonathan, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2010). Take Up: Why Microfi-

nance Take Up Rates are Low and Why it Matters. Financial Access Initiative Research Framing

Note.


   Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman (2011). Microcredit in theory and practice: Using ran-

domized credit scoring for impact evaluation. Science 332 (6035), 1278–1284.


   Karlan, Dean, Robert Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry (2014): “Agricultural

decisions after relaxing credit and risk constraints,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2),

597-652.


   Melzer, Brian T. (2011): ”The Real Costs of Credit Access: Evidence from the Payday Lending

Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 126, Issue 1.


   Morse, Adair (2011): ”Payday lenders: Heroes or villains?” Journal of Financial Economics,

Vol 102, Issue 1.


                                              25
   Skiba, Paige M and Jeremy Tobacman (2011): ”Do Payday Loans Cause Bankruptcy?” Van-

derbilt Law and Economics Research Paper No. 11-13


   Stegman, Michael A. (2007): ”Payday Lending,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 21,

No 1


   Suri, Tavneet and William Jack (2016): “The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile

money,” Science, Vol 354, Issue 6317, pp. 1288-1292.


   Tarozzi, Alessandro, Jaikishan Desai, and Kristin Johnson (2013). On the impact of micro-

credit: Evidence from a randomized intervention in rural Ethiopia. BREAD working paper no.

382.


   Tarozzi, Alessandro, Jaikishan Desai and Kristin Johnson (2015): “The impacts of microcre-

dit: Evidence from Ethiopia,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 54-89.


   Zinman, Jonathan (2010): ”Restricting consumer credit access: Household survey evidence

on effects around the Oregon rate cap,” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol 34, Issue 3.




                                              26
                        Figure 1A: CBA Market Share, 2010-2017




                           Figure 1B: Histogram of Credit Score




Note: The survey sample was drawn from M-Shwari customers with credit scores spanning -9 to 10.
      Individuals were assigned a credit score (that never changes) at the time of account opening.
      Individuals with a credit score strictly above zero were eligible for loans of varying sizes (depending on the score).
                           Figure 1C: Credit Score Distribution




Note: The RD window is marked in black and covers 15% of the overall sample of accounts.



         Figure 1D: Loan History (Separate Sample, RD Bandwidth)




Note: The survey sample was drawn from M-Shwari customers with credit scores spanning -9 to 10.
      This graph is from a different sample of M-Shwari customers than the study sample (see text for details).
      Individuals in this sampled opened accounts in January 2016 and the data runs till the end of March 2017.
   Figure 1E: Credit Limit Evolution (Separate Sample, RD Bandwidth)




Note: This is from a different sample of M-Shwari customers than the study sample (see text for details).
      Credit limits are reported in Kenyan shillings (KSh). The exchange rate is KSh 100 to the dollar.



  Figure 1F: Loans and Credit Limits (Separate Sample, RD Bandwidth)




Note: This is from a different sample of M-Shwari customers than the study sample (see text for details).
      This figure uses daily loan level data (conditional o borrowing) for this sample.
                 Figure 2A: First Stage, Administrative Data




Note: The data covers all M-Shwari loans received in the 18 months prior to the sampling for the survey.
                        Figure 2B: First Stage, Survey Data




Note: The data covers all loans received in the 2 years prior to the survey from all sources, not just M-Shwari.
                     Figure 3: Resilience and Expenditures




Note: The first panel shows survey data on whether the household cut epenses of any sort to deal with a negative shock.
      The second panel shows survey data on total daily household consumption (in logs).
      The third panel shows survey data on whether the household spent on education in the past year).
                      Figure 4: Robustness to Bandwidth




Note: All three panels shows robustness of the estimated RD coefficient (from equation (1)) to varying bandwidths.
      The outcome in the first panel is the number of loans borrowed in the 2 years priot to the survey.
      The outcome in the second panel is whether the household cut epenses of any sort to deal with a negative shock.
      The outcome in the third panel is whether the household spent on education in the past year).
            Table 1A: Summary Statistics from Administrative Data
                                                    Mean                   SD                  N
Age of Customer                                     30.462               14.106              6000
Male, M-Shwari Admin Data                             .483                   .5              6000
Top Up Amount                                     4670.494              4478.503             5000
Number of Loans                                     16.823               41.351              5000
Number of Low Days                                 103.614               54.279              5000
Total MPESA Transaction Value                     4047.174              11607.49             5000
Six month Balance                                  569.078              6725.829             5000
One month Balance                                  607.158              6638.072             5000
Send Clients                                         3.299                5.024              5000
Paybill                                              2.995               13.266              5000
Paybill Clients                                       .446                 .986              5000
Bank Clients                                          .183                 .483              5000
Note: All variables are for the six months prior to the individual opening an M-Shwari account.
      Top up is the amount of airtime purchased.
      Number of loans is the number of times the individual has taken out an airtime loan.
      Low days is the number of days the customer has had less than 2 shillings (USD 0.02) of airtime balance.
      Total Value is the value of total inflows (money received plus deposits made plus any bank transfers).
      1month/6month Balance is the average daily balance in the persons account in the past 1 month/6 months.
      Send clients is the number of unique individuals money is sent to via MPESA by the customer.
      Paybill is the number of paybill payments made over M-PESA.
      Paybill clients is the number of unique organizations the individual has paid on M-PESA using the paybill service.
      Bank clients is the number of unique bank accounts that the customer transferred money from.
               Table 1B: Summary Statistics, Survey Data
                                    Mean           SD       N
Household Size                       4.395        2.366    4136
No of Girls in the Household          1.02        1.158    4136
No of Boys in the Household           .916        1.085    4136
Number of Adults                      2.46        1.262    4136
Household Head Age                  36.646       12.672    3949
Religion is Catholic                  .267         .443    4136
HH Head Years of Education          10.775        3.723    3956
Spouse Years of Education           10.044        3.551    2711
Acres of Urban Land Owned             .117        .558     4025
Acres of Rural Land Owned           1.658        2.488     3815
Moved in Last 6 Months               .133           .34    4136
Household Taken a Loan (Dummy)        .506           .5    4136
No of Outstanding Loans              .884         1.42     4109
Total Debt                         16070.26      62902     4136
Total Amount of Formal Loans       15631.32     62331.02   4136
Have an M-Shwari Loan                .275         .446     4136
Have a Bank Loan                     .059         .235     4136
Have an MFI loan                     .019         .136     4136
Have a SACCO Loan                    .045         .207     4136
Have a ROSCA Loan                    .056           .23    4136
Loan for Emergency                    .115        .319     4136
Loan for a Large Purchase             .061        .239     4136
Loan for Everyday Use                 .169        .374     4136
Loan To Pay Off Other Debt            .026        .158     4136
Loan For School Fees                   .11        .312     4136
Loan For Medical Expenses             .031        .173     4136
Loan for Business                     .071        .256     4136
Number of Savings Instruments        3.734        1.74     4136
Saved Last Month                      .821        .384     4136
Total Savings in Last Month        7511.921     9861.934   3930
Current Savings Balance Positive      .645        .479     4136
Total Current Balance              7743.302     13295.56   3930
Log Total Assets                    10.976        1.503    4048
Log Productive Assets                9.757        1.649    3962
Log Total Consumption (Daily)        6.388        .741     4121
Log Food Consumption (Daily)          5.07        .702     4041
Log Expenditure on Basics            4.261        1.195    3780
Spent on Education?                   .769        .422     4121
Spent on Medical Care?                .529        .499     4121
Spent on Clothing?                    .716        .451     4121
Spent on Assets?                      .818        .386     4121
Spent on Transport?                   .731        .443     4121
Spent on Temptation Goods?            .771          .42    4121
Spent on Alcohol, Tobacco?            .082        .275     4121
Negative Shock                        .897        .304     4136
Positive Shock                        .162        .368     4136
Adjust by Cutting Spending             .63        .483     4136
Shock Response Foregone a Meal        .411        .492     4136
Shock Response Foregone Medical       .263          .44    4136
Shock Response Reduce Non Food        .446        .497     4136
Shock Response Child Out of Sch       .409        .492     4136
Left a Job in Response to Shock       .259        .438     4136
Sold Assets in Response to Shock      .221        .415     4136
Table 1C: Summary Statistics, by Treatment (Above Cutoff) and Control (Below Cutoff)
                                                         Mean, T           SD, T          Mean, C           SD, C
       No of Outstanding Loans                             1.003           1.506             .766           1.32
       Total Debt                                        17537.52        67057.63         14622.74        58493.96
       Total Amount of Formal Loans                      16955.13        66293.29         14325.31        58144.65
       Have an M-Shwari Loan                                 .34            .474              .21            .407
       Have a Bank Loan                                      .06            .237             .057            .232
       Have an MFI loan                                     .019            .135             .019            .137
       Have a SACCO Loan                                    .047            .212             .043            .202
       Have a ROSCA Loan                                    .058            .235             .054            .226
       Loan for Emergency                                   .137            .344             .093            .291
       Loan for a Large Purchase                            .065           .247              .057           .231
       Loan for Everyday Use                                .195           .396              .143             .35
       Loan To Pay Off Other Debt                           .029           .168              .022           .147
       Loan For School Fees                                 .119           .324                .1              .3
       Loan For Medical Expenses                            .036           .185              .026             .16
       Loan for Business                                    .073             .26             .068           .252
       Number of Savings Instruments                        3.78           1.773            3.689           1.707
       Saved Last Month                                     .813             .39             .829           .377
       Total Savings in Last Month                       7511.004        9942.155         7512.827        9784.478
       Current Savings Balance Positive                     .637            .481             .652           .476
       Total Current Balance                             7617.55         13335.59         7868.415        13257.81
       Log Total Assets                                   10.948          1.529            11.004          1.478
       Log Productive Assets                               9.738          1.666             9.775          1.633
       Log Total Consumption (Daily)                       6.401            .751            6.376            .731
       Log Food Consumption (Daily)                        5.082            .691            5.058           .713
       Log Expenditure on Basics                           4.281          1.172             4.242          1.216
       Spent on Education?                                  .779           .415              .759           .428
       Spent on Medical Care?                               .531           .499              .527           .499
       Spent on Clothing?                                   .703           .457              .729           .445
       Spent on Assets?                                     .815           .388              .821           .384
       Spent on Transport?                                   .73           .444             .732            .443
       Spent on Temptation Goods?                           .778           .416              .765           .424
       Spent on Alcohol, Tobacco?                           .083           .276              .081           .274
       Negative Shock                                       .902           .297              .892             .31
       Positive Shock                                       .155           .362              .169           .374
       Adjust by Cutting Spending                           .633           .482              .628           .484
       Shock Response Foregone a Meal                       .409            .492             .412            .492
       Shock Response Foregone Medical                      .251            .434             .274            .446
       Shock Response Reduce Non Food                       .456            .498             .437            .496
       Shock Response Child Out of Sch                      .416            .493             .402             .49
       Left a Job in Response to Shock                      .267            .443              .25           .433
       Sold Assets in Response to Shock                     .219            .414             .223           .416
      Note: T stands for individuals in the treatment group (i.e. those with a credit score above the cutoff for a loan.
            C stands for individuals in the control group (i.e. those with a credit score below the cutoff for a loan.
                  Table 1D: Summary Statistics (Separate Sample)
                                                         Mean                 SD                 N
Loans                                                     7.412              6.158              9993
Loans per Month                                           .567                .468              9993
Loan Amount                                             8265.54            16313.89             9993
Months Account Open                                      13.115              1.188              9993
Loans (RD Sample)                                         6.559              5.833              1472
Loans per Month (RD Sample)                               .511                .453              1472
Loan Amount (RD Sample)                                 3217.19            5870.489             1472
Months Account Open (RD Sample)                         12.932              1.198               1472
Note: This is from a different sample of M-Shwari customers than the study sample (see text for details).
      The first rows report results for the full sample across the full distribution of credit scores.
                                                          Table 2A: Balance in Admin Data
                   Characteristics                     Airtime                                                         M-PESA Transactions
                   (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)        (10)          (11)             (12)
                   Age       Male       Top Up      No of Loans     Low Days         Value       6m Bal       1m Bal      Send      Pay Bill   Pay Bill Clients   Bank Clients
Score Cutoff      -0.869    -0.041       94.128        -0.439          2.472         57.643      110.795      127.912     -0.428     -0.592        -0.057            -0.046
                  [0.724]   [0.026]    [272.907]       [2.249]        [3.037]      [725.367]    [551.361]    [532.054]    [0.280]    [0.760]       [0.055]          [0.028]
Control Mean      30.415     0.491     4502.967        16.653         104.642      4017.090      497.585     533.502      3.143      2.597          0.432            0.184
Observations       6000      6000        5000           5000           5000          5000         5000        5000        5000       5000           5000             5000
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets.
      All the variables in columns (3) through (12) are for the six months prior to the individual opening an M-Shwari account.
      Top up is the amount of airtime purchased.
      Number of loans is the number of times the individual has taken out an airtime loan.
      Low days is the number of days the customer has had less than 2 Kenyan shillings (USD 0.02) of airtime balance on their account.
      Value is the value of total inflows (money received plus deposits made plus any bank transfers).
      1m/6m Bal is the average daily balance in the persons account in the past 1 month/6 months.
      Send is the number of unique individuals money is sent to via MPESA by the customer.
      Paybill is the number of paybill payments made over M-PESA.
      Paybill clients is the number of unique organizations the individual has paid on M-PESA using the paybill service.
      Bank clients is the number of unique bank accounts that the customer transferred money from.
      The specification in all columns is as per equation (1) in the paper with differential linear slopes on either side of the cutoff.
      The bandwidth in all columns is -9 to 10.
                                                         Table 2B: Balance in Survey Data

                   Non-Response                    Demographics                                                        Characteristics
                          (1)             (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)           (8)               (9)            (10)      (11)
                                         Size      Girls      Boys      Adults       Age      Catholic     Head Educ        Spouse Educ    Land Owned   Moved
Score Cutoff             -0.003         0.129      0.106      -0.013     0.035      0.870       -0.041         -0.104           0.064         -0.064     0.008
                        [0.024]        [0.142]    [0.070]    [0.066]    [0.075]    [0.796]     [0.027]        [0.235]          [0.264]       [0.164]    [0.021]
Control Mean             0.317          4.335      0.991      0.909      2.435      36.429      0.268         10.783           10.053         1.694     0.134
Observations             6000           4136       4136       4136       4136        3949       4136           3956             2711          4136      4136
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets.
      Size refers to household size.
      Girls, Boys and Adults refer to the numbers of each in the household.
      Age refers to the age of the respondent.
      Catholic refers to whether the respondent is a Catholic.
      Head Educ and Spouse Educ refer to the years of education of the household head and spouse, respectively.
      Land Owned refers to the total acres of land owned by the household.
      Moved refers to whether anyone is the household has moved in the last 6 months.
      The specification in all columns is as per equation (1) in the paper with differential linear slopes on either side of the cutoff.
      The bandwidth in all columns is -9 to 10.
                           Table 3A: First Stage, Access to M-Shwari, Administrative Data
                                    Has Loan          No of Loans             Total Loan Amount                    Average Loan Size          First Loan Default
                                         (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)            (7)
                                                                               Level              Log              Level              Log
 Bandwidth of -9 to 10
 RD Cutoff                           0.243∗∗∗            1.307∗∗∗           1002.957∗∗          1.718∗∗∗        112.173∗∗∗         1.374∗∗∗         0.007
                                      [0.027]             [0.282]            [445.862]           [0.208]         [28.306]           [0.164]        [0.024]
 Control Mean                          0.299               1.924             1512.596             2.206           166.307            1.774          0.066
 Observations                          5000                5000                5000               5000             5000              5000           2380
 Bandwidth of -4 to 5
 RD Cutoff                           0.192∗∗∗             0.805∗              575.272           1.267∗∗∗          73.565∗          1.029∗∗∗         0.024
                                      [0.043]             [0.454]            [610.277]           [0.325]          [40.846]          [0.258]        [0.036]
 Control Mean                          0.308               1.962             1549.290             2.255           169.070            1.825          0.065
 Observations                          2571                2571                2571               2571             2571              2571           1246
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets.
      All amounts are reported in Kenyan shillings, where the exchange rate is 100 KSh to the USD.
      The specification in all columns is as per equation (1) in the paper with differential linear slopes on either side of the cutoff.
      The sample in the last column conditions on having at least one loan (else default is not defined).
                                                   Table 3B: First Stage, Access to Credit
                                     (1)                   (2)                 (3)                 (4)                      (5)                 (6)           (7)
                                Had Any Loan           No of Loans         Total Debt       Log(Total Debt+1)           Formal Debt        Interest Paid   Gave Loan
Bandwidth of -9 to 10
Score Cutoff                        0.106∗∗∗              0.320∗∗∗          1758.431               0.882∗∗∗               1415.405             0.216         0.040
                                     [0.031]               [0.082]         [3684.916]               [0.275]              [3669.798]           [0.155]       [0.028]
Sidak-Holm p-value                    0.006                 0.001            0.982                   0.013                  0.982             0.725          0.725
Control Mean                          0.455                 0.766          14622.736                 3.718                14325.305           0.591          0.293
Observations                          4136                  4109             4136                    4136                   4136              4080           4136
Bandwidth of -4 to 5
Score Cutoff                        0.119∗∗∗              0.377∗∗∗          5705.199               1.024∗∗                5266.330             0.251         0.051
                                     [0.045]               [0.124]         [5349.003]              [0.404]               [5326.126]           [0.216]       [0.041]
Sidak-Holm p-value                    0.083                 0.028            0.838                   0.107                  0.838             0.838          0.838
Control Mean                          0.455                 0.764          14283.339                 3.688                13943.502           0.488          0.285
Observations                          2111                  2096             2111                    2111                   2111              2082           2111
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets.
      Interest is reported as a fraction of the daily total expenditure of the household.
      The Sidak-Holm p-value accounts for multiple testing across all outcomes in Tables 3B and 3C.
      All amounts are reported in Kenyan shillings, where the exchange rate is 100 KSh to the USD.
      The specification in all columns is as per equation (1) in the paper with differential linear slopes on either side of the cutoff.
                                                   Table 3C: First Stage, Sources of Credit
                                        (1)                      (2)                 (3)                  (4)                     (5)            (6)
                                    MShwari Loan              Bank Loan            MFI Loan           SACCO Loan              ROSCA Loan    Informal Loan
 Bandwidth of -9 to 10
 Score Cutoff                            0.133∗∗∗                 0.011               0.005                0.003                  0.024∗        0.001
                                          [0.028]                [0.015]             [0.008]              [0.012]                 [0.014]      [0.015]
 Sidak-Holm p-value                        0.000                  0.970               0.974                0.982                   0.591        0.982
 Control Mean                              0.210                  0.057               0.019                0.043                   0.054        0.067
 Observations                              4136                   4136                4136                 4136                    4136         4136
 Bandwidth of -4 to 5
 Score Cutoff                            0.126∗∗∗                 0.026               0.014                0.018                   0.032        -0.019
                                          [0.041]                [0.022]             [0.011]              [0.019]                 [0.022]      [0.022]
 Sidak-Holm p-value                        0.027                  0.838               0.838                0.838                   0.757        0.838
 Control Mean                              0.214                  0.054               0.017                0.041                   0.053        0.064
 Observations                              2111                   2111                2111                 2111                    2111         2111
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets.
      The Sidak-Holm p-value accounts for multiple testing across all outcomes in Tables 3B and 3C.
      The specification in all columns is as per equation (1) in the paper with differential linear slopes on either side of the cutoff.
                                                                    Table 4A: Resilience
                                   Shock                        Expenses Foregone                                                Other Adjustments
                                     (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)                   (6)                    (7)          (8)
                                                  Any           Meals         Medical        Non-Food          Child Out of School         Left Job   Sold Assets
 Bandwidth of -9 to 10
 Score Cutoff                       0.013       -0.063∗∗        -0.045        -0.049∗          -0.020                   0.006               0.026        0.029
                                   [0.018]       [0.030]        [0.032]       [0.029]          [0.032]                 [0.032]             [0.029]      [0.027]
 Sidak-Holm p-value                                              0.896          0.896           0.998                   0.998               0.970        0.995
 Control Mean                       0.892         0.679          0.447          0.300           0.474                   0.434               0.266        0.238
 Observations                       4136          3711           3711           3711            3711                    3711                3711         3711
 Bandwidth of -4 to 5
 Score Cutoff                       0.006         -0.052       -0.095∗∗       -0.081∗          -0.033                  0.080∗               0.015        0.002
                                   [0.026]       [0.044]        [0.047]       [0.042]          [0.047]                 [0.047]             [0.042]      [0.039]
 Sidak-Holm p-value                                              0.362          0.629           0.919                   0.909               0.926        0.919
 Control Mean                       0.901         0.698          0.462          0.297           0.486                   0.434               0.263        0.219
 Observations                       2111          1913           1913           1913            1913                    1913                1913         1913
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets.
      Sample restricted to households with a negative shock (90% of the sample).
      The specification in all columns is as per equation (1) in the paper with differential linear slopes on either side of the cutoff.
                                   Table 4B: Resilience, Heterogeneoity by Cause of Shock
                                (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)         (10)
                              Weather       Disease         Fire         Theft       Death        lllness       Injury    Livestock   Business   Employment
Bandwidth of -9 to 10
Cutoff*Shock                   -0.012       -0.088∗∗      -0.161        -0.015       -0.110∗       0.007        -0.002     -0.044      0.019       -0.022
                               [0.036]       [0.037]      [0.129]       [0.046]      [0.065]      [0.030]       [0.044]    [0.037]    [0.033]      [0.037]
Score Cutoff                   -0.060∗        -0.045      -0.063∗∗     -0.064∗∗      -0.056∗     -0.069∗∗      -0.061∗∗    -0.053∗    -0.069∗∗     -0.054∗
                               [0.031]       [0.031]       [0.030]      [0.031]      [0.031]      [0.035]       [0.031]    [0.031]     [0.032]     [0.031]
Shock                         0.072∗∗∗      0.165∗∗∗      0.195∗∗      0.091∗∗∗       0.020      0.156∗∗∗      0.124∗∗∗   0.089∗∗∗     0.018      0.102∗∗∗
                               [0.025]       [0.025]      [0.090]       [0.033]      [0.044]      [0.022]       [0.032]    [0.025]    [0.023]      [0.026]
Control Mean                    0.679         0.679        0.679         0.679        0.679        0.679         0.679      0.679      0.679        0.679
Observations                    3711          3711         3711          3711         3711         3711          3711       3711       3711         3711
Bandwidth of -4 to 5

Cutoff*Shock                   -0.011       -0.106∗∗      -0.038        -0.101       -0.012       -0.014        -0.019      0.008      0.024       -0.014
                               [0.050]       [0.051]      [0.214]       [0.062]      [0.087]      [0.042]       [0.060]    [0.052]    [0.046]      [0.051]
Score Cutoff                   -0.051        -0.027       -0.052        -0.044        -0.053      -0.050        -0.047     -0.050     -0.059       -0.044
                               [0.046]       [0.046]      [0.045]       [0.045]      [0.045]      [0.051]       [0.045]    [0.046]    [0.047]      [0.046]
Shock                          0.080∗∗      0.167∗∗∗       0.020       0.152∗∗∗      -0.057      0.179∗∗∗      0.157∗∗∗    0.069∗      0.001      0.092∗∗∗
                               [0.034]       [0.033]      [0.170]       [0.042]      [0.062]      [0.030]       [0.040]    [0.036]    [0.033]      [0.035]
Control Mean                    0.698         0.698        0.698         0.698        0.698        0.698         0.698      0.698      0.698        0.698
Observations                    1913          1913         1913          1913         1913         1913          1913       1913       1913         1913
  Note: Robust standard errors in brackets.
        Sample restricted to households with a negative shock (90% of the sample).
        The last three columns are shocks that results in losses of livestock, business and employment, respectively.
                                                                           Table 5: Consumption
                                             Log Expenditures                                                        Dummy for Positive Expenses
                                    (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)              (9)              (10)
                                   Total       Food       Basics      Airtime       Education        Health      Clothing       Assets     Temptation Goods   Alcohol Tobacco
 Bandwidth of -9 to 10
 Score Cutoff                     0.017        0.035       0.043        0.063         0.058∗∗        -0.046        -0.021       -0.025          -0.001             0.010
                                 [0.048]      [0.047]     [0.082]      [0.065]        [0.027]        [0.032]       [0.030]      [0.025]         [0.027]           [0.017]
 Sidak-Holm p-value                              .         1.000        1.000          0.743          0.970         0.999        0.999          1.000              1.000
 Control Mean                     6.377        5.054       4.238        3.385          0.771          0.547         0.730        0.834          0.786              0.081
 Observations                     3701         3637        3405         3479           3701           3701          3701         3701           3701               3701
 Bandwidth of -4 to 5
 Score Cutoff                     0.009        0.102       -0.015       0.034          0.059         -0.045        -0.021       -0.057           0.005             -0.001
                                 [0.072]      [0.068]     [0.119]      [0.096]        [0.038]        [0.047]       [0.044]      [0.037]         [0.039]           [0.025]
 Sidak-Holm p-value                              .         0.999        0.999          0.765          0.988         0.999        0.988          0.999              0.999
 Control Mean                     6.366        5.052       4.194        3.354          0.752          0.564         0.721        0.838          0.775              0.063
 Observations                     1907         1871        1765         1792           1907           1907          1907         1907           1907               1907
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets.
      For expenditures, basics covers all utilities (water, rent, electricity, firewood, fuel and gas).
      For expenditures, temptation goods include meals outside the house, alcohol, tobacco, entertainment, donations and events.
      The specification in all columns is as per equation (1) in the paper with differential linear slopes on either side of the cutoff.
                                                      Table 6: Assets (Financial and Real)
                                    Savings Instruments              Savings Last Month               Savings Current Balance                Log Asset Value
                                           (1)                        (2)             (3)              (4)                (5)               (6)          (7)
                                        Number Used                   Any           Amount             Any              Amount             Total     Productive
 Bandwidth of -9 to 10
 Score Cutoff                                0.184∗                  0.007           -5.716           0.011              243.889            0.022      0.055
                                             [0.107]                [0.023]        [631.385]         [0.029]            [833.840]          [0.095]    [0.105]
 Sidak-Holm p-value                           0.940                  1.000          1.000             1.000              1.000             1.000       1.000
 Control Mean                                 3.689                  0.829         7512.827           0.652             7868.415           11.004      9.775
 Observations                                 4136                   4136            3930             4136                3930              4048       3962
 Bandwidth of -4 to 5
 Score Cutoff                                0.272∗                  0.018          437.442           0.053             1919.968           0.254∗     0.275∗
                                             [0.157]                [0.034]        [935.513]         [0.043]           [1214.336]          [0.139]    [0.153]
 Sidak-Holm p-value                           0.940                  1.000          1.000             1.000              1.000             1.000       1.000
 Control Mean                                 3.676                  0.831         7718.806           0.648             7879.983           10.941      9.740
 Observations                                 2111                   2111            2002             2111                2012              2069       2025
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets.
      For assets, productive assets include mobile phones, livestock, computers and vehicles.
      All amounts are reported in Kenyan shillings, where the exchange rate is 100 KSh to the USD.
      The specification in all columns is as per equation (1) in the paper with differential linear slopes on either side of the cutoff.
