NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIALIZED HEALTHCARE AND WOMEN’S FERTILITY DECISIONS
Resul Cesur
Pinar Mine Gunes
Erdal Tekin
Aydogan Ulker
Working Paper 25605
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25605

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

We are grateful for the helpful comments received from audiences at the University of
Connecticut, the Western Economic Association International Conference in Singapore, the 1st
Workshop on Economics of Education, Health, and Worker Productivity in Turkey, the 10th
Workshop in Economics of Health and Wellbeing in Australia, and the Annual Meetings of the
Southern Economic Association in the U.S. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Resul Cesur, Pinar Mine Gunes, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Socialized Healthcare and Women’s Fertility Decisions
Resul Cesur, Pinar Mine Gunes, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker
NBER Working Paper No. 25605
February 2019
JEL No. I10,I12,I13,I18,J13
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the effect of a nationwide healthcare reform implemented in Turkey on
women’s fertility decisions. The Family Medicine Program (FMP), introduced in 2005, provided
a wide-range of primary healthcare services, free of charge, and achieved universal access by
matching each citizen to a specific family physician, who operates at neighborhood clinics, called
Family Health Centers, on a walk-in basis. Although reducing fertility was not specified among
the goals of the reform, reproductive-health and family-planning services have been covered
under the FMP. To establish causality, we exploit the staggered rollout of the FMP
implementation across Turkish provinces over time using a difference-in-differences estimation
strategy. Our estimates indicate that the FMP significantly reduced childbearing among both
teenagers and women ages 20-29. These results can be explained by increased access to and
reduced cost of reproductive-health and family-planning services. However, the patterns in which
the program effect has evolved over time differs between the two groups of women in a way that
provides additional insights about the mechanisms. For teenagers, the FMP had a direct effect on
childbearing, reflected by an immediate and rapidly-increasing pattern, which is not surprising
given the broad agreement about the negative consequences of teenage childbearing among
government and public health officials, including those in Turkey. For women ages 20-29,
however, the program had a gradual and slowly-increasing effect, which is consistent with an
empowerment channel. This should be interpreted as an unintended consequence of the program
because, if anything, Turkey is a country where the government’s position is to encourage
fertility behavior and discourage birth control practices among women at prime childbearing
ages.
Resul Cesur
University of Connecticut
School of Business
2100 Hillside Road
Storrs, CT 06269
and IZA
and also NBER
cesur@uconn.edu

Erdal Tekin
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070 and
IZA
and also NBER
tekin@american.edu

Pinar Mine Gunes
Department of Economics
University of Alberta
9-10 HM Tory
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T6G 2H4
gunes@ualberta.ca

Aydogan Ulker
Department of Economics
Deakin University
221 Burwood Highway Burwood
VIC, 3125
Australia
ulker@deakin.edu.au

1. Introduction
Of the many developing countries that have implemented major healthcare reforms over
the last several decades, Turkey is unique in that it is the only country that has pursued and
successfully established a socialized healthcare system.1 Turkey now has universal healthcare
coverage in place that extends primary health services to all of its citizens. Furthermore, these
services are provided to everyone regardless of income and under a free-of-charge and singlepayer system that is fully financed and administered by the central government. The pursuit of
universal health coverage began in 2003 when the government embarked a large-scale health
transformation program with the objective of achieving universal basic health coverage,
reducing inequities in access to healthcare, and addressing inefficiencies in the delivery and
financing of health services (Atun et al., 2013; Atun, 2015; Yasar, 2011). At the heart of this
transformation lies the Family Medicine Program (FMP hereafter), which covers a wide range
of services, including diagnostic, curative, and rehabilitative care as well as family-planning,
reproductive health and counselling services. Under the FMP, each Turkish citizen is matched
with a family physician, who offers a range of healthcare services in neighborhood clinics
called Family Health Centers (FHC) that operate on a walk-in basis. The program was first
initiated as a pilot in 2005 in the province of Duzce, and then gradually expanded to cover
citizens in all 81 provinces by the end of 2010. By 2017, there were over 25,000 family
physicians – all public employees – in 7,774 FHCs.2
As a result of the FMP implementation, healthcare access for Turkish citizens has
improved dramatically (Worldbank, 2018). Studies have shown that the FMP has also led to
marked improvements in the quality of and access to basic health services, especially among
low income populations as well as those who are among the most vulnerable, including

Reforms implemented in countries like Brazil, Indonesia, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, and Thailand have been
successful to varying degrees, but in essence, they are still staggered systems of coverage with more restricted
benefits and access for lower-income groups.
2 See http://ailehekimligi.gov.tr.
1

2

pregnant women, new mothers, infants, and the elderly (World Health Organization, 2012a,
2012b; Yasar, 2011). Furthermore, outpatient physician visits per capita have more than
doubled, growing from 3.1 visits annually in 2002 to 8.2 visits in 2013 (Worldbank, 2018). As
a result of these improvements, there have been visible increases in patient satisfaction and
healthcare utilization (Akturk et al., 2015; Baris et al., 2011; World Health Organization, 2008).
Importantly, the program has helped to greatly reduce the mortality rates among infants and
the elderly (Cesur et al., 2017a).
In this paper, we examine the impact of the FMP on women’s fertility decisions. At
first glance, the consideration of a possible link between the FMP and birth rates may come as
a surprise since influencing women’s fertility behavior was never articulated as a program goal.
Yet, there are several reasons why such a relationship may be anticipated. For example,
reproductive-health and family-planning services, which are included under the FMP, may
directly influence fertility behavior. Prior to the FMP, reproductive-health and family-planning
services were primarily provided by midwives and nurses in small healthcare units, called
health houses, but the personnel in these settings usually lacked adequate training and resources
to treat reproductive-health problems, prescribe medications, and refer patients to
gynecologists or other specialists (Aarendonk and Maeseneer, 2011; Erbil and Bostan, 2010;
Yanikkerem et al., 2006). Shortages of basic contraceptives were common, and only 10 percent
of health insurance beneficiaries received adequate family-planning services (Sine et al.,
2004)3. Under the FMP, family physicians have been able to provide a broad range of
counseling and reproductive-health services, including oral contraception and prophylactics4,
pregnancy testing, gynecological exams, as well as family counseling, and sexual education
(Karaca et al., 2009; Mehmetoglu et al., 2010; Symposium Report, 2010). Additionally,
curative services, including essential obstetric care (e.g., administering antibiotics), abortion

http://turkey.unfpa.org/topics/family-planning.
Contraceptives, such as birth control pills and condoms are fully covered, whereas intrauterine devices (IUD)
are provided at a subsidized price (Bernar-Dilbaz, 2010; Karaguzel, 2006).
3
4

3

services, and management of sexually transmitted infections and reproductive system cancers
(e.g., cervical cancer) are also available to all women.5 To ensure service quality and
effectiveness, family physicians are required to complete training in family planning,
reproductive health, essential obstetrics and gynecology, and youth reproductive health
(Aarendonk and Maeseneer, 2011; Entre Nous, 2007; Symposium Report, 2010). Importantly,
all these services are provided to the public with no out-of-pocket costs.
Accordingly, the FMP has led to a decrease in the cost of childbearing as well as the
healthcare costs associated with raising young children. On the one hand, the reduction in these
costs might have then encouraged more women to become mothers or mothers to have more
children, at least among households wherein the cost of children is a relevant factor in fertility
decisions. On the other hand, the increased availability of family-planning services, such as
contraceptives, reproductive-health services, and sexual education, might have led to either
reduced childbearing or a shift in the timing of childbearing towards older ages, especially
among women who lacked access to or awareness and knowledge of such services. Finally,
because the FMP improved child health (Cesur et al. 2017a), the reform might have induced a
quantity-quality trade-off, which might have led to a reduction in fertility (Becker, 1960).
However, the ambiguity in the relationship between the FMP and birth rates inferred
from the discussion above is likely to apply only to women who are at their prime reproductive
ages. For younger women, particularly teenagers, the relationship is likely to be negative. First
of all, teenage pregnancy is universally accepted by public health officials as a public health
and social problem associated with a myriad of negative consequences for both teenage
mothers and their children and Turkey is no exception.6 Moreover, adolescent pregnancy is
Obstetricians and gynecologists (ob-gyns), family physicians, and certified general practitioners (GPs) are
legally permitted to provide clinical abortion services, and termination of pregnancy is mainly surgical (vacuum
aspiration) (Akin et al., 2012).
6 The World Health Organization (2016) report that complications during pregnancy and childbirth are the leading
cause of deaths globally for 15-19-year-old girls. The risk of maternal death is twice as high for girls ages 15 to
19 as for women in their 20s, and five times as high for girls ages 10 to 14 (Smith et al., 2009). Children born to
teenage mothers have lower birth weights, increased risk of hospitalization, less supportive home environments,
poorer cognitive development, and are more likely to become teenage mothers themselves (Botting et al., 1998;
Wellings et al., 1999). Furthermore, compared to peers not experiencing childbearing, teenage mothers are
5

4

often unintended rather than an intentional decision based on consideration of benefits and
costs. Access to reproductive-health and family-planning services can therefore reduce these
unintended pregnancies. The FMP provided most women and adolescent girls with an
opportunity to have access to any type of reproductive-health services and education that had
not previously existed. Moreover, family physicians are in a unique position to provide
medically accurate information to young women as well as their parents to encourage them to
make healthy life choices, and they can do so with a sense of authority. Any interaction with a
family physician, even a visit for sore throat or immunization, may then lead to conversations
about adolescent growth and development, sexuality, birth control, protection against sexually
transmitted infections, and other issues related to reproductive health. Such interactions may
also lead to changes in life choices about when to become sexually active and use
contraception, as well as the ability to obtain and use contraception when these choices are
made.
It has been widely documented that access to healthcare is imperative to women’s
empowerment, which would give them the ability to make strategic decisions for themselves
(Lee and Finlay, 2017; Shaw, 2006).7 Then it is conceivable to think that the FMP might have
ultimately led to the empowerment of Turkish women, enabling them to avoid pregnancy at
young ages. As women become more empowered and acquire knowledge and resources, they
are expected to make strategic life decisions in a more informed manner and in ways that could
result in positive health outcomes for themselves and their children (Kabeer, 2002).
Studying the impact of a healthcare reform on women’s fertility decisions is particularly
important in the context of a conservative society like Turkey, in which women are largely
disadvantaged and disempowered, and experience high fertility rates. The World Economic

more socially isolated, have worse mental health, have less educational and employment opportunities, and hence,
are more often welfare dependent (Angrist and Evans, 2000; Ashcraft et al., 2013; Chevalier and Viitanen, 2003;
Fletcher and Wolfe, 2009; Holmlund, 2005; Hotz et al., 2005; Klepinger et al., 1999).
7 Empowerment is described as the process of change wherein an individual with prior inability to choose has the
access and freedom to make choices (Kabeer, 2005). For young women, it is the process by which these women
gain power and control over their own lives and acquire the ability to make strategic choices.

5

Forum, for example, ranked Turkey at 105th among 115 countries in comprehensive gender
equality in 2006, and according to the United Nations, teenage fertility rate was 45 births per
1,000 women ages 15-19 in 2005 prior to the FMP.8 Premarital and extramarital sex are highly
stigmatized, and girls are often married at young ages, especially in rural areas, in order for
parents to prevent premarital sexual activity of daughters. For instance, seven percent of girls
ages 15-19 are already married and 26 percent of women ages 15-49 report being married as a
child (Turkish Population and Health Research, 2013). Moreover, prior to the FMP, most
adolescent girls lacked basic knowledge regarding reproductive health and family planning
(Ege et al., 2014). Whether or not a healthcare reform can be effective in reducing teenage
childbearing and empowering women more generally in the context of a society, where
marriage and fertility choices, and even premarital relations, are highly constrained, is of
significant interest to both academics and policy makers.
In order to obtain a causal estimate of the impact of the FMP on childbearing, we exploit
the staggered implementation of the FMP across Turkish provinces and over time in a
difference-in-differences framework. Our results provide robust evidence in support of a
negative causal relationship between the FMP implementation and birth rates among both
teenagers and women ages 20-29. Moreover, the relationship appears to follow a dynamic
pattern with an immediate and growing effect for teenagers and a gradual and slowly-increasing
effect among women ages 20-29. The pattern for teenagers is not surprising and would likely
be appreciated by the Turkish public health officials and program administrators. After all,
reducing teenage fertility is a desirable goal in most societies including Turkey where decisions
regarding marriage and childbearing are still constrained by a set of conservative institutions
to a large extent. However, the finding for women ages 20-29 may come as a surprise and could
be interpreted as an unintended consequence of the program. In fact, Turkey is a country where
the highest-ranking government officials, most importantly the President himself, frequently

8

http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/adolescent-birth-rate-women-aged-15-19-years-births-1000-women-ages-15-19.

6

make public statements, encouraging women to have at least three children, describing birth
control as a threat to country’s lineage, and blaming birth control advocates for hindering the
country’s economic development prospects (Yeginsu, 2014).
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. In Section II, we provide a summary of the
relevant literature. We provide a brief description of the history of the FMP in Section III. We
then discuss the data in Section IV and the estimation strategy in Section V, followed by the
results in Section VI. We end the paper with conclusions in Section VII.

II. Overview of Literature
In the context of developed countries (especially the United States), several studies
investigated the role of various health reforms on fertility with mixed findings. For example,
Lovenheim et al. (2016) found that the expansion of school-based health centers reduced teen
birth rates, while Apostolova-Mihaylova and Yelowitz (2018) showed that a health insurance
reform in Massachusetts led to increased fertility among married women and decreased fertility
among unmarried women. Kearney and Levine (2009) studied the effect of an expansion in
family-planning services, showing that such services reduced fertility, especially among
teenagers. Studies focusing on Medicaid expansions also produced mixed results. For example,
Bitler and Zavodny (2010) showed that Medicaid expansions increased fertility (among women
without high school diplomas) while DeLeire et al. (2011) documented a non-robust
relationship.
The evidence obtained from studies focused on health reforms implemented in
developing countries is much more limited. One exception is Rocha and Soares (2010) who
found that the Family Health Program in Brazil (PSF) reduced fertility for women between the
ages of 31-40, but not for women between the ages of 18-30 or 41-55. While expanding familyplanning and reproductive-health services was an initial priority of the PSF program, it should
be highlighted that this aspect of the program—namely the Comprehensive Women’s Health

7

Assistance Program (PAISM)—was not fully implemented due to a lack of political will, and
this priority was not fulfilled as contraception and other family-planning services remained
unavailable and physicians did not receive training in family planning (De Bessa, 2006; Pierre
and Clapis, 2010). Studying the effect of the FMP, which has been successful in fulfilling this
priority, thus represents an important opportunity to shed light on the role of health
interventions in the context of a developing country.
The present paper adds to the literature by investigating the effect of a primarily supplyside health intervention implemented in Turkey on fertility decisions. The FMP extended
primary and reproductive healthcare services to the entire population under a free-of-charge
and single-payer system that is fully financed and administered by the central government. A
unique component of the FMP, which distinguishes it from most other interventions studied in
the literature, is the assignment of every Turkish citizen, regardless of income, to a specific
family physician, who provides basic healthcare services including sexual and reproductive
health services in easily accessible walk-in clinics located within the local neighborhoods.

III. Brief History of the Family Medicine Program
Prior to the FMP, the healthcare system in Turkey was highly fragmented and
characterized by uneven health coverage and access, high out-of-pocket costs to patients, and
inefficiencies in the allocation of resources. The “Greed Card” program covered the poor, but
included only basic inpatient treatments in public facilities (typically centralized hospitals).9
Among the various types of health coverage, there was wide variation in terms of benefits
coverage, out-of-pocket expenses and co-pays related to services, and the set of eligible
healthcare providers (Atun, 2015; Robila, 2013). Moreover, many important health services
were prohibitively costly and many individuals in rural areas lacked access to professional

The “Green Card” program launched in 1992 was the flagship social protection mechanism that targeted poor,
but covered only inpatient treatment costs of the eligible beneficiaries in public facilities until 2004.
9

8

healthcare providers, and dispensaries and healthcare personnel lacked adequate resources,
such as medication and equipment (OECD, 2008).
In 2005, the Turkish Ministry of Health launched the FMP as a pilot in the province of
Duzce, and gradually expanded the program to all 81 provinces by the end of 2010.10 The FMP
harmonized the patchwork of health-coverage programs, providing universal and free coverage
to all citizens regardless of occupation or income. The primary benefits package included a
wide range of health services, and importantly, assigned each citizen to a specific family
physician that provided primary healthcare services free of charge.
Family Health Centers (FHCs) and Community Health Centers (CHCs) are the primary
channels of the delivery of the FMP services. The FHCs are the primary care clinics where a
wide range of primary care services are provided by family health teams comprised of at least
one family physician and other healthcare personnel including nurses and midwives. More
importantly, the FHCs are easily accessible clinics located within the communities where
assigned citizens reside, and citizens are not required to schedule an appointment or hold any
type of health insurance. The CHCs, on the other hand, are the centers that usually provide
logistical support to family physicians for public health services such as vaccination
campaigns, health promotion and education services, and environmental and occupational
health services. Moreover, the CHCs collect statistical data on public health services, and
monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of health services provided by the FHCs. Both the FHCs
and CHCs are administered under the supervision of the Provincial Health Directorates that are
in charge of planning and provision of health services at provincial level.
Family physicians are public employees, who are recruited from existing general
practitioners, specialists within both the private and public sectors, and recent graduates from
medical schools (Worldbank, 2013). In order to ensure that family doctors provide quality care,
a number of measures are put in place. For example, physician pay is based on capitation.

10

A detailed description of the FMP can be found in Cesur et al. (2017a).

9

Moreover, a performance-based payment scheme is integrated into the capitation payment
system (OECD, 2014; Worldbank, 2013). In particular, family physicians are required to meet
pre-defined performance (activity) targets in maternal and child health, such as immunization
and antenatal care. Failure to meet these targets have ramifications such as a salary deduction
of up to 20 percent as well as contract termination in repeated failures. Furthermore, contracts
include a point-based warning and admonition system for violations of 35 pre-defined
indicators, such as abiding with working hours, and maintenance and security of patient health
records. Physicians with points exceeding 100 within a contract period have their contracts
terminated and are not allowed to apply for a new contract.11
Appendix Table 1 shows the year of implementation of the FMP as well as the number
of citizens per family physicians for each province in 2017. According to the goals set by the
Turkish Ministry of Health, the program aims to provide one family physician for every 3,500
persons in each province. There is evidence to suggest that the targets were met rather quickly
and exceeded in some cases (Dogac et al., 2014; Öcek et al., 2014; Tirpan, 2010; Worldbank,
2013).12 For example, as illustrated in Appendix Table 1, the average number of citizens per
family physician as of 2017 is 3,217, which is remarkably close to the target rate.

IV. Data
Information on the FMP was obtained from the Public Health Institution of Turkey
(PHIT), and data on birth rates over a period between 2001 and 2017 come from the Turkish
Statistical Institute (TurkStat). Our main analysis focuses on the birth rates among women in
two age categories: (i) teenagers who are between ages 15 and 19; and (ii) women in prime
Additionally, an internet-based platform is established for family physicians to maintain a database on maternal
and child health activities, such as vaccinations and antenatal care to the Health Information Systems Directorate
at the Ministry of Health. Auditors from CHCs assess compliance and quality of services provided by FHCs at
least once every six months, and family physicians are randomly selected for performance audits every month,
which includes audits of health services administered to a randomly selected 10 percent of patients. Finally, to
provide ongoing training, an internet-based open platform was established for physicians to interact with each
other and to facilitate peer-to-peer learning, which has served to improve quality of services (Worldbank, 2013).
12 See also http://ailehekimligi.gov.tr/sk-sorulan-sorular/personel-cin.html.
11

10

childbearing age, who are between ages 20 and 29. These age-specific birth rates reflect the
number of births per 1,000 women in the associated age group.
We account for a host of time-varying determinants of childbearing in our econometric
analysis. These covariates are measured either at the provincial or sub-regional level on an
annual basis.13 Per capita GDP, the number of motor vehicles per 1,000 persons, and the share
of governing party seats in the Turkish Parliament in the most recent general election are
measured at the province level, while unemployment rate and the percentage of the population
with high school and college degrees are measured at the sub-regional level.14,15 Information
on province age-specific populations comes from the TurkStat.16
Descriptive statistics on birth rates and the covariates are presented in Table 1. The
mean birth rate among teenagers is 34.02 per 1,000, which goes up to 120.51 among women
ages 20-29.17 Note that these birth rate figures accord well with other sources like OECD.18
Interestingly, as shown in columns 2 and 3, conditioning on the FMP status indicates that birth
rates among both groups of women are higher in the subsample prior to the introduction of the
FMP program.
As shown in Table 1, the time-variant province characteristics also vary considerably
between province-year observations with and without the FMP. For example, the observations
with the FMP appear to have a higher number of motor vehicles per capita, and higher income
and education. The pattern in these differences suggests that the pace by which the FMP has

The TurkStat classifies Turkey into 12 regions and 26 sub-regions in addition to 81 provinces. These regional
and sub-regional classifications are generated for statistical purposes based on geographic proximity and socioeconomic similarities within the associated region. The TurkStat collects and processes data from different sources
on a variety of topics including demographic characteristics and health. See http://www.turkstat.gov.tr for more
information.
14 Between 2001 and 2017, Turkey had five general elections (2002, 2007, 2011, June 2015, and November 2015),
in which the members of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey were elected.
15 We also include binary indicators representing missing observations for each control variable.
16 The information on province populations and age compositions from the TurkStat refer to the years 2000 and
2007-2017. Because no Census was administered in the period 2001-06, the associated province populations for
these years are imputed using a linear growth rate.
17 In supplementary analysis, we also estimate models for the birth rate among women between ages 30 and 39.
The mean birth rate among this group is 66.64.
18 See OECD Family Sources Database www.oecd.org/social/family/database.
13

11

expanded is positively associated with urbanization and economic development. On the one
hand, this may seem surprising given higher average incomes and better access to healthcare
observed in more urban areas. On the other hand, there is evidence that health outcomes are
negatively associated with living in urban areas, especially in developing countries, due to
deleterious factors, such as stress and pollution (Health Effects Institute, 2010; McGranahan
and Murray, 2003). Furthermore, these patterns are also consistent with high levels of income
inequality in urban areas as well as the persistent trends in “urbanization of poverty” in the
developing world (Ravallion et al., 2007). Additionally, Cesur et al. (2017b) show that air
pollution is an important factor responsible for the higher infant mortality rates in urban
Turkish provinces. In another recent paper, the same authors document a similar pattern for the
adult and the elderly mortality rates as well (Cesur et al., 2018).

V. Estimation Strategy
Our goal is to obtain estimates of the causal impact of the FMP on birth rates among
teenagers and women in prime childbearing age. Achieving this goal is complicated due to
potential endogeneity bias that might be caused by non-random implementation of the FMP. It
is important to note that, when the central government launched the FMP in 2005, it did so with
a clear and decisive goal to ultimately establish a healthcare system with universal coverage.
This goal was accomplished when the program was expanded to all 81 Turkish provinces by
the end of 2010. Therefore, there is no concern about selection bias in our context that might
stem from only a subset of provinces instituting the program due to some unobserved factors
having to do with birth rates. However, there may still be endogeneity with respect to the order
in which the FMP was rolled out over time. For instance, if the order in which the program was
launched is related to differences in pre-existing trends in fertility rates across provinces then
the relationship between the FMP and birth rates would be confounded, resulting in biased
estimates. More specifically, if reducing teenage pregnancy were among the goals to be

12

achieved by FMP, then provinces with a relatively high teenage birth rate at the baseline might
have been given priority. In that case, the estimates could be biased upward. As explained
earlier however, we can confidently rule out this possibility as there is not even a hint of
evidence to indicate that such motives played a role in the program implementation.
While the timing and location decisions for the FMP had not been strategically
determined in a way to accomplish some policy goal with respect to fertility rates, the program
does not appear to have been implemented in a random manner either. As illustrated in Table
1, there is considerable variation in observable characteristics between province-year
observations with and without the FMP. For example, as shown in columns 2 and 3 of Table
1, the pattern between the two groups indicates that provinces that appear to be more urban,
more economically developed, and with more educated populations have deployed their FMP
earlier than other provinces. This is not surprising because trained healthcare personnel as well
as physical and organizational structures that are required for a well-functioning FMP are more
likely to be already in place or easier to establish in more urban, educated, and economically
developed provinces. If province characteristics such as urbanicity, education, and economic
development are correlated with pre-existing trends in birth rates, then an approach that relies
on comparing differences in birth rates across provinces with and without the FMP at different
points in time would reflect a relationship that is confounded by these characteristics.
Given these considerations, our baseline approach to estimating the causal relationship
between the FMP and birth rates is to follow Cesur et al. (2017a) by implementing a differencein-differences strategy. This strategy exploits the temporal and spatial variation in the
implementation of the FMP across Turkish provinces and can be expressed formally by the
following regression equation:
BRrpt = a0 + Xrpta1 + a2 FMPrpt + δr*t + λp + φp t + εrpt,

(1)

where BRrpt is the number of births per 1,000 women at ages either 15-19 or 20-29 living in
province p in region r in year t. The FMPrpt is the corresponding binary indicator for whether

13

the province has an FMP in place, and Xrpt represents a vector of time-varying characteristics
measured at either the province or region level that are described in the previous section.
To capture the impact of confounding factors, equation (1) is supplemented with a
series of additional variables. In particular, the δr*t represents region-by-year fixed effects,
which would capture any common trends and shocks to birth rates that might occur either at
the national or regional level (Cesur et al., 2017a). For example, any regional or nationwide
investments made by the central government in an effort to improve health or economic
conditions would be captured by these fixed effects.19 The λp represents province fixed effects
that would account for any time-invariant differences between provinces.20 For instance, if the
adoption of the program is correlated with some pre-existing provincial factors, such as initial
fertility rates or infant health, then the province fixed effects would account for such factors.
Therefore, the identification of the treatment effect in equation (1) comes from the variation in
birth rates within provinces rather than comparisons between different provinces.
The key identifying assumption in the difference-in-differences framework expressed
in equation (1) is that birth rates across provinces would have trended in a parallel fashion in
the absence of the FMP. One possible threat to this assumption is that provinces that had been
already making health-related investments might have been able to institute their FMP earlier
than other provinces that had been relatively slow in meeting the personnel and infrastructure
requirements necessary for the program to take off. To the extent that these pre-existing
differences in trends associated with health-related investments are correlated with both the
adoption of the FMP and birth rates, the estimates could be biased. To guard against such bias,
we also explore specifications with province-specific linear trends in equation (1). These trends
There have been a number of significant health and non-health related policies and programs introduced by the
central government at the national level during our analysis period. For example, an air ambulance service was
introduced in 2008 and mobile pharmacy services were established in 2009 with the goal of improving access to
medical care in rural areas. Some other examples include a national tracking system, which was introduced in
2009, and taxes for alcohol and cigarettes, which were raised significantly in 2010. The influence of these factors
could be captured by region-by-year fixed effects.
20 Note that any differences in birth rates across provinces that are due to other factors, such as cultural, religious,
and traditional practices are likely to remain unchanged during our analysis period. Therefore, their effects are
also likely to be captured by province fixed effects.
19

14

represented by φpt would capture the impact of any difficult-to-observe factors that are trending
linearly at the province level.21 Finally, εrpt is the idiosyncratic error term. All the regressions
are weighted by province population for the relevant age category.22 Note that we cluster
standard errors at the province level to account for arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and
serial correlation within provinces over time (Bertrand et al., 2004).
It is important to recognize that the model specified in equation (1) imposes the
assumption that program effect remains the same over time. This may be too strong of an
assumption because it may take some time before FHCs within which family physicians and
other healthcare personnel provide their services become sufficiently staffed and equipped.
Relatedly, establishing a steady relationship between family physicians and the citizens
designated to them is also likely to be a time-consuming and effortful process, involving the
steps of identifying and registering these individuals, conducting initial health screening and
evaluations, and gaining their trust by creating an environment in which individuals feel
welcome and secure. In short, the program may become fully operational in all neighborhoods
within a province only gradually. Accordingly, a more flexible specification that allows the
program impact to vary over time is likely to capture a more realistic representation of the
relationship between the FMP and birth rates. One way to allow the effect to vary over time is
to replace the binary FMP indicator in equation (1) with an index variable representing the
number of years the program has been in place. This equation could be specified as follows:
BRrpt = a0 + Xrpta1 + a2Years_since_FMPrpt + δr*t + λp + φp t + εrpt.

(2)

We also estimated our models controlling for province-specific quadratic trends. The results obtained from
these models are very similar to those presented in this paper. They are available from the authors upon request.
22 The results from unweighted regressions are qualitatively similar to those presented in this paper, though the
coefficients are somewhat less precisely estimated. This is not surprising because there are several very lowdensely populated provinces, for which the impact of the FMP is not representative of the program effect more
generally. This is because the key operational feature of the FMP entails an initial contact between a family
physician and each citizen, which presumably progresses into a continuous and long-term relationship with regular
checkups performed at neighborhood clinics. This relationship is likely to be more challenging to establish in
these sparsely populated provinces. Therefore, not employing population weights would place undue influence
on these small provinces in estimating the average effect of the FMP on the overall population. In fact, when we
exclude these sparsely populated provinces from the analysis, the estimates become robust to not using weights.
21

15

In equation (2), a2 represents the marginal effect of the FMP on BR for every year. While the
specification in equation (2) allows the effect to evolve over time, it is still restrictive as it
imposes the relationship to evolve linearly. This could be especially unrealistic for the program
impact pertaining to women ages 20-29 for whom we expect little or no effect initially and
stronger effects later on. A more flexible approach would be to specify a non-parametric model,
in which the treatment variable is defined as separate binary indicators for various years lapsed
since the implementation of the FMP. This could be expressed by the following equation:
BRrpt = a0 + Xrpta1 + ∑#$
%&' 𝛽% k_years_since_FMP567 + δr*t + λp + φp t + εrpt,

(3)

where the program is allowed to have a different impact in the year of its introduction and each
of the first four years after its launch.23
It is worth noting that if the set of fixed effects and trends included in our empirical
model indeed capture all the confounding factors, then inclusion of time-varying provincial or
regional characteristics into the model should not affect the program impact in any appreciable
way. One way to test this is to consider pairwise correlations between these characteristics that
are likely to be related to both birth rates and the treatment variables described in equations (1),
(2), and (3), and examine how these correlations vary as we successively control for the fixed
effects and the trend terms described above. The results from this analysis are presented in
Tables 2A, 2B, and 2C with each using the FMP treatment variable specified in equations (1),
(2), and (3), respectively. Note that each cell in these tables correspond to an estimate from a
separate regression. As illustrated in Table 2A, province-year observations with and without
the FMP differ significantly from each other on a number of dimensions, including
unemployment rate, number of vehicles per 1000 persons, per capita income, percent of
population with a high school and college degree, and the share of the members of the
parliament from the governing party representing the province at the general assembly. The

Note that k takes on the value of 0 for the year of implementation and 1, 2, 3, 4 for the following four years.
The specification in equation (2) restricts the FMP impact to remain constant after four years of implementation.
23

16

overall evidence emerging from Table 2A indicates that the presence of the FMP is positively
associated with the degree of urbanicity and economic development. However, most of these
differences are eliminated once we control for time-varying differences across regions in
column 2 through region-by-year fixed effects. But it is really when we account for permanent
differences across provinces through province level fixed effects in column 3 that all of these
characteristics become unrelated to the FMP. Furthermore, the estimates are robust to provincespecific linear trends as shown in column 4. When we repeat this exercise using the treatment
variables described in equations (2) and (3), the overall pattern remains the same as displayed
in Tables 2B and 2C. Specifically, province characteristics are significantly and sizably related
to the number of years that the program has been in place in a province, suggesting a more
rapid adoption of the FMP in provinces that are more urban and economically developed than
other provinces. But again, this pattern disappears once we control for fixed effects and trends.
Next, we provide more formal evidence on the validity of our identification strategy by
performing an event-study analysis.24 This analysis enabled us to trace out differences in birth
rates between provinces with and without the FMP in the periods leading up to and following
the establishment of the program. To do so, we estimate an augmented version of equation (3),
in which we include both the lead and lagged values of the FMP indicator in the model. If the
indicators for periods leading up to the program turn out to be statistically significant in this
analysis, this would serve as evidence that the program might have evolved in a way that is
correlated with some characteristics of the dependent variable, which would be a violation of
the parallel trends assumption. Figure 1 displays the estimates from the event-study analysis
separately for the birth rate among teenagers and women ages 20-29 along with the 95 percent
confidence interval. As shown in the figure, there is no evidence, at least statistically, of any
systematic changes in birth rates at the province level in the years prior to the launch of the

See Jones and Ziebarth (2018), Bartel et al. (2018), Buckles and Hungerman (2018), Chen et al. (2018),
Gershenson and Tekin (2018) Waddington and Berends (2018) for examples.
24

17

FMP. In particular, all of the placebo (lead) indicators of the FMP are statistically insignificant.
In sum, the results from the event-study analysis bolster our confidence in the ability of our
empirical strategy to deal with these issues.

VI. Results
Table 3 presents results from the regression model specified in equation (1) estimated
separately for the birth rate among teenagers in column 1 and the birth rate for women ages 2029 in column 2. The estimates in panel I that are obtained from a regression with no controls
indicate that the FMP is negatively related to the birth rates for both groups of women. As
expected, this pattern is consistent with the differences in raw means in birth rates between
province-year observations with and without FMP as shown in Table 1. In panels II and III, we
account for any time varying unobservable factors that might influence birth rate at the national
or regional levels. Doing so causes the estimates for both the teen birth rate and the birth rate
among women ages 20-29 to remain negative and statistically significant. Interestingly, the
estimate on teen birth rate becomes smaller while the opposite is true for the older age women.25
However, it is when we control for the time-invariant differences across provinces in panel IV
that the estimates change dramatically. In particular, both estimates are substantially reduced
in both magnitude and standard error. According to the point estimates, the FMP is associated
with a decline of 1.657 births per 1,000 teenagers and an increase of 0.745 births per women
ages 20-29, though the latter estimate is not statistically significant. Moreover, both estimates
remain robust to controlling for province-specific linear time trends in panel V. Finally, panel

A number of factors may be responsible for these patterns. For example, the Civil Code Law of 2002, which
raised the legal marriage age from 15 to 17 years and the Child Protection Law of 2005, which identified children
as individuals below 18 years of age might have played a role in reducing fertility. Furthermore, the expansion of
the FMP coincided with periods of robust economic growth experienced during most of the 2000s and the
government’s initiatives to increase education, most of which might have benefitted girls (Cin and Walker, 2016).
The opposite pattern observed for the women ages 20-29 might have to do with the massive wave of welfare
programs launched by the ruling AKP party and the discourse that emphasizes more traditional family behaviors
and pronatalism openly advocated by President Erdogan (Aksoy and Billari, 2018; Greulich et al., 2016). As a
consequence of these views and policies, the fertility decline in Turkey, which started in 1960s has stalled and
subsequently slightly reversed under the AKP’s rule (Aksoy and Billari, 2018).
25

18

VI of Table 3 displays estimates obtained from a specification that includes a set of timevarying province characteristics in addition to all those fixed effect and trend terms. As shown
in the table, the estimate on teenage birthrate shifts little in response to the inclusion of these
variables. According to the point estimate, the FMP is associated with a decline by 1.578 births
per 1,000 teenagers on average, which translates into an effect size of about 4.63 percent
calculated at the mean of teenage birth rate. The estimate for the FMP among women ages 2029 changes sign between panels V and VI, which might look peculiar at first. However, the
estimates are statistically insignificant and economically inconsequential in both cases,
especially considering the fact that this is the most fertile age group to begin with. For example,
the estimate in the last panel implies that the FMP is associated with a decline of 0.374 births
per 1,000 women ages 20-29 or an effect size of 0.31 percent. Our identification strategy
assumes that the fixed-effects specified in Panels II to IV sufficiently capture the influence of
confounding factors and any remaining variation in birth rates is orthogonal to the FMP.
Therefore, it is comforting that the estimates are essentially robust to controlling for timevarying province characteristics. This is also a finding that supports the pattern obtained in
Tables 2A and 2B.
The estimates shown in Table 3 are derived from a specification that constrains the
effect of FMP on birth rates to be the same in all years after the introduction of the program.
For reasons explained earlier, this assumption may be too restrictive and mask important
dynamics in the actual relationship between the FMP and birth rates. The results from the
estimation of equations (2) and (3), which allow such a dynamic relationship are presented in
Table 4. The upper panel presents the estimate on “years since FMP” variable specified in
equation (2) and the lower panel shows estimates on binary indicators of FMP representing
various years lapsed since the launch of FMP as expressed in equation (3). As shown in the
upper panel, each year of FMP is associated with a decline in birth rate for women in both age
groups. According to the point estimates, each year of FMP implementation is associated with

19

a 1.067 reduction in births per 1,000 teenagers and a 2.049 reduction in births per 1,000 women
ages 20-29, respectively. In contrast to the pattern in Table 3, both estimates are statistically
significant.
While the evidence shown in the upper panel of Table 4 points to a pattern in which the
FMP appears to be effective in reducing birth rates among women in both age groups, this may
still not be reflective of the actual effect if the true relationship is nonlinear, which is especially
likely for older women. This is exactly what we observe when we focus on the estimates
obtained from the non-parametric specification. As shown in the bottom panel of Table 4, the
impact of FMP on birth rate among teenagers is negative and significant as soon as the program
is launched with the effect getting stronger over time, a pattern consistent with the estimate on
the upper panel. For example, in the year of its implementation, the program is expected to
reduce teen birth rate by about 1.139 birth per 1,000 teenagers. This impact increases to 2.159
births in the first year after the introduction of the FMP, 2.735 births in the second year, 2.840
births in the third year, before reaching 3.354 births (9.99 percent) on average in the fourth year
and after. Turning next to the estimates for women ages 20-29 shown in column 2, the
importance of the dynamic nature of the relationship becomes much more apparent.
Specifically, it looks like the program has little effect on the birth rate among women in this
age group in the year of its introduction. However, starting with the first year after its
introduction, it appears to cause the birth rate to decline with the effect becoming more
significant both statistically and economically. For example, the women ages 20-29 reduce
their birth rate by 3.963 births (3.28 percent) per 1,000 women in the third year after the launch
of the program and another 4.226 births (3.50 percent) in year four and afterwards. This
gradually strengthening pattern is consistent with our prior that the underlying relationship
between the FMP and birth rates is one in which the effect accumulates over time. Furthermore,
it is not surprising that the more immediate impact of the program is on the birth rate among
teenagers than those women of prime childbearing age. First and most importantly, the teenage

20

childbearing is a public health and social problem, while the childbearing among women ages
20-29 is not. It is therefore expected that the family physicians and other healthcare personnel
employed under the FMP must have prioritized the engagement of teen pregnancy prevention
efforts such as provision of educational material and counselling, among other services. In
contrast, any relationship for the women ages 20-29 is more likely to evolve over time due to
an indirect influence. For example, improved health and ability to control over fertility might
have enabled these women to gain increased self-efficacy, make life-enhancing decisions, and
obtain control over resources - a development often termed as “empowerment” (Lee and
Finlay, 2017; Kabeer, 2001; Malhotra et al., 2002; Shaw, 2006). With women gaining access
to improved reproductive-health services, fertility behavior might have changed due to an
increase in the opportunity cost of time-intensive activities, resulting in higher labor force
participation, a delay in the first birth, an increase in spacing between births, or avoidance of
having children at an earlier age (Becker, 1981; Canning and Schultz, 2012; Lee and Finlay,
2017; Schultz, 1981; Porter and King, 2012; Prata et. al, 2017; Upadhyay et al., 2014).
However, consequences of this process or the empowerment of women with respect to
childbearing are expected to occur rather slowly as empowerment itself is a process that unfolds
gradually over time (Cornwall, 2016). Overall, the picture revealed by Table 4 underscores
that the relationship between FMP and birth rates is one that evolves non-linearly over time, a
pattern that cannot be captured properly by a binary indicator or a linear relationship.
Therefore, going forward, we focus the discussion on the results obtained from equation (3).
Next, we address the question whether the dynamic pattern in the relationship between
the FMP and birth rates illustrated in Table 4 is related in any way to the initial levels of birth
rates. This is especially a relevant question for teenage birth rates because, even in the case of
constant treatment intensity, i.e., program resources including the efforts put by family
physicians are equally distributed across provinces, areas with high birth rates initially might
have experienced a more rapid decrease in childbearing. This is simply because the population

21

of young women benefitting from the FMP would include a larger proportion of teenagers at
risk of pregnancy. To test this question, we estimate the specification in equation (3) separately
for provinces with birth rates below and above the median. As shown in Table 5, the effects
are primarily driven by the reductions in birth rates in provinces with relatively high baseline
birth rates prior to the establishment of the program. Although this pattern appears to be the
case for birth rates among both teenagers and women ages 20-29, the estimates are only
significant for the former group. The results shown in Table 5 suggest that the FMP effect has
worked towards reducing geographical disparities in birth rates, especially among teenagers.
Next, we attempt to obtain an estimate of the marginal productivity of a family
physician. The assignment of each Turkish citizen to a unique family physician is arguably the
most important and distinctive operational feature of the FMP. It is really through the
relationship established by these physicians that women must feel comfortable talking about
their reproductive health issues, seek sexual education and counseling, and obtain
contraception. One way to estimate the marginal productivity of a family physician is to regress
birth rates on the number of physicians along with other control variables. However, this is
likely problematic due to the potential endogeneity of the actual number of family physicians.
As shown in Appendix Table 1, there is considerable variation in the number of citizens served
by a family physician across provinces. In fact, a closer look reveals that many of the more
urban and populous provinces like Adana, Ankara, Izmir, and Istanbul have more citizens per
physician than some of the rural and remote provinces like Ardahan, Artvin, Bayburt, and
Yozgat. This suggests that there are likely other factors associated with the degree to which the
FMP becomes fully operational within a province besides the task of meeting a pre-determined
goal. For example, the fact that citizens living in dense, urban areas are likely to have other
avenues available to them, such as public and private hospitals and health polyclinics, and
doctors’ offices, might have been factored into the decision to recruit family physicians.

22

Additionally, security concerns due to civil unrest and terrorism might have slowed down the
progress in efforts to fully staff the program in certain provinces (Cesur et al., 2017a).
To guard against potential bias from the endogeneity of the number of family
physicians, we implement a two-stage least squares approach, in which we use the target figure
for the number of family physicians per capita as an instrumental variable (IV) for the actual
number of physicians. This approach would allow us to generate a predicted number of family
physician values that is only a function of exogenously determined program rules (Cesur et al.,
2017a). The estimates for the first and second stages from the IV analysis are shown in Tables
6A and 6B, respectively. The estimate in Table 6A implies that every additional 3,500 citizens
would result in an increase in the number of family physicians by 0.907 on average. As
expected, this figure is very close to the target rate of one family physician per 3,500 citizens.
The marginal productivity estimates shown in Table 6B are both negative and statistically
significant (p=0.001) indicating that each family physician is responsible for a 0.804 fewer
births among teens and 5.177 fewer births among women ages 20-29. These effect sizes seem
plausible, especially considering that the total number of citizens served by a family physician
averaged 3,217 in 2017 as shown in Appendix Table 1.
Under the healthcare model established by the FMP, family physicians operate within
FHCs that are basically neighborhood clinics serving the public on a walk-in basis. The
presence of an FHC in a neighborhood may then indicate the availability of a whole range of
services covered by the FMP (e.g., contraception, immunization, and strep test) regardless of
whether it is fully staffed or not. To assess the impact on birth rates associated with each FHC,
we compiled information on the number of these clinics for each province for the analysis
period and estimated regressions of the impact of this variable on births for each group of
women. Note that we are not able to implement an instrumental variables strategy like in
analysis for the marginal productivity of a family physician because, unlike family physicians,
the FMP rules do not specify a target figure for the FHCs. Therefore, the estimates for the

23

marginal effect of a FHC on birth rates could be subject to a potential endogeneity bias.
Keeping this in mind, the estimates from this analysis are shown in Table 7. The results
indicate that each additional FHC is associated with a decline of 2.876 births among teens and
13.120 births among women ages 20-29.
One potential threat to the validity of the results discussed above is the possibility of
bias due to some other government program or reform that might have been implemented
concurrently with the FMP. For example, if the FMP had been implemented as part of a much
larger development package, then the effects obtained in our analysis might be driven by not
only the FMP alone, but also some of the other services in the package. We are not aware of
such a development that coincided with the FMP, and importantly, followed the same roll-out
pattern as the FMP did. Nevertheless, one way to test this is to identify a set of placebo
outcomes that could not possibly be influenced by the FMP, and repeat the analysis using these
outcomes. To do this, we consider three outcomes including car accident rate, car accident
injury rate, and suicide rate. The estimates from specifications in equations (1)-(3) using these
variables as outcomes are presented in Table 8. As shown in the table, not only none of the
estimates are statistically significant in any of the three panels, there is also no consistent
pattern in the direction of the estimates. Taken together, the evidence emerging from this
analysis lends further support to our hypothesis that the reductions in childbearing found in our
analysis are driven by the FMP, and not by some other government initiative.

VII. Conclusions
The Family Medicine Program established by the Turkish government in 2005 and
expanded across the entire country by 2010 has resulted in universal access to basic healthcare,
enhanced equity in financing, and better financial protection. These developments were
followed by a significant increase in patient satisfaction and a breadth of improvements in
public health outcomes. Aside from basic provisions of preventive, curative, and rehabilitative

24

care, the FMP also included a wide range of counselling and reproductive health services,
including oral contraception and prophylactics, pregnancy testing, gynecological exams, as
well as family counseling and sex education, which are available to Turkish citizens with no
out-of-pocket charges. These services raise the question as to whether the program might have
influenced fertility behavior of Turkish women. In this paper, we tackle this question by
conducting an analysis of the impact of FMP on birth rates among teenagers and women ages
20-29. Our findings indicate that the program caused noticeable decreases in the birth rates
among both groups of women. Consistent with our expectations, the decrease in birth rate
among teenagers appears to be immediate and persistent over time, while women ages 20-29
experience reductions in their birth rate more gradually. The finding that the patterns in the
program effect differs between the two groups of women is informative in terms of providing
additional insights for the mechanisms behind these impacts. For teenagers, it is not surprising
that the program effect is immediate and rapidly-increasing over time. After all, teenage
childbearing is widely accepted as a public health and social problem among government
officials, including those in Turkey. For women ages 20-29, however, the program had a
gradual and slowly-increasing effect, which is consistent with an additional channel, namely
“empowerment”. This channel should be interpreted as an unintended consequence of the
program because reducing fertility was never among the goals of the FMP. In contrast, Turkey
is a country where the government’s position is to encourage fertility behavior and discourage
birth control practices among women at prime childbearing ages.
Our findings suggest that women ages 20-29, who are at their prime reproductive years,
reduce their fertility behavior in response to the FMP. This result could be explained by several
behaviors. First, it could reflect a permanent reduction in fertility by some of these women.
Second, women in this age group may simply be delaying their decision to have a child or
increasing the spacing between consecutive children. Third, it could be that these women reach
their desired number of children with fewer pregnancies because of the reduction in infant

25

mortality, also caused by the FMP (Cesur et al., 2017a). Although it is reasonable to think that
all three explanations may be true to some extent, testing the degree to which each drives our
findings requires more detailed data. For example, the first two explanations cannot be
satisfactorily tested without data reflecting individual preferences on childbearing. That being
said, we can gain some insights about the viability of the second explanation using the current
research design. More specifically, if these women are, for example, delaying childbearing,
then one should see an increase in their childbearing when they are older. Since we have data
on the birth rates among women ages 30 and older, we can examine the FMP impact on the
birth rates among these women. When we do this, the results as shown in Appendix Table 2
imply no discernable pattern one way or the other, not to mention that none of the estimates
are statistically significant at conventional levels. While these results seem to indicate that the
FMP had no particular effect on the fertility behavior of these women, these estimates must be
interpreted with caution for two reasons. First, it is not clear how many of these women had
been exposed to the FMP in their 20s. Clearly, women in their early 30s must be more likely
to have been exposed to the program than women in their late 30s. However, the estimates
illustrated in the second and third columns of Appendix Table 2 also show no evidence of a
difference in birth rates between women in early 30s and late 30s. Finally, we perform a crude
test of the third explanation by estimating our models, controlling for infant mortality along
with all the variables included in our most comprehensive specification. If the FMP does not
affect the number of children that a woman ultimately has, but rather allows her to reach her
desired number of children in fewer pregnancies, then the program effect on birth rate should
become zero or be reduced significantly once infant mortality is accounted. However, this
analysis causes no appreciable change to the estimate on the impact of FMP on birth rate among
these women.26 This suggests that our finding is more likely to be driven by a change in the
desired number of children rather than a change in infant mortality.

26

Results are available from the authors upon request.

26

References
Aarendonk, Diederik and de Maeseneer, Jan (2011). EFPC: European forum for primary care.
Integrating sexual and reproductive health in primary health care in Europe—A meeting held
in Ankara in close collaboration with WHO, UNFPA, ICC and the Turkish Ministry of Health.
European Journal of General Practice, Vol. 17, pp. 76-77.
Akin, Ayse, Dogan, Bahar G., Ozvaris, Sevkat B., and Mihciokur Sare (2012). Introducing
medical abortion in Turkey: Perspectives of physicians. International Journal of Gynecology
and Obstetrics, 118: S57–S61.
Aksoy, O. and Billari, F.C. (2018). Political Islam, marriage, and fertility: Evidence from a
natural experiment. American Journal of Sociology, 123(5), pp.1296-1340.
Akturk, Zekeriya, Atesoglu, Derya, and Ciftci, Esra (2015). Patient satisfaction with family
practice in Turkey: Three-year trend from 2010 to 2012. European Journal of General
Practice, vol. 21, issue 4, pp. 238-245.
Angrist, J., and Evans, W. (2000). Schooling and labor market consequences of the 1970 state
abortion reforms. Research in Labor Economics, 18:75–13.
Apostolova-Mihaylova, Maria & Yelowitz, Aaron (2018). Health Insurance, Fertility, and the
Wantedness of Pregnancies: Evidence from Massachusetts. Contemporary Economic Policy,
Vol. 36, Issue 1, pp. 59-72.
Ashcraft, A., Fernández‐Val, I. and Lang, K. (2013). The consequences of teenage
childbearing: Consistent estimates when abortion makes miscarriage non‐random. Economic
Journal, 123(571), pp.875-905.
Atun, Rifat (2015). Transforming Turkey’s health system—lessons for universal coverage. The
New England Journal of Medicine, 373; 14.
Atun, R., Aydın, S., Chakraborty, S., Sümer, S., Aran, M., Gürol, I., Nazlıoğlu, S., Özgülcü,
Ş., Aydoğan, Ü., Ayar, B. and Dilmen, U. (2013). Universal health coverage in Turkey:
enhancement of equity. The Lancet, 382(9886), pp.65-99.
Baris, E., Mollahaliloglu, S., and Aydin, S. (2011). Healthcare in Turkey: from laggard to
leader. British Medical Journal, 342, c7456.
Bartel, A.P., Rossin‐Slater, M., Ruhm, C.J., Stearns, J. and Waldfogel, J. (2018). Paid family
leave, fathers’ leave‐taking, and leave‐sharing in dual‐earner households. Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 37(1), pp.10-37.
Becker, Gary (1960). An economic analysis of fertility. In Demographic and economic change
in developed countries (pp. 209-231). Princeton, NJ: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Becker, Gary (1981). A Treatise on the Family, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bernar-Dilbaz, Berna (2010). FIGO working group on prevention of unsafe abortion: Turkey
situational analysis. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) Report,
International Gynecology and Obstetrics, 110: S20-S24.

27

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). How Much Can We Trust
Differences in Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119:1, 249–275.
Buckles, K.S. and Hungerman, D.M. (2018). The incidental fertility effects of school condom
distribution programs. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 37(3), pp.464-492.
Bitler, M. P., and Zavodny, M. (2010). The effect of Medicaid eligibility expansions on
fertility. Social Science & Medicine, 71, 918-924.
Botting, B., Rosato, M., and Wood, R. (1998). Teenage mothers and the health of their
children. Population Trends, Vol. 93, pp. 19-28.
Cesur, Resul, Gunes, Pinar M., Tekin, Erdal, and Ulker, Aydogan (2017a). The value of
socialized medicine: The impact of universal primary healthcare provision on mortality rates
in Turkey. Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 150, June, pp. 75-93.
Cesur, Resul, Tekin, Erdal, and Ulker, Aydogan (2017b). Air Pollution and Infant Mortality:
Evidence from the Expansion of Natural Gas Infrastructure, Economic Journal, Vol. 150, pp.
75-93.
Cesur, Resul, Tekin, Erdal, and Ulker, Aydogan (2018). Can Natural Gas Save Lives? Evidence
from the Deployment of a Fuel Delivery System in a Developing Country. Journal of Health
Economics, Vol. 59, pp. 91-108.
Canning, D. and Schultz, T.P. (2012). The economic consequences of reproductive health and
family planning. The Lancet, 380(9837), pp.165-171.
Chen, A.J., Graves, A.J., Resnick, M.J. and Richards, M.R. (2018). Does Spending More Get
More? Health Care Delivery and Fiscal Implications from a Medicare Fee Bump. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 37(4), pp.706-731.
Chevalier, A., and Viitanen, T. (2003). The long-run labour market consequences of teenage
motherhood in Britain. Journal of Population Economics, 16(2), 323–343.
Cin, Firdevs Melis, and Walker, Melanie (2016). Reconsidering girls’ education in Turkey
from a capabilities and feminist perspective. International Journal of Educational
Development, Elsevier, vol. 49(C), pp. 134-143.
Cornwall, A., (2016). Women's empowerment: What works? Journal of International
Development, 28(3), pp.342-359.
De Bessa, Gina H. (2006). Ethnophysiology and contraceptive use among low-income women
in urban Brazil. Health Care for Women International, 27:5, 428-452.
DeLeire, T., Lopoo, L. M., and Simon, K. I. (2011). Medicaid expansions and fertility in the
United States. Demography, 48(2), pp. 725-747.
Dogac, A., Yuksel, M., Ertürkmen, G.L., Kabak, Y., Namli, T., Yıldız, M.H., Ay, Y., Ceyhan,
B., Hülür, Ü., Öztürk, H. and Atbakan, E. (2014). Healthcare information technology
infrastructures in Turkey. Yearbook of Medical Informatics, 9(1), p.228.

28

Ege E., Akin B., and Koçoğlu D. (2014). Adolescent Pregnancy in Turkey. In: Cherry A.,
Dillon M. (eds) International Handbook of Adolescent Pregnancy. Springer, Boston, MA
Entre Nous (2007). Time of changes in Turkey. The European Magazine for Sexual and
Reproductive Health, World Health Organization, No. 65.
Erbil, N. and Bostan, Ö. (2010). Knowledge and behaviors of nurses and midwives with
emergency contraception. International Journal of Human Sciences, No 7:2, pp. 873-884.
Fletcher, Jason, and Wolfe, Barbara (2009). Education and Labor Market Consequences of
Teenage Childbearing: Evidence Using the Timing of Pregnancy Outcomes and Community
Fixed Effects. Journal of Human Resources, University of Wisconsin Press, vol. 44(2).
Gershenson, Seth, and Tekin, Erdal. (2018). The Effect of Community Traumatic Events on
Student Achievement: Evidence from the Beltway Sniper Attacks. Education Finance and
Policy, Vol. 13(4), pp. 513-544.
Greulich, A., Dasre, A. and Inan, C. (2016). Two or three children? Turkish fertility at a
crossroads. Population and Development Review, 42(3), pp.537-559.
Health Effects Institute (2010). Outdoor Air Pollution and Health in the Developing Countries
of Asia: A Comprehensive Review. Health Effects Institute, Boston, MA.
Holmlund, Helena (2005). Estimating Long-Term Consequences of Teenage Childbearing: An
Examination of the Siblings Approach. Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 40, No. 3 (Summer),
pp. 716-743.
Hotz, V.J., McElroy, S.W. and Sanders, S.G. (2005). Teenage childbearing and its life cycle
consequences: exploiting a natural experiment. Journal of Human Resources, 40(3), pp.683715.
Jones, L.E. and Ziebarth, N.R. (2017). US child safety seat laws: are they effective, and who
complies? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36(3), pp.584-607.
Kabeer N. (2001). Reflections on the measurement of women’s empowerment. In: Discussing
Women’s Empowerment—Theory and Practice. Stockholm: Novum Grafiska AB.
Kabeer, N. (2002). Resources, agency, achievements: Reflections on the measurement of
women's empowerment. Development and Change, 30(3), 435-464.
Kabeer, N. (2005). Gender equality and women's empowerment: A critical analysis of the third
millennium development goal 1. Gender Development, 13, 13–24.
Karaca, Mehmet, Vural, Zeynep Tuzcular, Palanci, Yilmaz, Caylan, Ayse, and Volkan, Islim
(2009). Attitudes towards the use of Pap smear among family medicine specialists and residents
in Turkey. Turkiye Aile Hekimligi Dergisi, April-June, pp. 68-74.
Karaguzel, Nejda (2006). Fertil cagdaki kadinlarda kontraseptif yontemler ve anemi iliskisi.
Ministry
of
Health,
Istanbul.
Thesis
retrieved
from:
http://www.istanbulsaglik.gov.tr/w/tez/tez_ailehekimi.asp

29

Kearney, Melissa S., and Phillip B. Levine (2009). Subsidized contraception, fertility, and
sexual behavior. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1): 137-151.
Klepinger, D., Lundberg, S., and Plotnick, R. (1999). How Does Adolescent Fertility Affect
the Human Capital and Wages of Young Women? Journal of Human Resources, 34(3), pp.
421-448.
Lee, Marlene, and Finlay, Jocelyn (2017). The effect of reproductive health improvements on
women’s economic empowerment: A review through the population and poverty lens.
Washington, DC: Population and Poverty Research Initiative and Population Reference
Bureau.
Lovenheim, Michael F., Reback, Randall, and Wedenoja, Leigh (2016). How does access to
health care affect teen fertility and high school dropout rates? Evidence from school-based
health centers. NBER Working Paper No. 22030.
Malhotra, A., Schuler, S.R., and Boender, C. (2002). Measuring Women's Empowerment as a
Variable in International Development. Washington: World Bank.
McGranahan, Gordon, and Murray, Frank. (2003). Air Pollution and Health in Rapidly
Developing Countries. Management of Environmental Quality: An International Journal, Vol.
14, Issue: 4, pp.542-543.
Mehmetoglu, Hande Celik, Sadikoglu, Ganime, Ozcakir, Alis, and Bilgel, Nazan (2010). Pap
smear screening in the primary health care setting: A study from Turkey. North American
Journal of Medical Sciences, Vol. 2. No. 10.
OECD (2008). OECD Reviews of health systems: Turkey 2008. OECD and the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank.
OECD (2014). OECD Reviews of Health Care Quality: Turkey 2014 Raising Standards.
Öcek, Z.A., Çiçeklioğlu, M., Yücel, U. and Özdemir, R. (2014). Family medicine model in
Turkey: a qualitative assessment from the perspectives of primary care workers. BMC Family
Practice, 15(1), p.38.
Pierre, Luzia A. dos Santos and Clapis, Maria J. (2010). Family planning in a family health
unit. Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem, 18(6): 1161-8.
Porter, M. and King, E.M. (2012). Fertility and women’s labor force participation in
developing countries. Mimeo. Department of Economics, University of Oxford.
Prata, N., Tavrow, P., and Upadhyay, U. (2017). Women’s empowerment related to pregnancy
and childbirth: introduction to special issue. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 17(2), p.352.
Ravallion, Martin, Chen, Shaohua, and Sangraula, Prem. (2007). New Evidence on the
Urbanization of Global Poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Robila, M. (2013). Handbook of family policies across the globe. New York, NY: Springer.

30

Rocha, R., and Soares, R. (2010). Evaluating the impact of community-based health
interventions: evidence from Brazil’s Family Health Program. Health Economics, 19(S1):
S126–S158.
Shaw, D. (2006). Women’s right to health and the Millennium Development Goals: Promoting
partnerships to improve access. International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics, vol. 94,
pp. 207-215.
Schultz, T.P. (1981). Economics of Population. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Sine, Jeffrey, Clyde, Maureen E., and Baser Zerrin (2004). A political economy perspective on
achieving contraceptive self-reliance in Turkey. POLICY Working Paper Series, No. 13.
Smith, R., Ashford, L., Gribble, J., and Clifton, D. (2009). Family Planning Saves Lives, Fourth
Edition. Population Reference Bureau, Washington DC.
Retrieved from
www.prb.org/Reports/2009/fpsl.aspx.
Symposium Report (2010). The Symposium on Sexual and Reproductive Health Care Services
in Primary Health Care Report—A meeting held in Ankara in close collaboration with WHO,
UNFPA, ICC and the Turkish Ministry of Health. Ankara.
Tirpan, K. (2010). Birinci Basamak ve Geriatri Iliskisi. Retrieved from
http://www.akademikgeriatri.org/files/Akademik_Geriatri_2010/Konusma_Metinleri/5.pdf.
Turkish Population and Health Research (2013). Hacettepe Üniversitesi Nüfus Etütleri
Enstitüsü, T.C. Kalkinma Bakanligi ve TUBITAK, Ankara. Retrieved from
http://www.hips.hacettepe.edu.tr/tnsa2013/rapor/TNSA_2013_ana_rapor.pdf.
Upadhyay, U. D., Gipson, J. D., Withers, M., Lewis, S., Ciaraldi, E. J., Fraser, A., Huchko, M.
J., … Prata, N. (2014). Women's empowerment and fertility: A review of the literature. Social
Science & Medicine, 115, 111-20.
Waddington, R.J. and Berends, M. (2018). Impact of the Indiana Choice Scholarship Program:
Achievement effects for students in upper elementary and middle school. Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 37(4), pp.783-808.
Wellings, K., Wadsworth, J., and Johnson A., et al. (1999). Teenage fertility and life
chances. Reviews of Reproduction, Vol. 4, pp.184-190.
Worldbank (2013). Turkey performance—based contracting scheme in family medicine—
design and achievements. Technical report, 77029-TR.
Worldbank (2018). Turkey: Transforming Healthcare for All. Retrieved from
https://www.worldbank.org/en/about/partners/brief/turkey-transforming-health-care-for-all.
World Health Organization (2008). Fact sheet on maternal mortality. Geneva: WHO. Retrieved
from www.fwrsmi.org.fj/pdf/actsheet-maternal_mortality.odf.
World Health Organization (2012a). Successful Health System Reforms: The Case of Turkey.
A report by WHO Regional Office for Europe, Denmark. Retrieved from
http://disab.saglik.gov.tr/yonetim/Uploads/files/kitaplar/Successful%20Health%20System%2
0Reforms-The%20Case%20of%20Turkey.pdf.

31

World Health Organization (2012b). Turkey Health System Performance Assessment 2011. A
report by WHO Regional Office for Europe, Denmark. Retrieved from
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/165109/e95429.pdf.
World Health Organization (2016). Global health estimates 2015: deaths by cause, age, sex, by
country and by region, 2000–2015. Geneva: WHO. Retrieved from
https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/adolescent-pregnancy.
Yanikkerem, E., Acar, H., and Elem E. (2006). Withdrawal users’ perceptions of and
experience with contraceptive methods in Manisa, Turkey. Midwifery, 22, 274-284.
Yasar, Yenimahalleli G. (2011). Health transformation programme in Turkey: An
assessment. International Journal of Health Planning and Management, 26(2), pp.110-133.
Yeginsu, C. (2014). Turkey’s President Accuses Advocates of Birth Control of Being Traitor.
The
New
York
Times.
December
22.
Retrieved
from
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/23/world/europe/erdogan-turkey-president-sayscontraception-supporters-traitors.html?_r=0.

32

Figure 1: Event Study Estimates of the Family Medicine Program on Birth Rates

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Teen Birth Rate

<=-6

-5

-4
-3
-2
0
1
2
Years Prior to and After FMP Implementation Year

3

>=4+

3

>=4+

-12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2

0

2

4

6

8 10 12

Ages 20 to 29 Birth Rate

<=-6

-5

-4
-3
-2
0
1
2
Years Prior to and After FMP Implementation Year

Notes: The figures display the estimates and 95% confidence intervals. The reference category is “one year prior to the
implementation of the FMP.”

33

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Family Medicine Program Implementation Status
Variable
Full
FMP
Non-FMP
Sample
Panel I: Outcome Variables
34.02
27.90
40.51
Teen Birth Rate
(14.64)
120.51
(30.04)

(13.03)
116.79
(28.31)

(13.41)
124.45
(31.32)

Percent Share of Governing Party Share
of Seats in Parliament

10.91
(3.80)
[1,134]
17.28
(12.76)
[1,377]
195.24
(87.26)
[1,377]
18.53
(6.04)
[1,134]
10.19
(4.26)
[1,134]
0.62
(0.17)

10.58
(3.86)
[736]
24.48
(13.31)
[736]
236.11
(82.96)
[736]
21.65
(4.10)
[736]
11.84
(3.98)
[736]
0.59
(0.17)

11.47
(3.65)
[398]
9.60
(5.79)
[641]
151.72
(68.75)
[641]
13.29
(5.08)
[398]
7.44
(3.16)
[398]
0.64
(0.17)

Observations

[1,377]

[736]

[641]

Ages 20 to 29 Birth Rate
Panel II: Control Variables
Unemployment Rate
Per Capita GDP
Vehicles Per 1,000 People
High school Rate
College Rate

Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses and the number of observations is in square brackets. In Panel I, mean
values are weighted by the associated mean number of women for the relevant age group. In Panel II, mean values
are weighted by province population. Teen Birth Rate represents the number of births per 1,000 women in the
ages 15 to 19. 20 to 29 BR represents the number of births per 1,000 women in the ages 29 to 29.

34

Table 2A: Estimates of Province and Region Level Time Varying Characteristics on
Family Medicine Program Indicator
Variable
Unemployment Rate

(1)
-0.091***
(0.034)
[1,134]

(2)
0.035
(0.046)
[1,134]

(3)
-0.031
(0.061)
[1,134]

(4)
-0.043
(0.052)
[1,134]

Per-capita GDP

0.967***
(0.016)
[1,377]

0.049
(0.073)
[1,377]

0.008
(0.014)
[1,377]

0.010
(0.018)
[1,377]

Vehicles per 1,000 persons

0.494***
(0.036)
[1,377]

0.085
(0.064)
[1,377]

-0.003
(0.011)
[1,377]

0.002
(0.017)
[1,377]

Percent High School

0.528***
(0.014)
[1,134]

0.064**
(0.029)
[1,134]

-0.021
(0.016)
[1,134]

-0.012
(0.023)
[1,134]

Percent College

0.498***
(0.048)
[1,134]

0.152**
(0.064)
[1,134]

0.048*
(0.027)
[1,134]

0.045
(0.035)
[1,134]

Percent Share of Governing Party
Seats in the Parliament

-0.049***
(0.015)
[1,377]

-0.006
(0.048)
[1,377]

-0.022
(0.020)
[1,377]

-0.019
(0.022)
[1,377]

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Controls for
Region by Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Province Linear Trends

Notes: Each cell corresponds to a separate regression, where the “dependent variable” is regressed on Family
Medicine Program Indicator conditional on control variables as indicated above. Models also control for a family
medicine program year of adoption indicator. Regressions are weighted with mean province populations. Robust
standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses and the number of observations is in square
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

35

Table 2B: Estimates of Province and Region Level Time Varying Characteristics on
Years since the Family Medicine Program Implementation
Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Unemployment Rate

-0.016**
(0.006)
[1,134]

0.020
(0.031)
[1,134]

-0.016
(0.025)
[1,134]

-0.017
(0.025)
[1,134]

Per-capita GDP

0.159***
(0.005)
[1,377]

0.015
(0.027)
[1,377]

0.003
(0.010)
[1,377]

0.004
(0.008)
[1,377]

Vehicles per 1,000 persons

0.079***
(0.005)
[1,377]

0.034
(0.024)
[1,377]

0.003
(0.016)
[1,377]

0.001
(0.008)
[1,377]

Percent High School

0.068***
(0.002)
[1,134]

0.033***
(0.012)
[1,134]

0.012
(0.016)
[1,134]

0.016
(0.017)
[1,134]

Percent College

0.089***
(0.007)
[1,134]

0.043**
(0.020)
[1,134]

0.001
(0.014)
[1,134]

0.012
(0.020)
[1,134]

Percent Share of Governing Party
Seats in the Parliament

-0.015***
(0.005)
[1,377]

0.010
(0.041)
[1,377]

0.018
(0.023)
[1,377]

-0.023
(0.049)
[1,377]

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Controls for
Region by Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Province Linear Trends

Notes: Each cell corresponds to a separate regression, where the “dependent variable” is regressed on Years Since
Family Medicine Program Implementation conditional on control variables as indicated above. Regressions are
weighted with mean province populations. Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses
and the number of observations is in square brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%
and 1%, respectively.

36

Table 2C: Estimates of Province and Region Level Time Varying Characteristics on
Binary Years since the Family Medicine Program Implementation Indicators
Dependent variable: Unemployment Rate
FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Dependent variable: Per-capita GDP
FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Dependent variable: Vehicles per 1,000 persons
FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Dependent variable: Percent High School
FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Dependent variable: Percent College
FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1

37

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.050
(0.034)
-0.066*
(0.037)
-0.128***
(0.041)
-0.122***
(0.040)
-0.112**
(0.044)
[1,134]

0.036
(0.036)
0.039
(0.050)
0.024
(0.063)
0.036
(0.081)
0.124
(0.154)
[1,134]

-0.015
(0.050)
-0.030
(0.069)
-0.069
(0.084)
-0.075
(0.094)
-0.038
(0.085)
[1,134]

-0.027
(0.043)
-0.044
(0.063)
-0.083
(0.077)
-0.090
(0.086)
-0.044
(0.083)
[1,134]

0.517***
(0.018)
0.651***
(0.025)
0.753***
(0.028)
0.876***
(0.029)
1.192***
(0.021)
[1,377]

0.040
(0.057)
0.052
(0.075)
0.058
(0.099)
0.065
(0.118)
0.107
(0.169)
[1,377]

0.011
(0.014)
0.011
(0.018)
0.003
(0.023)
-0.001
(0.028)
0.011
(0.037)
[1,377]

0.013
(0.017)
0.013
(0.021)
0.005
(0.025)
0.002
(0.030)
0.014
(0.033)
[1,377]

0.319***
(0.022)
0.365***
(0.026)
0.409***
(0.028)
0.451***
(0.030)
0.584***
(0.042)
[1,377]

0.064
(0.048)
0.087
(0.065)
0.114
(0.085)
0.138
(0.102)
0.203
(0.148)
[1,377]

-0.001
(0.011)
-0.003
(0.015)
-0.006
(0.020)
-0.006
(0.025)
-0.006
(0.039)
[1,377]

0.003
(0.015)
0.002
(0.019)
0.000
(0.024)
0.001
(0.028)
0.002
(0.033)
[1,377]

0.401***
(0.046)
0.495***
(0.020)
0.527***
(0.015)
0.524***
(0.017)
0.563***
(0.021)
[1,134]

0.018
(0.024)
0.085**
(0.032)
0.114***
(0.043)
0.135**
(0.052)
0.200***
(0.075)
[1,134]

-0.040*
(0.021)
0.005
(0.015)
0.008
(0.019)
0.007
(0.023)
0.014
(0.034)
[1,134]

-0.031
(0.027)
0.016
(0.025)
0.021
(0.033)
0.021
(0.039)
0.027
(0.048)
[1,134]

0.145***
(0.035)
0.271***
(0.032)

0.127**
(0.053)
0.146**
(0.066)

0.054*
(0.029)
0.045
(0.032)

0.050
(0.037)
0.041
(0.042)

FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Dependent variable: Percent Share of Governing Party
Seats in the Parliament
FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Controls for
Region by Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Province Linear Trends

0.339***
(0.035)
0.453***
(0.039)
0.663***
(0.057)
[1,134]

0.198**
(0.083)
0.232**
(0.104)
0.311**
(0.139)
[1,134]

0.063*
(0.035)
0.071
(0.044)
0.077
(0.054)
[1,134]

0.058
(0.048)
0.064
(0.058)
0.066
(0.067)
[1,134]

0.319***
(0.022)
0.365***
(0.026)
0.409***
(0.028)
0.451***
(0.030)
0.584***
(0.042)
[1,377]

0.064
(0.048)
0.087
(0.065)
0.114
(0.085)
0.138
(0.102)
0.203
(0.148)
[1,377]

-0.001
(0.011)
-0.003
(0.015)
-0.006
(0.020)
-0.006
(0.025)
-0.006
(0.039)
[1,377]

0.003
(0.015)
0.002
(0.019)
0.000
(0.024)
0.001
(0.028)
0.002
(0.033)
[1,377]

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Each cell corresponds to a separate regression, where the “dependent variable” is regressed on Years Since
Family Medicine Program Implementation conditional on control variables as indicated above. Regressions are
weighted with mean province populations. Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses
and the number of observations is in square brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%
and 1%, respectively.

38

Table 3: The Effect of the Family Medicine Program on Birth Rates – Binary
Specification
Variable
Panel I: No Controls
Family Medicine Program
Panel II: Year Fixed Effects
Family Medicine Program
Panel III: Region by Year Fixed Effects
Family Medicine Program
Panel IV: Panel III + Province FE
Family Medicine Program
Panel V: Panel IV + Province Trends
Family Medicine Program
Panel VI: Panel V + Time Varying Controls
Family Medicine Program
Observations

Teen BR

20 to 29 BR

-12.612***
(0.578)

-7.659***
(1.293)

-8.357**
(3.456)

-13.023*
(7.770)

-8.418***
(2.908)

-11.331**
(4.478)

-1.657***
(0.575)

0.745
(1.000)

-1.636***
(0.521)

0.086
(0.982)

-1.579***
(0.518)

-0.374
(1.041)

1,377

1,377

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. Regressions are weighted with
mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5% and 1%, respectively. Time varying province characteristics include log of unemployment rate, log of vehicles
per 1,000 persons, log of per capita GDP, log of percent high school, log of percent college, log of students per
teacher in primary schools. Teen Birth Rate represents the number of births per 1,000 women in the ages 15 to 19.
20 to 29 BR represents the number of births per 1,000 women in the ages 29 to 29.

39

Table 4: The Effect of the Family Medicine Program on Birth Rates – Nonlinear
Specifications
Variable

Teen BR

20 to 29 BR

Years Since FMP Implemented

-1.067**
(0.462)
-1.139**
(0.511)
-2.159***
(0.685)
-2.735***
(0.811)
-2.840***
(0.926)
-3.354***
(1.133)

-2.049**
(0.935)
0.163
(1.196)
-1.225
(1.167)
-2.442
(1.479)
-3.963**
(1.753)
-4.426**
(2.122)

1,377

1,377

FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Observations

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. Regressions are weighted with
mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5% and 1%, respectively. Models control for the full set of covariates specified in Panel VI of Table 3. Teen BR
represents the number of births per 1,000 women in the ages 15 to 19. 20 to 29 BR represents the number of births
per 1,000 women in the ages 29 to 29.

40

Table 5: The Effect of the Family Medicine Program on Birth Rates by Baseline
Fertility
Variable

Teen BR

20 to 29 BR

0.115
(0.619)
-0.495
(0.924)
-0.734
(1.042)
-0.808
(1.123)
-1.202
(1.175)

0.417
(1.116)
0.847
(1.670)
0.639
(2.327)
-2.001
(2.399)
-2.727
(2.738)

680

680

-1.504*
(0.815)
-3.215***
(1.102)
-4.057***
(1.326)
-4.244**
(1.691)
-4.837**
(2.236)

1.651
(2.102)
-1.805
(2.090)
-2.615
(2.277)
-3.394
(2.959)
-2.996
(3.632)

697

697

Panel I: Below Median Baseline Fertility Sample
FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Observations
Panel II: Above Median Baseline Fertility Sample
FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Observations

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. Regressions are weighted with
mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5% and 1%, respectively. Models control for the full set of covariates specified in Panel VI of Table 3. Teen BR
represents the number of births per 1,000 women in the ages 15 to 19. 20 to 29 BR represents the number of births
per 1,000 women in the ages 29 to 29.

41

Table 6A: The Effect of Predicted Family Physicians on Actual Family Physicians First Stage Estimate
Variable

# of Actual
Family Physicians

Predicted # of Family Physicians

0.907***
(0.006)

Observations

1,377

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. Regressions are weighted with
mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5% and 1%, respectively. In addition to the full set of covariates specified in Panel VI of Table 3, and providence
population is controlled for.

42

Table 6B: The Effect of an Additional Family Physician on Birth Rates - Instrumental
Variable Estimates
Variable
# of Family Physicians
Observations
1st F-test
1st value

Teen Births

Births among
Ages 20-29

-0.804***
(0.035)

-5.177***
(0.150)

1,377
26,094
0.000

1,377
27,942
0.000

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. Regressions are weighted with
mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5% and 1%, respectively. In addition to the full set of covariates specified in Panel VI of Table 3, and providence
population is controlled for.

43

Table 7: The Effect of Family Health Center Density on Birth Rates
Variable
Number of Family Health Centers
Observations

Teen Births

Births Among
Ages 20 to 29

-2.876***
(0.194)

-13.120***
(0.950)

1,377

1,377

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. Regressions are weighted with
mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5% and 1%, respectively. In addition to the full set of covariates specified in Panel VI of Table 3, and providence
population is controlled for.

44

Table 8: The Effect of the Family Medicine Program on Placebo Outcomes
Variable

Car Accident
Rate

Car Accident
Injury Rate

Suicide
Rate

Family Medicine Program

-3.286
(3.156)

-2.441
(5.890)

0.007
(0.056)

Years Since FMP Implemented

1.501
(2.788)

2.989
(4.642)

0.022
(0.029)

FMP Year 0

-2.305
(2.876)
-0.869
(4.065)
-1.813
(6.150)
-0.525
(7.570)
6.144
(8.681)

-1.560
(5.439)
2.534
(7.576)
0.117
(10.451)
2.829
(12.756)
13.470
(14.681)

-0.053
(0.065)
0.049
(0.073)
0.041
(0.092)
-0.052
(0.084)
-0.063
(0.098)

1,215

1,215

1,289

FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Observations

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. Regressions are weighted with
mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5% and 1%, respectively. Models control for the full set of covariates specified in Panel VI of Table 3.

45

Appendix Table 1: Family Medicine Program Implementation Year and Population Per
Family Physician in 2017
Provinces by Region
Aegean Region
Afyonkarahisar
Aydin
Denizli
Izmir
Kutahya
Manisa
Mugla
Usak
Central Anatolia Region
Aksaray
Kayseri
Kirikkale
Kirsehir
Nevsehir
Nigde
Sivas
Yozgat
Central East Anatolia
Bingol
Region
Bitlis
Elazig
Hakkari
Malatya
Mus
Tunceli
Van
East Black Sea Region
Artvin
Giresun
Gumushane
Ordu
Rize
Trabzon
East Marmara Region
Bilecik
Bolu
Bursa
Duzce
Eskisehir
Kocaeli
Sakarya
Yalova

Year of
Implementation

Population
Per Family
Physician

2010
2010
2006
2007
2010
2008
2010
2009

3,046
3,170
3,106
3,336
2,950
3,183
3,237
3,016

2010
2008
2008
2008
2010
2010
2010
2010

3,169
3,172
3,030
2,895
2,983
2,939
3,091
2,907

2010
2010
2007
2010
2010
2010
2008
2010

3,037
3,162
2,963
3,404
3,026
3,211
2,845
3,145

2010
2010
2006
2010
2009
2009

2,816
3,037
3,403
3,314
3,246
3,060

2008
2006
2009
2005
2006
2010
2010
2008

3,037
3,032
3,292
3,173
3,085
3,381
3,345
3,349

Provinces by Region
Mediterranean Region
Adana
Antalya
Burdur
Hatay
Isparta
Kahramanmaras
Mersin
Osmaniye
Northeast Anatolia Region
Agri
Ardahan
Bayburt
Erzincan
Erzurum
Igdir
Kars
Southeast Anatolia Region
Adiyaman
Batman
Diyarbakir
Gaziantep
Kilis
Mardin
Sanliurfa
Siirt
Sirnak
West Anatolia Region
Ankara
Karaman
Konya
West Black Sea Region
Amasya
Bartin
Cankiri
Corum
Karabuk
Kastamonu
Samsun
Sinop
Tokat
Zonguldak
West Marmara & Istanbul
Balikesir
Regions
Canakkale
Edirne
Istanbul
Kirklareli
Tekirdag

Turkey (weighted average)
Note: Information on the FMP is obtained from the Public Health Institution of Turkey.

46

Year of
Implementation

Population
Per Family
Physician

2008
2010
2008
2010
2007
2010
2010
2008

3,198
3,099
3,009
3,380
2,799
3,048
3,056
2,948

2010
2010
2008
2010
2008
2010
2010

3,290
2,697
2,594
3,129
2,786
3,043
2,906

2006
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010

2,971
3,423
3,434
2,984
2,963
3,163
3,304
3,119
2,765

2010
2008
2010

3,276
2,972
3,169

2007
2007
2008
2008
2008
2008
2007
2007
2010
2010

2,945
2,616
3,154
2,888
3,134
3,295
3,274
3,241
3,026
3,061

2010
2010
2006
2010
2010
2010

2,917
3,274
3,154
3,422
3,151
3,352
3,216

Appendix Table 2: The Effect of the Family Medicine Program on Birth Rates of
Women 30 and Older
Variable
FMP Year 0
FMP Year 1
FMP Year 2
FMP Year 3
FMP Year >=4
Observations

30 to 39 BR

30 to 34 BR

35 to 39 BR

0.902
(0.721)
0.344
(0.749)
-0.357
(0.956)
-0.822
(1.077)
-0.908
(1.277)

1.162
(0.980)
0.066
(1.004)
-0.911
(1.241)
-1.412
(1.411)
-1.493
(1.713)

0.602
(0.673)
0.482
(0.678)
-0.026
(0.869)
-0.473
(0.958)
-0.457
(1.189)

1,377

1,377

1,377

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. Regressions are weighted with
mean province populations for the associated age group. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5% and 1%, respectively. Models control for the full set of covariates specified in Panel VI of Table 3. 30 to 39
BR represents the number of births per 1,000 women in the ages 30 to 39. 30 to 34 BR represents the number of
births per 1,000 women in the ages 30 to 34. 35 to 39 BR represents the number of births per 1,000 women in the
ages 35 to 39.

47

