                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SCHOOL FINANCE EQUALIZATION INCREASES INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY:
         EVIDENCE FROM A SIMULATED-INSTRUMENTS APPROACH

                                             Barbara Biasi

                                         Working Paper 25600
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w25600


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2019




I wish to thank Caroline Hoxby for the valuable advice she has provided me while working on this
project. I also thank Jason Abaluck, Joe Altonji, Jaime Arellano-Bover, Leah Boustan, Raj Chetty,Will
Dobbie, Florian Ederer, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkam, Robert Jensen, Alan Krueger, Julien Lafortune, Costas
Meghir, Petra Moser, Petra Persson, Luigi Pistaferri, David Sch¨onholzer, Edoardo Teso, EbonyaWashington,
as well as seminar participants at Stanford, Princeton, Yale, EIEF Rome, the Russell Sage Foundation,
Barcelona GSE Summer Forum 2018, and the NBER Summer Institute 2018 for helpful comments.
The Departments of Education of the states of California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Illinois,
Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota,
Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and Wisconsin provided invaluable help in the retrieval of historical
district-level components of school finance formulas. Financial support from the Russell Sage Foundation
Award 83-14-06 and from the Gregory Terrill Cox Fellowship and the John M. Olin Program in Law
and Economics at Stanford Law is gratefully acknowledged. All mistakes are mine. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Barbara Biasi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
School Finance Equalization Increases Intergenerational Mobility: Evidence from a Simulated-Instruments
Approach
Barbara Biasi
NBER Working Paper No. 25600
February 2019, Revised October 2019
JEL No. I22,I24,J62

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the causal effect of equalizing revenues across public school districts on students’
intergenerational mobility. I exploit differences in exposure to equalization across seven cohorts of
students in 20 US states, generated by 13 state-level school finance reforms passed between 1980 and
2004. Since these reforms create incentives for households to sort across districts and this sorting affects
property values, post-reform revenues are endogenous to an extent that varies across states. I address
this issue with a simulated instruments approach, which uses newly collected data on states’ funding
formulas to simulate revenues in the absence of sorting. I find that equalization has a large effect on
mobility of low-income students, with no significant changes for high-income students. Reductions
in the gaps in inputs (such as the number of teachers) and in college attendance between low-income
and high-income districts are likely channels behind this effect.


Barbara Biasi
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
barbara.biasi@yale.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25600
1    Introduction

Large differences in intergenerational income mobility exist across states and local labor mar-

kets in the United States. The probability that a child born in a family in the bottom quintile

of the national income distribution will reach the top quintile during adulthood is 14.3 percent

on average in Utah, but only 7.3 percent in Tennessee (Chetty et al., 2014). While part of these

differences might be due to different types of people self-selecting into specific places, studies

of movers across counties have highlighted a causal relationship between growing up in cer-

tain areas and long-run outcomes (Ludwig et al., 2013; Chetty et al., 2016; Chetty and Hendren,

2018a).

    Less is known, however, about what factors make a place particularly successful at guaran-

teeing equal opportunities to children regardless of their family background. Places with high

intergenerational mobility tend to have lower income and racial segregation, lower inequal-

ity, higher social capital, and better schools (as proxied by test scores, Chetty and Hendren,

2018b). While these patterns are suggestive of a role for institutions and public policies in pro-

moting mobility, they cannot be interpreted as causal. Yet, understanding the role of public

policies is the first step towards improving intergenerational mobility and guaranteeing equal

opportunities to all children regardless of their family background.

    This paper moves beyond these simple correlations and examines the causal role of school

finance equalization, i.e., a reduction in the differences in public school revenues and expendi-

tures across school districts within a state. Historically, US schools have been primarily funded

with revenues from local levies (such as property taxes). As a consequence, wealthier districts

(with a larger tax base) have been able to spend more per pupil than poorer districts. These

between-district disparities vary across states: In 1980, the gap in expenditure between the

lowest-spending and the highest-spending district was 70 percent in California, but only 40

percent in Maryland. This variation is driven by cross-state differences in funding formulas,

used to define each district’s revenues as a combination of state funds and local levies. In an

attempt to equalize expenditures, over the past four decades states have reformed their school

finance schemes through changes in these formulas. While often sharing a common objective,

however, school finance equalization reforms have taken various forms across states and over

time, with some being more successful at equalizing revenues than others (Hoxby, 2001).

    To study the causal effects of equalization on children’s intergenerational mobility, I exploit


                                                 1
changes in the distribution of per pupil revenues generated by 13 state-level school finance

reforms passed in a sample of 20 states between 1980 and 2004. I use the measure of inter-

generational mobility of Chetty et al. (2014) (also used by Acciari et al., 2019), defined as a

child’s percentile in the national income distribution given the income percentile of their par-

ents, and calculated separately for each commuting zone (CZ hereafter), cohort (1980-1986),

and income percentile of the parents. I measure equalization in school revenues as the slope

of the relationship between per capita income and per pupil revenues across districts in each

state, denoted by          (as in Hoxby, 1998; Card and Payne, 2002; Lafortune et al., 2018). When

revenues are perfectly equalized,           equals zero; when wealthier districts receive and spend

more,       is positive.

       I show that school finance reforms led to a sharp decline in , i.e., to a reduction in the

difference in school revenues between districts serving children from poorer and wealthier

families. A simple theoretical framework predicts that this decline, which breaks the link be-

tween parents’ economic conditions and school spending on their children, should improve

the economic opportunities of lower-income children relative to those of their parents, “level-

ing the playing field” (Becker and Tomes, 1994).1

       To empirically investigate the effects of equalization on intergenerational mobility, I exploit

the fact that different cohorts were in school during different years and therefore experienced

different degrees of equalization (different ) across states. For example in Wisconsin, which

had a reform in 1996, the 1980 cohort (in school between 1986 and 1998) had a                   equal to 0.016

(with the richest district spending $15,000 and the poorer district spending $10,000 in 1990),

while the 1990 cohort (in school between 1996 and 2008) had a               equal to 0.008 (with the richest

district spending $13,000 and the poorer district spending $14,000 in 2000). In Ohio, which had

no reform between 1986 and 2004, these two cohorts had a                  equal to 0.044 and 0.047, respec-

tively. Assuming that the timing of each reform is exogenous, comparing intergenerational

mobility across cohorts within each state allows me to estimate the effects of equalization. In

support of this assumption, I show that mobility was on a flat trend in the years leading to a

reform in each state.2

       To causally estimate the effects of a decline in       on mobility, however, one must deal with
   1
     Existing research has shown that early investments in human capital are among the major determinants of
future income (Becker and Tomes, 1979), especially for disadvantaged children (Cunha et al., 2010).
   2
     This assumption has also been extensively discussed and argued for by Hoxby (2001); Lafortune et al. (2018);
Jackson et al. (2015).




                                                       2
an endogeneity problem. The changes in the funding formula that lead to changes in                            alter

the relationship between the “price” of school spending to taxpayers and the amount of public

good they receive in return. This might induce households to “vote with their feet” (Tiebout,

1956), i.e., to move across districts based on their preferences for this public good and their

income.3 On one side, household sorting affects house prices and districts’ revenues (via the

funding formula) and the degree of equalization in school funding. On the other side, this

sorting changes the composition of each school district and CZ, which could have a direct effect

on mobility (for example through peer effects). Post-reform revenues – and the resulting                      – are

therefore endogenous; ignoring this endogeneity would confound the effects of equalization

with the effects of sorting.

       I address this endogeneity issue with a simulated-instruments approach (similar to Gruber

and Saez, 2002), which exploits plausibly random, state-specific changes in the funding for-

mulas. To do this, I combine a variety of administrative and legislative sources to construct

an original data set containing information on the formulas in place in each state and year

and on all the district-level variables entering each formula. This information is available for

a sample of 20 states, enrolling 62 percent of all US students. These data allow me to simulate

district revenues in the absence of sorting, using the post-reform formula but keeping districts’

characteristics (e.g. property values, enrollment, and income) fixed at their pre-reform values.

I then use these simulated revenues to estimate a simulated version of , which I use as an

instrument for .

       This approach is useful for two reasons. First, it allows me to separate the variation in

the distribution of school revenues driven by exogenous changes in the funding formula from

the variation driven by endogenous household sorting, which is necessary to estimate causal

effects. Second, it explicitly takes into account the fact that different reforms had very different

effects on the level and distribution of school revenues across districts, because they changed

the funding formulas in very different ways (as shown by Hoxby, 2001; Jackson et al., 2015;

Hyman, 2017, and also evident in my data). Ignoring this heterogeneity could impact both the

precision and the consistency of the estimates.4
   3
      Aaronson (1999); Dee (2000); Figlio and Lucas (2004); Epple and Ferreyra (2008); Chakrabarti and Roy (2015)
provide evidence of this type of sorting in various contexts.
    4
      Importantly, both the changes in spending inequality and the patterns of household sorting triggered by each
reform depend on the pre-reform and post-reform funding formula (Hoxby, 2001). For example, Jackson et al.
(2015) find that school finance reforms increase expenditure more in ex ante lower-spending districts, whereas
Hyman (2017) finds that a reform passed in Michigan in 1993 increased expenditure more in low-poverty districts.
In line with these results, I find that some reforms (such as Massachusetts, 1994 and Wisconsin, 1996) led to larger



                                                         3
    Two-stages least squares (2SLS) estimates of the effects of changes in                 indicate that school

finance equalization has a sizable positive effect on intergenerational mobility. A one-standard

deviation reduction in         (equivalent to a $4,500 reduction in the difference in per pupil rev-

enues between the richest and the poorest districts in a state) leads to a significant 5.6 percentile

increase in the income rank of children with parental income in the 10th percentile; this esti-

mate correspond to a 16.2 percent increase in income. By comparison, the same reduction in

  has a smaller and insignificant effect on children with parents in the 90th income percentile.

These results are robust to controlling for total school spending in each state. My results also

indicate that the average reform would increase mobility of children from families in the 10th

percentile by 3.6 percentiles (or 8.6 percent), and close approximately 13 percent of the gap

between the lowest-mobility and the highest-mobility CZ.5 Importantly, 2SLS estimates are

approximately 50 percent larger than both a) OLS estimates and b) estimates obtained ignor-

ing the differences in the funding formulas across states.

    My estimates also show that equalization is most effective when experienced earlier in a

child’s education career. A one-standard deviation reduction in                    increases the income rank

of children with parents in the 10th percentile by 7.6 percentiles if the reform that generated

this decline was experienced during elementary school, but only 4.1 percentiles if it was ex-

perienced during high school. This finding is in line with a large literature highlighting the

importance of early childhood investments for long-run outcomes (see Cunha and Heckman,

2010, for a review).

    The effects of equalization in school revenues might vary depending on the degree of

income inequality and segregation within each CZ. When cross-district income inequality is

high, the same reduction in         might translate into a much larger increase in revenues in lower-

income districts relative to higher-income ones. Similarly, when segregation is high, a reduc-

tion in   is more likely to increase revenues for lower-income children. 2SLS estimates confirm

that a decline in       has the largest effects on CZs with higher income inequality and higher

levels of segregation.

    In the last part of the paper I explore the channels behind the main estimates. I provide sug-
declines in compared with others (such as Michigan, 1993). Furthermore, different reforms triggered different
changes in house prices: A reform in New Jersey in 1990 led to a decline in overall prices, the one in Massachusetts
lead to an increase, and the one in Michigan left prices unchanged.
    5
      The average reform reduces by approximately 0.045 (Figure I), or 0.64 of a standard deviation. The effect
of this decline on the mobility of children with parents in the 10th percentile is an increase of approximately 3.6
percentiles, which corresponds to 13 percent of the 27.6 percentile gap in mobility between the highest-mobility CZ
(Sioux Center, IA) and the lowest-mobility one (Clarksdale, MS).



                                                         4
gestive evidence that school finance equalization increases intergenerational mobility through

a reduction in the gaps in basic school inputs (such as the number of teachers) and in interme-

diate educational outcomes (such as college enrollment) between richer and poorer districts.

       This paper makes three main contributions. First, it provides a causal explanation for the

differences in intergenerational mobility across US areas illustrated by Chetty et al. (2014).6

Existing empirical evidence on the effectiveness of increased education expenditure (see, for

example, Cascio et al., 2013; Cascio and Reber, 2013) or on expansion in access to high-quality

education (Meghir and Palme, 2005; Pekkarinen et al., 2009; Havnes and Mogstad, 2015) in

closing gaps in outcomes among more and less advantaged students suggests a positive role

for school finance equalization in improving intergenerational mobility. At the same time,

Rothstein (2019) argues that differences in school quality do not seem to explain much of the

observed differences in mobility and suggests that attention should be placed on other types of

policies. While Rothstein’s findings are based on correlations, this paper shows that a school-

related policy such as school finance equalization causes a sizable improvement in long-term

outcomes of economically disadvantaged children, in line with Card et al. (2018). This implies

that equalization can be an engine for mobility, even if it explains a relatively small share of the

cross-sectional variation. My results also shed some light on the mechanisms through which

equalization in school resources affect children’s long-run outcomes, such as equalization in

school inputs and in college attendance.

       Second, this paper contributes to a large literature on the effects of school spending on

students’ outcomes, initiated decades ago by the Coleman report (Coleman et al., 1966) and en-

compassing observational (Hanushek, 1986, 1997, 2003), quasi-experimental (Card and Krueger,

1992; Hyman, 2017), and experimental studies (Krueger, 1999; Dynarski et al., 2013). A few

studies in this literature have used school finance reforms as a source of variation in the levels

of school expenditures to study the effects on short-term absolute outcomes, such as student

achievement and educational attainment (Hoxby, 2001; Card and Payne, 2002; Hyman, 2017;

Lafortune et al., 2018), and long-term outcomes, such as earnings (Jackson et al., 2015). This

paper extends this literature by focusing on intergenerational mobility, a measure of economic
   6
    Most of the earlier literature on intergenerational mobility is descriptive and has focused on comparing vari-
ous measures across countries and using different samples within each country. Early studies have looked at the
correlation in earnings of parents and children at a single point in time (Becker and Tomes, 1994). Subsequent
works (surveyed in Solon, 1999) have tried to obtain more precise estimates using panel data and isolating the per-
manent component of lifetime income. Another related strand of research has attempted to perform international
comparisons of intergenerational income elasticities (Solon, 2002).




                                                        5
opportunity which has received increasing attention in recent years thanks to the availability of

administrative tax data (Chetty et al., 2014; Acciari et al., 2019). As mobility is an inherently rel-

ative concept, designed to capture the relationship between children’s and parents’ outcomes,

the focus of my analysis is on the effects of revenue equalization (rather than revenue levels),

the key parameter that governs the extent to which investments in public education depend

on parents’ economic status.

    Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, this paper highlights the importance of accounting

for the endogeneity in post-reform expenditure and for the differences in funding schemes

across states when studying the effects of changes in spending driven by school finance re-

forms. To capture these differences, Jackson et al. (2015) instrument expenditure with the tim-

ing and “type” (e.g. foundation plan, or equalized effort) of each reform. Even this approach,

however, is unable to fully account for the fact that even reforms of the same type could have

affected the distribution of revenues and expenditures in different ways and triggered differ-

ent household responses. My estimates demonstrate that ignoring these differences can lead to

the inconsistent estimation of the effects of equalization. My approach, and the accompanying

dataset, can be used in other settings as well.

    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the school finance equal-

ization reforms. Section 3 uses a simple theoretical framework to illustrate the relationship

between school finance equalization and intergenerational mobility. Section 4 describes the

data. Section 5 introduces the measure of inequality in school revenues. Section 6 outlines the

simulated instruments approach. Section 7 presents and discusses the main estimates of the

effects of equalization on intergenerational mobility. Section 8 investigates the mechanisms

behind these effects, and Section 9 concludes.



2   School Finance Equalization Reforms

US school districts have historically drawn a large portion of their revenues from local prop-

erty taxes (Howell and Miller, 1997; Hoxby, 2001). As a result, wealthier districts – with a

larger tax base – have been able to spend considerably more compared to low-income districts.

Over time, this has created large disparities in per pupil revenues and expenditures across dis-

tricts within each state. Capitalization of the quality of public schools into house prices has

exacerbated these differences.



                                                  6
       To reduce these disparities, states have passed school finance equalization reforms. Some of

these reforms followed rulings of unconstitutionality of funding schemes by states’ Supreme

Courts. Others were instead the outcomes of legislative processes. Earlier reforms, passed

in the 1970s and 1980s, had a predominant equity motive and were designed to weaken the

relationship between each district’s fiscal capacity and the amount of resources spent on public

schools (Card and Payne, 2002; Murray et al., 1998; Jackson et al., 2015). Later reforms have

focused more on adequacy, i.e., have sought to guarantee a minimum level of expenditure to

children in all districts (Lindseth, 2004; Lafortune et al., 2018).

       Regardless of their specific motives, school finance equalization reforms have changed

states’ funding schemes, typically summarized by a formula. This formula expresses a dis-

trict’s total revenue as a function of a number of variables, including (but not limited to) en-

rollment, fiscal capacity, and fiscal effort (i.e., local tax rates). The formulas also define the size

of state transfers to each school district, and some include limits on total spending or local tax

rates. Hoxby (2001) and Jackson et al. (2014) provide a categorization of school finance plans

into a number of “types,” depending on whether they focus on ensuring a minimum level of

expenditure (“foundation” or “equalization” plans), guaranteeing a certain tax base (“guaran-

teed tax base”), or providing incentives toward fiscal effort (“rewards for effort”). Nearly all

funding formulas are, however, the combination of two or more of these types. In addition, the

parameters of each formula vary considerably across states and over time even within types.

As a result, plans passed under the same name have had very different effects on districts’

revenues and expenditures.

       One common aspect of different school finance schemes is that the basis for equaliza-

tion, i.e., the tax base, is endogenous. A change in the funding formula provides households

with incentives to sort across school districts depending on their preference for public schools

and their income; these movements affect house prices and district revenues. The failure of

policymakers to fully understand and anticipate these responses when designing school fi-

nance plans has caused some reforms to reduce overall expenditure on public schools (or “level

down”; Hoxby, 2001).7

       Empirical evidence on the effects of school finance equalization reforms on student achieve-

ment is mixed. Card and Payne (2002) find that court-mandated reforms reduced gaps in SAT
   7
    For example, California’s 1978 Serrano reform was followed by an unprecedented decline in expenditure (Silva
and Sonstelie, 1995). Similarly, Texas’s 1993 “Robin Hood” plan is estimated to have destroyed $27,000 per pupil
in property values (Hoxby and Kuziemko, 2004).



                                                       7
scores between low-income and high-income students. More recently, Lafortune et al. (2018)

estimate a positive and large effect of adequacy reforms on test scores.8 In one of the few stud-

ies of the long-run effects of school finance reforms, Jackson et al. (2015) find large effects of in-

creased expenditure on future educational achievement, wages, and poverty incidence among

low-income students. This paper focuses on the effects of equalization in school revenues (as

opposed to changes in revenue levels) on students’ intergenerational income mobility. The

goal is to quantify the extent to which breaking the link between parental resources and public

school spending breaks the link between parents’ and children’s economic outcomes.



3        A Simple Model of School Finance and Intergenerational Mobility

To conceptually illustrate the relationship between school finance equalization and intergen-

erational mobility, I use a very simple model. This model yields a testable prediction which I

bring to the data in the remainder of the paper.

        The world is populated by two generations: parents, with income x, and children, with in-

come y. Parents and children live in school districts and each district belongs to a state. School

districts are responsible for the financing of public schools, and each child attends school in

the district she lives in. The income of a child in family i, living in school district d and state s,

is determined as follows:

                                                yid = ✓xid + ed                                                  (1)

where xid is parental income and ed is public expenditure on the child’s education. The param-

eter ✓ captures all the possible ways in which parental income is related to children’s income

(e.g. transmission of ability or private investments in education). By expressing the child’s

income in this way, I implicitly assume that the returns to public education investments are

constant across children.

        School spending in district d, located in state s, is defined by the following state-level for-

mula:

                                            ed = (1       s )Ks   +   s xd                                       (2)

where Ks is a state-level constant and xd is average parental income in district d. In this ex-
    8
    Some studies focusing on individual states have also found positive effects of equalization on achievement
(Guryan, 2001; Papke, 2005; Roy, 2011) and educational attainment (Hyman, 2017). Downes et al. (1997), on the
other hand, find no effects of equalization on the distribution of test scores, and Hoxby (2001) finds mixed evidence
on high school dropout.



                                                         8
pression, the parameter              s   captures the degree of equalization in school expenditure within

each state. When          s    = 0, ed = Ks : expenditure is fully equalized across all districts in state

s. When       s   > 0, on the other hand, ed depends positively on xd , which implies that the richer

districts in the state have higher expenditures and vice versa. Lastly, when                           s   < 0 the system

is redistributive and poorer districts receive and spend more.

      The income of the child can be rewritten as a function of Ks and                    s   as follows:


                                           yid = ✓xid + Ks +       s (xd   Ks )                                         (3)


      This simple conceptual framework can be used to highlight the relationship between inter-

generational income mobility and inequality of school expenditure across districts, captured

by the parameter          s.   Following Chetty et al. (2014), I define intergenerational mobility as a

child’s income rank (in the national distribution) given the income rank r of her parents:


                                             Msr = Fy (yid |Fx (xid ) = r/100)                                          (4)


where Fy (·) represents the national cumulative distribution function (CDF) of children’s in-

come and Fx (·) denotes the national CDF of parents’ income. I make the simplifying assump-

tion that xid = xd for every individual i living in district d. Denoting the quantile function of

the random variable z as Qz (·)9 and substituting the expression for the child’s income from

equation (1) allows me to express mobility as a function of the parameter                         s:



                                    Msr = Fy (✓Qx (r) + Ks +         s (Qx (r)    Ks ))                                 (5)


Being a CDF, the function Fy (·) is non-decreasing. As result, Msr is non-increasing in                           s   when

Qx (r)  Ks . Equation (5) implies that a stronger positive correlation between per pupil expen-

diture and per capita income across districts within a state (i.e., a larger                    s)   is associated with

lower intergenerational mobility for all children with parental income below a state-specific

threshold Ks ; furthermore, this association is stronger the lower is parental income. By the

same token, a larger           s   is associated with higher intergenerational mobility for children with

parental income greater than Ks . An important corollary of this result is that, if Ks is large

enough that all parents in the state have incomes below this threshold, a given decline in                               s
  9
      Note that Qz (a) = Fz 1 (a).



                                                            9
would not lead to a decline in mobility (defined relative to the national distribution) even for

children of the richest parents in the state. In the remainder of the paper I empirically test these

predictions by studying the effects of a decline in            s,   triggered by school finance reforms, on

intergenerational mobility of children with low and high parental incomes.



4         Data

To conduct the empirical analysis I combine data from multiple sources. In the final data set,

each observation corresponds to a “cell” of children born in a given cohort, from a given CZ,

and with parent’s income in a given percentile within the CZ. The components of the final

data set are briefly described below; more detail can be found in Appendix B. Expenditures,

revenues, and income are converted to 2000 US dollars.


School Expenditures and Revenues and Funding Formula Components                               My instrumental

variables approach relies on simulating district revenues using states’ funding formulas. This

procedure requires information not only on total revenues, but also on all the variables entering

the formula (such as property values, enrollment, household income, tax rates, etc.). Both the

nature of these elements and the way they are measured vary across states. This information

is therefore not readily available from a unique source.10

         To address this data limitation I construct a novel district-level panel dataset for each state,

drawing from states’ detailed historical records on school finance accessed through a series

of FOIA requests. Each dataset contains all the elements of the funding formula in place in

each year in a given state, as well as total expenditures and revenues. I was able to construct

these datasets for 20 states, comprising 405 CZs and 8,102 school districts and including ap-

proximately 62 percent of all students in the country. These 20 states, highlighted in Figure

AII, appear similar to the remaining states with respect to a range of characteristics of schools,

families, and households (Table AI).11 The elements of the dataset for each state are described

in Table CI, and the various formulas are described in detail in Appendix D. 12
    10
     Information on school districts’ expenditures and revenues is available from the US Census of Government
and the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) Longitudinal School District Dataset.
  11
     The only statistically different differences are population size and the divorce rate.
  12
     I obtained the data via direct requests or through FOIA requests addressed to each state’s Department of Ed-
ucation. The request was fulfilled by the states of California (data available for the years 1996-2004), Colorado
(1994-2004), Florida (1988-2004), Georgia (1987-2004), Illinois (1987-2004), Kentucky (1991-2004), Louisiana (1993-
2004), Massachusetts (1993-2004), Michigan (1990-2004), Minnesota (1991-2004), Montana (1994-2004), Nebraska
(1993-2004), New Jersey (1988-2004), New York (1986-2004), North Dakota (1986-2004), Ohio (1986-2004), Pennsyl-
vania (1995-2004), Texas (1986-2004), Utah (1986-2004), and Wisconsin (1986-2004). The remaining states did not


                                                        10
    Table I (Panel A) summarizes the variation in school revenues across districts within each

CZ or state. While the difference in revenues between the highest-income and the lowest-

income district is small on average, it ranges from -$2,306 to $12,965 across states, and from

-$10,710 to $14,518 across CZs in 1990.


School Finance Reforms I compile a list of all state-level school finance reforms passed be-

tween 1980 and 2004, to encompass the time period when the cohorts at study (born between

1980 and 1986) were in grades one to twelve (i.e., 1986-2004). To do so I combine information

from “Public School Finance Programs of the United States and Canada” (1990–199113 and

1998–199914 ) and from Verstegen and Jordan (2009). These publications describe the funding

schemes in place at different points in time and include details of the timing and content of

each reform. I complement these data with information from Manwaring and Sheffrin (1997),

Hoxby (2001), Jackson et al. (2015), and Lafortune et al. (2018). Information is largely consis-

tent across the different sources; when discrepancies are found, priority is given to the “Public

School Finance Programs of United States and Canada” for older events and to Lafortune et al.

(2018) for more recent ones. Appendix E briefly describes the reforms used in the analysis, and

Figures AIII and AIV summarize the timing of these events.


Income I use tabulations of household income at the school district level, taken from the US

Census of Population and Housing for the years 1980, 1990, and 2000 and from the American

Community Survey for the year 2010, to calculate median household income in each district.15

I link these data with information on per pupil school revenues to compute measures of equal-

ization across districts in each state and year.


Intergenerational Mobility I use the intergenerational mobility measure proposed and con-

structed by Chetty et al. (2014), and defined as children’s percentile in the national income
maintain detailed records on historical school finance data. California, Illinois, Florida, Georgia, New York, North
Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Utah did not experience any reform between 1986 and 2004; the remaining states
experienced at least one reform, and New Jersey and Texas experienced two reforms. Appendix D describes the
formulas in more detail.
   13
      Albany, NY : American Education Finance Association and Center for the Study of the States, The Nelson A.
Rockefeller Institute of Government, State University of New York, 1992.
   14
      Washington, DC: US Dept. of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement, National Center
for Education Statistics, 2001.
   15
      Income tabulations at the school district level are contained in the Census STF3F file for 1980 and published
as part of the National Center for Education Statistics’ (NCES) School District Demographic System for the years
1990 and 2000. For the year 2010 I use the 2008–2012 district-level tabulations of the American Community Survey
provided by the School District Demographic System.




                                                        11
distribution for a given CZ, cohort, and income percentile of the parents. To construct this

measure, Chetty et al. (2014) use administrative tax records to estimate the intercept and slope

of the linear relationship between parents’ and children’s national income percentiles for 637

out of 722 CZs (including 327 CZs for which simulated revenues are available) and for each

cohort of children born between 1980 and 1986.16 Combined with information on the national

and CZ-specific distributions of parental income, these estimates allow me to predict the in-

come percentiles of children for each CZ, cohort, and parental income percentile in the CZ.17

Compared to the simple correlation between parents’ and children’s incomes (used by Solon,

1992; Björklund and Jäntti, 1997; Lee and Solon, 2009, among others) this measure allows me

to study the economic performance of children relative to their parents for different percentiles

of parental income.18

       The final dataset contains children’s percentiles for 327 CZs, seven birth cohorts, and six

CZ-specific parental income percentiles (10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th, and 99th). On aver-

age, children with parental income below the national median experience upward mobility,

whereas children with parental income above the median experience downward mobility (Ta-

ble I, Panel B).19 Wide differences exist across CZs (Figure AI): The mean percentile of children

with parents on the 25th percentile is as low as 32 in Gordon, SD and as high as 61 in Sioux

Center, IA, while for children with parents on the 75th percentile it is as low as 51 in Gallup,

AZ and as high as 70 in Hiawatha, KS. Mobility appears to increase, albeit slowly, across co-

horts. I complement information on income mobility with data on education mobility, also

constructed and provided by Chetty et al. (2014) and defined as the probability of being en-

rolled in college at age 19 for each CZ, birth cohort (1984-1990), and parents’ income percentile

in the CZ.20
  16
      Slope and intercept estimates are published as the Online Data Table 1 of Chetty et al. (2014), available at
https://opportunityinsights.org/. Children are assigned to CZs based on when they lived at age 16, irrespective
of whether they moved when they entered the labor market.
   17
      I choose to use parents’ percentiles in the CZ, rather than in the national distribution, to account for differ-
ences in income distributions across CZs. This allows me to correctly weigh each CZ in the sample; using per-
centiles in the national distribution instead translates into having observation in the data set that correspond to
different counts of people. To see this, consider a CZ with 10 percent of individuals on the 25th national per-
centile and only 0.1 percent on the 99th percentile. Using national percentiles these two groups would receive
equal weight in the estimation, even though the first contains more people than the second. Information on the
income distributions within each CZ is published as the Online Data Table 7 of Chetty et al. (2014), available at
https://opportunityinsights.org/.
   18
      To see this, consider an increase in the parent-child income correlation. Such an increase could be caused by
better outcomes for the poor or worse outcomes for the rich. My measure, analogous to Chetty et al. (2014)’s
“absolute” mobility, allows me to study these two cases separately.
   19
      This result is not mechanical: income ranks of parents and children are defined relative to the national income
distribution, whereas intergenerational mobility measures are estimated at the CZ level.
   20
      Measures of education mobility are available for cohorts 1984 to 1993. Since school finance data are only



                                                         12
Cross-County Migration             Data on county-level migration flows and on the incomes of mi-

grants are taken from the IRS Statistics of Income (SOI) and cover years 1991 to 2004. I calculate

county-level individual migration rates as the ratio between the total number of in-migrants

and out-migrants and the county’s population.


House Prices To calculate changes in property values I use transaction-based annual house

price indexes at the 5-digit zip code level for the years 1986 to 2004, published by the Federal

Housing Finance Agency (FHFA).21 I use information from the 1990 Census to link zip codes

to school districts, and I aggregate house prices at the district level based on the population in

each zip code. The coverage of this dataset varies across time, with 48 percent of all zip codes

in 1986, 70 percent in 1995, and almost 100 percent in 2004. The available information allows

me to obtain a measure of house prices for 64 percent of all districts in 1986, 82 percent in 1995,

and 100 percent in 2004.


Other School District Data Additional district-level information from the NCES’s Local Ed-

ucation Agency Universe Survey Data includes the number of teachers employed in each dis-

trict and year, available for the years 1988 to 2010.



5    Measuring Inequality in School Expenditure

As a first step in my empirical analysis, I build a measure of inequality in per pupil revenues

across school districts. In keeping with the theoretical framework, I measure inequality as the

slope of the relationship between per pupil revenues and per capita income across districts

within each state, captured by the parameter             st   in the following equation:22


                                           edt = ↵st +        st xdt   + "dt                                   (6)


where edt is per pupil revenue in district d (located in state s) and year t, xdt is median per

capita household income, and "dt is an error term.

    The parameter       st ,   estimated separately for each state s and year t, represents the degree

of inequality in school funding across districts. When the funding scheme is unequal and rev-
available until 2004, however, I restrict my attention to cohorts until 1990 to have information on funding schemes
for at least nine school years for each cohort.
   21
      The construction of this index is explained in detail in Bogin et al. (2016).
   22
      A similar approach has been used by Hoxby (1998); Card and Payne (2002); Lafortune et al. (2018).



                                                        13
enues are higher (lower) in richer (poorer) districts,                   st   will be positive. When the funding

scheme is redistributive and revenues are higher in low-income districts,                         st   will instead be

negative. Lastly, when the funding scheme is equalized and revenues are similar across richer

and poorer districts,      st   will be close to zero. Appendix Figure AV shows the linear relation-

ship between per-pupil revenues and per capita income for school districts in New Jersey and

Georgia in 1990 and 2000. In New Jersey, which experienced a school finance equalization

reform in 1991, the slope of the relationship (i.e.,              st )   decreased in 2000 relative to 1990. In

Georgia, which did not experience any reform, the slope remained constant over this decade.

       To study the effects of changes in            st   (measured at the year level) on intergenerational

mobility (measured at the cohort level) I assign each cohort a measure of revenue inequality

experienced while in school, constructed as the average                       st   over the calendar years in which

the cohort was in grades one to twelve.23 For cohorts born between 1980 and 1986, this requires

estimating     st   for each state and year between 1986 and 2004. Income data, however, are only

available for Census years. To back out median district incomes for intercensal years, I directly

exploit the timing of each reform and I impute income values to each district depending on

whether the corresponding state had a school finance reform during that decade. If a reform

took place, I impute the income of the Census year at the beginning of the decade to the years

preceding the reform (including the year of the reform) and the income of the Census year at

the end of the decade to the years following the reform. If no reform took place, I interpolate

between the income values of the Census years at the beginning and at the end of the decade.24

To demonstrate that my results are not driven by this imputation procedure, in robustness

checks I use a version of         st   estimated assigning the 1990 median district income to all years

(Table AVIII).

       On average, the parameter          st   is equal to 0.019 for states without a school finance reform

(with a standard deviation of 0.098); for states with a reform it equals 0.041 in the years before

the reform (with a standard deviation of 0.027) and -0.004 in the years after the reform (with a

standard deviation of 0.034, Table I, Panel C). Figure I illustrates the change in                      st   in the years

surrounding a reform. The figure shows point estimates and 90 percent confidence intervals
  23
     For example, the s for the 1980 cohort is the average of the st for the years 1986-1997.
  24
     If two reforms take place in one decade (which is the case for Montana, New Jersey, New York, and Oregon),
I assign the income of the Census year at the beginning of the decade to the years preceding the first reform, the
income of the Census year at the end of the decade to the years following the last reform, and I interpolate between
these two values for the years between the two reforms.




                                                            14
of the coefficients     k   in the following equation:

                                               10
                                               X
                                     ˆst =           k Rs   (t    ryears = k) + "st                            (7)
                                              k= 3


where ˆst is the estimated           st   coefficient for state s and year t, Rs equals 1 if state s experienced

a school finance reform between 1986 and 2004, and ryears is the year of the first of these

reforms.25 Estimates of         st   decline immediately following a school finance reform and remain

stable at this lower level ten years after the reform. Appendix Figure AVI shows estimates of

 st      separately for “equity” reforms (passed before 1990) and “adequacy” reforms (passed after

1990). The initial drop in                after an equity reform is slightly larger than after an adequacy

reform. The former, however, tends to revert to its pre-reform values, while the latter remains

stable over time.



6         Endogeneity of Post-Reform School Expenditure and Simulated

          Instruments

6.1        Explaining The Need for An Instrument

Having estimated a measure                  for the inequality in school spending, my next goal is to test

the theoretical predictions derived in Section 3 and to estimate the effects of a decline in                   on

intergenerational mobility. Doing so requires a source of exogenous variation in . School

finance reforms are a natural candidate; indeed, several studies have used these reforms as

exogenous shifters of school spending to study a variety of children’s outcomes (Jackson et al.,

2015; Lafortune et al., 2018).

         If one is simply interested in the effect of the passage of any school finance reform on stu-

dents’ outcomes (as in Lafortune et al., 2018), the exogeneity in the timing is the only required

identifying assumption. If, instead, one wants to estimate the causal effect of the changes in

revenues and expenditures triggered by the reform, one must deal with an endogeneity prob-

lem.26 To see this, consider the following simplified version of equation (5), which expresses

mobility of children in CZ c and state s, cohort b, and with parents’ income rank r as a function
    25
    The estimation includes years 1986 to 2004, and standard errors are clustered at the state level.
    26
    This is analogous to wanting to estimate a “structural” parameter, whereas Lafortune et al. (2018) estimate the
reduced-form effect of equalization reforms.




                                                             15
of :
                                           r          r
                                          Mcb =           sb   + ✓c + ⌧b + "˜cb                                      (8)

The variable "˜cb is a residual component of mobility, which can include the composition of

their group of peers and, more generally, of their community, summarized by X̃bc :



                                                    "˜cb = X̃cb + "cb

To simplify matters, I express the variable                sb   as the product between the parameters of the

funding formula of state s, gsb , and the variables entering that formula, Xsb :                          sb   = gsb Xsb

(where Cov(X̃cb , Xsb 6= 0)).

       Suppose that, due to a school finance reform, the funding formula for cohort b + 1 changes

to gsb+1 . Changes to the funding formula affect the tax price (i.e., the dollars of tax revenues

required to increase spending by one dollar), which represents the “price” of public schools

to taxpayers, and – in turn – households’ budget constraints. Households will respond to

this change in the tax price by “voting with their feet” (Tiebout, 1956) and by moving to a

different district (Aaronson, 1999; Dee, 2000; Figlio and Lucas, 2004; Epple and Ferreyra, 2008;

Chakrabarti and Roy, 2015). Due to this sorting, variables such as house prices and property

tax revenues, which are included in Xsb , will change to Xsb+1 . At the same time, this sorting

could affect intergenerational mobility through changes in X̃cb .27

       OLS estimates of     r   from the first-differenced version of equation (8) are only consistent if

the following exclusion restriction holds:


                        [(gsb+1 Xsb+1       gsb Xsb )( X̃cb+1 + "cb+1             X̃cb    "cb )] = 0


Since (Xsb+1 X̃cb+1 ) 6= 0, the exclusion restriction fails, giving rise to an endogeneity problem.


How Prevalent Is Household Sorting After A School Finance Reform?                                   The answer to this

question determines the importance of addressing the endogeneity problem. To quantify this,

I conduct an event study of county-level migration flows around an equalization event. I

estimate:
                                   5
                                   X
                         mkt =            n Rs(k)    (t    ryears(k) = n) +        k   + ⌧t + "kt                    (9)
                                   n= 5

  27
    Note that this is the same justification for the IV strategy of Jackson et al. (2015), who also seek to estimate the
causal effect of changes in expenditure levels on student outcomes (as opposed to just the effect of the reform).


                                                               16
where mkt is either the in-migration or the out-migration rate, defined respectively as the total

number of households moving in or out of county k in year t, divided by the total number of

households in k. The variable Rs(k) equals 1 if state s of county k experienced a school finance

reform in the years 1986-2004, and ryears(k) is the year of the earliest reform. The vectors                       k

and ⌧t are county and year fixed effects, respectively, and "kt is an error term. Estimates of

the coefficients    n,   shown in Figure III (top panel), capture year-specific changes in migration

flows after each reform relative to the year preceding a reform. The differences between in-

migration and out-migration rates of counties with and without a reform are indistinguishable

from zero in the years leading to a reform, and they increase by 17 and 19 percent (or 0.13 and

0.14 percentage points) respectively in the years following the reform.

       These migration patterns, however, cause endogeneity in post-reform expenditure only if

they are associated with sorting on income and wealth. To better characterize the patterns of

sorting, I re-estimate equation (9) using the absolute value of the percentage difference between

the incomes of migrants and stayers as the dependent variable. These estimates, shown in

the bottom panel of Figure III, reveal that the absolute difference the average income of both

in-migrants and out-migrants and the average income of stayers is flat in the years leading

to a reform, and it increases significantly (to a maximum of 9 and 7 percent, or 2.1 and 1.7

percentage points respectively) in the years after the reform.

       Taken together, these results provide evidence of significant household sorting across coun-

ties following a school finance reform.28 This sorting can affect house prices, change the com-

position of local communities, and in turn lead to the endogeneity of post-reform revenues.29


6.2      Constructing the Simulated Instrument

I address this endogeneity issue with a simulated-instruments approach (as in Gruber and

Saez, 2002) which, similarly to Hyman (2017), directly exploits changes in each state’s formula

type and parameters generated by a reform.30 The goal of this strategy is to isolate the exoge-

nous variation in funding inequality, driven by the timing of the reform and the type of funding
  28
      Income and wealth are often strongly positively correlated (Wolff and Zacharias, 2009).
  29
      This finding is in partial contrast with Lafortune et al. (2018), who analyze changes in the income gap between
ex ante richer and poorer districts, as well as changes in the demographic composition of students across districts
after each reform, and find no evidence of changes in these variables.
   30
      Hyman (2017) focuses on Michigan’s 1994 school finance reform and directly uses changes in the foundation
grant (the relevant policy parameter for this reform) as an instrument for expenditures. Goldsmith-Pinkham et al.
(2018) illustrate how, in a simulated-instruments context, identification leverages variation in the change in the
parameters of a given policy. The source of exogenous variation used in my analysis is thus the same as in Hyman
(2017), which I expand to include a large sample of US states.



                                                         17
formula, from the endogenous variation driven by sorting and changes in house prices and in

the tax base.

   It is useful to express the post-reform     sb+1   as the sum of an exogenous component and an

endogenous one:


                  st+1   = gst+1 Xst + bst+1 , where bst+1 = gst+1 Xst+1        gst+1 Xst


The quantity gt+1 Xst is the     st+1   that would have resulted had households not sorted (and

house prices not changed). This “simulated” version of            st+1 ,   which I denote as    st+1 ,
                                                                                                sim      can

be used as an instrument to obtain consistent estimates of            r   in equation (8). The required

exclusion restriction becomes:


                     [(gsb+1 Xsb     gsb Xsb )( X̃cb+1 + "cb+1     X̃cb      "cb )] = 0


This condition is satisfied if gsb+1      gsb is unrelated to Xcb+1        Xcb or, in other words, if the

specific change in the funding formula is unrelated to sorting and the subsequent changes in

house prices. I provide evidence in favor of this assumption in Appendix Table AII, which I

describe below.

   The correlation between bst+1 and intergenerational mobility determines the sign of the

bias of the OLS estimates. If the effect of           on mobility is negative, a positive correlation

implies that OLS will be biased toward zero, whereas a negative correlation implies that OLS

will overstate the negative effect of      on mobility. The sign of this correlation is uncertain ex

ante and depends on both Xst and gst+1 .


6.2.1   The Importance of Accounting for Differences in Funding Formulas Across States

While earlier studies of school finance reforms (such as Card and Payne, 2002) have not ex-

plicitly accounted for the endogeneity in post-reform revenues, more recent studies (such as

Jackson et al., 2015; Hyman, 2017) have recognized and addressed it. Jackson et al. (2015) (JJP

hereafter), for example, study the effects of several reforms passed across all US states since the

1970s and instrument expenditure using the timing of each reform, districts’ initial position in

the state’s expenditure and income distributions, and the type of funding plan (e.g. foundation

plan, or equalized effort).

   While similar to JJP’s, my approach bears one important difference. Their strategy relies

                                                   18
on the assumption that all reforms of the same type had the same effect on expenditure, condi-

tional on a district’s initial position in the state’s expenditure and income distributions. If one
                                                                                  sim = ĝ X̂ .31
were to apply JJP’s strategy in my context, the instrument would be specified as ˆst+1       st

In other words, the instrument formula would be the same across all states, and the set of char-

acteristics considered (X̂st ) would be a subset of all the ones entering the actual formula.

       What happens when one uses ˆst+1
                                   sim in lieu of                  sim
                                                                   st+1   as an instrument? First, the formula

ĝ can be seen as a “restricted” or simplified version of gst+1 ; as a result, using ĝ implies us-

ing fewer instruments than there are available, which could lead to asymptotic inefficiency

(Greene, 2008, Chapter 12).32

       Second, in the presence of large differences in gst across states, the standard IV mono-

tonicity assumption (Angrist and Imbens, 1995; Angrist et al., 1996) is more likely to be vi-

olated when using ˆst
                   sim than when using
                                                       st .
                                                       sim       To see this, suppose I have an endogenous

 st+1    = gst+1 Xst+1 with a corresponding value of JJP’s instrument ˆst+1
                                                                       sim = ĝ X̂ . Suppose now
                                                                                  st

that all states’ formulas change to gkt+1
                                     0    8k, such that the resulting instrument for state s would
      sim
be ˆ0 st+1 = ĝ 0 X̂st  ˆst+1
                          sim . Monotonicity requires that                 0
                                                                           st+1
                                                                                     0
                                                                                  = gst+1 Xst+1     st+1   for all s;

this condition would be violated if there is a state where the instrument predicts an increase in

equalization, but the actual changes in the formula and in Xst lead to a decline in equalization

(or vice versa). If instead one uses an instrument                sim
                                                                  st+1   = gst+1 Xst , this assumption would be

violated only if the endogenous change in Xst alone were so dramatic to yield a change in                        st+1

of the opposite sign as the the change in          st+1 ,
                                                   sim      since the function gst+1
                                                                                0    is the same in both         st+1

and      sim 33
         st+1 .

       Clearly, the extent to which     sim
                                        st    will be a better instrument than ˆst
                                                                                sim depends on how large


the heterogeneity in funding formula changes across states is in reality (Hoxby, 2001). Figure

II shows the trend in        around the year of the reform in five states with reforms between 1989

and 1996. While some reforms were effective in reducing                       (such as the one in Wisconsin in

1996, which reduced it from 0.021 in the year before the reform to 0.003 four years after the

reform), some others were considerably less effective (such as the one in Michigan, which only
  31
      Note that Jackson et al. (2015) instrument expenditure and not .
  32
      Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018) explain how, in a simulated instrument context, the parameters of the formula
used to construct the instrument represent the actual instruments. Therefore, using a simplified version of the
formula implies using fewer-than-available parameters.
   33
      Mogstad et al. (2019) explain how, in the context of 2SLS with many instruments, the validity of the strategy is
guaranteed by a (milder) “partial” monotonicity assumption, which essentially requires the standard monotonicity
assumption to apply individually to each instrument. The reasoning outlined in the text still applies: when using
 st+1 , the instruments are the actual parameters of the funding formula entering st+1 , whereas when using st+1
  sim                                                                                                            ˆsim
they are not.



                                                            19
reduced       from 0.045 to 0.041).34

       Different reforms also had different effects on house prices. Figure IV shows trends in the

difference in house prices between districts with household income above and below the state

median in 1990. While some reforms (such as the one of Texas) were followed by a decline in

this difference (which implies an increase in house prices in poorer districts relative to richer

ones), others (such as Michigan) did not trigger any significant changes, and others (such as

Massachusetts) were followed by an increase.35

       These differences in the effectiveness of each reform and in the house price responses across

states suggest that the use of        sim
                                      st    in lieu of ˆst
                                                        sim could significantly improve both the consis-


tency and the efficiency of the estimates. In Section 7, I contrast estimates obtained using                     sim
                                                                                                                 st

with those obtained using ˆst
                           sim , and show that the differences in these two sets of estimates


are significant.


Implementation I construct              sim   as follows. First, I obtain the funding formulas in place

in each school district and year. These formulas express total and per pupil revenues as a

function of district-specific characteristics (such as enrollment, property tax rates, property

values, and average gross income) and parameters set by state laws. I construct each formula

using information from “Public School Finance Programs of United States and Canada” (1990–

1991 and 1998–1999), as well as various state legislative bills (see Appendix D for details on

each specific formula). I then use the formulas to simulate each district’s post-reform revenues,

holding endogenous characteristics (i.e., property values, property tax rates, and income) fixed

at their pre-reform values.36 Lastly, I construct          sim   for each state and year, estimating equation

(6) using simulated revenues in lieu of actual revenues.37
  34
      These differences are consistent with the fact that Jackson et al. (2015) find that, on average, school finance
reforms increase expenditure more in ex ante lower-spending districts, Hyman (2017) finds that Michigan’s Proposal
A increased expenditure more in low-poverty districts.
   35
      Each point and spike in FigurePIV represent the estimate and the 90 percent confidence interval of the coeffi-
cients n in the regression HPdt = 6n= 4 n 1(Incomed,1990 > M edians )Rs(d) 1(t Ryears(d) = n) + ✓d + ⌧t + "dt ,
where HPdt is the house price index of district d in year t, Incomed,1990 is average household income of district
d in 1990, M edians is median household income in state s in 1990, Rs(d) equals 1 if state s where the district is
located experienced a school finance reform in the years 1986-2004, Ryears(d) is the year of the earliest reform, and
✓d and ⌧t are district and year fixed effects. The parameters are estimated separately for each state. Observations
are weighted by population. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
   36
      I adjust property values using the FHFA’s US All Transactions Index (quarterly data, available at
https://www.fhfa.gov/DataTools/Downloads/Pages/House-Price-Index-Datasets.aspx) to account for nation-
wide changes in house prices, and I correct for inflation using the CPI.
   37
      For states with no reform between 1986 and 2004, I simply set = s for all years and cohorts.




                                                         20
Assumptions The validity of this approach relies on the exogeneity of the timing of each

reform and of the type and parameters of the funding formula. This assumption could be vi-

olated if the funding formula chosen by each state or the timing of the reform were related to

the state’s socioeconomic or political conditions. Hoxby (2001), however, explains that equal-

ization schemes are more likely to be a reflection of a particular legal rhetoric rather than of

specific objectives in terms of school spending and redistribution. This would explain why

some of these reforms have had smaller-than-intended effects. In addition, the timing of a re-

form often depends on the length of a legislative process or on the timing of a court ruling. This

suggests that both the timing and the type of reforms can be plausibly considered random.

    Figure V shows trends in simulated and actual revenues in some of the largest states, sep-

arately for districts in the top and bottom quartile of the state’s initial distribution of per pupil

expenditure. The extent to which actual revenues differ from simulated revenues varies across

states; it depends on the changes in property values in each district following a reform, driven

by the ex ante characteristics of the district and by the change in the funding formulas. Districts

where a reform triggered an increase in house prices experienced higher revenues than they

would have had house prices not changed, and vice versa (Figure AVII).38

    On average, the parameter           sim   equals 0.040 (with a standard deviation of 0.030) in the

years preceding each reform, and it drops to 0.003 (with a standard deviation of 0.031) in the

years after the reform (Table I, Panel C). Estimates from the first stage of the IV estimation re-

veal that   sim   is a strong predictor for ; the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistic of the first stage

(Stock and Yogo, 2002), shown in Table III, is around 20. The instrument is also uncorrelated

with changes in house prices, migration rates, and differences in the incomes of migrants and

incumbents, which are precisely the sources of the endogeneity that the instrument is sup-

posed to address (Table AII).39



7    Effects of Equalization on Intergenerational Mobility

Having constructed a measure for the inequality in school spending and an instrument for

it, I now turn my attention to estimating the effects of spending equalization on children’s
   38
      Figure AVII shows the relationship between the percentage change in house prices after a reform and the
difference between actual and simulated revenues.
   39
      The table shows estimates of a regression of st sim
                                                           on the average change in house prices, the average in-
migration and out-migration rate, and the ratios between the incomes of in-migrants and out-migrants and the
incomes of stayers, as well as state and year fixed effects. Observations are at the state and year level. These
estimates indicate that none of these variables predict the change in st
                                                                       sim
                                                                           over time.



                                                       21
intergenerational mobility. The identification of these effects exploits variation in exposure

to equalization across cohorts and states, given by exogenous differences in the timing and

effectiveness of the reforms.

       To better illustrate identification, Figure VI shows an event study of intergenerational mo-

bility, measured as the average income rank of children with parental incomes in the 25th

percentile, by exposure to a reform and separately for states with an “effective” school finance

reform (i.e. one that resulted in a negative post-reform               or a decline in      of at least 50 percent,

solid line) and for those with an “ineffective” reform (dashed line), using states with no reform

as a control group. Similarly to JJP, exposure to a reform counts the number of school years a

given cohort in a given state was exposed to a “post-reform” school finance regime: Exposure

= birth year + 18 – (reform year + 1) (exposure is weakly negative for non-exposed cohorts).

To better understand this measure, consider the 1980 cohort in Massachusetts, where a school

finance reform was passed in 1994. This cohort, in school from 1986 to 1997, was exposed to a

“post-reform” regime for 1980 + 18 - (1994 + 1) = 3 years, namely 1995, 1996, and 1997.

       The figure shows that, in states with an effective reform, mobility gradually increases with

exposure (e.g. it is 3.3 percentiles higher for cohorts exposed for twelve years compared with

non-exposed cohorts). In states with an ineffective reform, on the other hand, mobility – if

anything – declines with exposure.40 Importantly, the figure shows the absence of any trends

in mobility for non-exposed cohorts, which supports the assumption of exogenous timing of

each reform. Taken together, these estimates provide a first piece of evidence that exposure to

effective reforms is associated with increased intergenerational mobility.


7.1      OLS Estimates

While useful to illustrate the trends in intergenerational mobility across cohorts and states, the

evidence in Figure VI is based on an arbitrary definition of the effectiveness of a reform; in

addition, it only informs us on the mobility of children whose parents are at the bottom of the

income distribution. To more rigorously test the effect of a change in                       on intergenerational
  40
    ThePfigure shows OLS points estimates and 90 percent confidence intervals of the coefficients n in the equation
mcb = 12  n= 6 n En(sb) + ✓c + ⌧b + "cb , where mcb is the mean rank of children in CZ c, cohort b, and with parents’
income in the 25th percentile in the national income distribution, En equals one if cohort b in state s was exposed to
a post-school finance reform regime for n years (En = b + 18 (ryears + 1), and ryears is the year of the first school
finance reform in state s between 1980 and 2004), and the vectors ✓c and ⌧b contain CZ and cohort fixed effects. The
coefficients are estimated separately for states with effective and ineffective reforms, using states with no reform as
a control group. Observations are weighted by the number of children in each CZ and cohort. Standard errors are
clustered at the state and birth cohort level.




                                                          22
mobility and to explore its effects on children with different parental incomes, I estimate the

following equation:


                      Mcbx =       ˆ
                                 0 s(c)b   + ˆs(c)b ⇥ ✓n(cx) + c + ⌧b + ✓n(cx) + !cbx                       (10)


where the variable Mcbx is the expected income percentile of children in CZ c, cohort b, and

with parental income in the x-th percentile in the CZ (either the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th, or

99th).41 The variable ˆs(c)b is the estimated state and cohort-specific measure of equalization

described in the previous section (s(c) denotes the state where CZ c is located). CZ fixed

effects c control for CZ-specific, time-invariant determinants of mobility, and cohort fixed

effects ⌧b control for secular trends in mobility. The vector ✓n(cx) controls for parents’ rank in

the national income distribution n(cx), to account for the fact that different CZs might have

different income distributions.42 The variable !cbx is an error term.

       In this model the parameter     0   captures the effect of an increase in , i.e., a decline in equal-

ization, on the income percentile of children with the lowest-ranked parental income in the

national distribution. The parameter            measures instead how much this effect changes as the

parental income rank increases. I standardize ˆsb across all CZs and cohorts, and I cluster stan-

dard errors at the level of the state and the year using a two-way procedure (Cameron and

Miller, 2015; Abadie et al., 2017), to account for the fact that           s(c)t   varies at the state level and

to allow for spatial correlation in mobility. For ease of interpretation, I describe my estimates

in terms of a reduction in , i.e., an increase in equalization.

       OLS estimates of equation (10) are shown in Table II. A one-standard deviation reduction

in , equivalent to a $4,500 reduction in the gap in per pupil revenues between the richest and

the poorer districts in a state, is associated with a 3.8 percentile increase in mobility of chil-

dren with parental income at the bottom of the income distribution, although this coefficient

is indistinguishable from zero (estimate of           equal to -3.8397, Table II, column 1, p-value equal

to 0.12). An estimate of         equal to 0.0246 indicates that this positive association is reduced

by 0.025 percentiles with each additional percentile of parental income (estimate of ⇥ parent

centile, Table II, column 1, significant at 1 percent). This implies that the same reduction in

  is associated with a 3.6 percentile increase in mobility for children with parental income in
  41
    One observation corresponds to a birth cohort, CZ, and percentile of parental income in the CZ.
  42
    For example, the 25th CZ-specific percentile in Cleveland, MS corresponds to an income of $15,000 and a 10th
percentile in the national distribution; the same CZ-specific percentile in Sheboygan, WI corresponds to an income
of $52,500 and a 45th percentile in the national distribution.


                                                       23
the 10th percentile (p-value equal to 0.15), a 3.2 percentile increase for children with parental

income in the 25th percentile (p-value equal to 0.18), and a smaller 1.6 percentile increase for

children with parental income in the 90th percentile (p-value equal to 0.48). These estimates

are robust to controlling for state fixed effects (Table II, column 2).

      In Figure VII (solid line), I relax the linearity restriction of equation (10) and I allow the

effect of a decline in       to vary flexibly by decile of parental income. These estimates reveal

that the relationship between the effect of a decline in                  and parents’ rank in the national

income distribution is close to linear. Controlling for CZ fixed effects, a one-standard-deviation

reduction in      is associated with a 3.1 percentile increase in mobility for children with parents

in the first decile (p-value equal to 0.15), a 3.6 percentile increase for children with parents in

the second decile (p-value equal to 0.16), and only a 1.34 percentile increase for children with

parents in the top decile (p-value equal to 0.56).


7.2     Two-Stages Least Squares Estimates

Household sorting after each school finance reform directly affects both                       and intergenera-

tional mobility: OLS estimates will therefore be biased and cannot be interpreted as causal. To

get at the causal effects, in Table IV I re-estimate the specifications in Table II via 2SLS, using
ˆsim (as defined in Section 6) and ˆsim ⇥✓n(xc) as instruments for ˆs(c)b and ˆs(c)b ⇥✓n(xc) . Esti-
 s(c)b                              s(c)b

mates of the first-stage equations, shown in Table III, indicate that ˆs(c)b
                                                                       sim is a strong instrument


for ˆs(c)b : the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistics are all close to 20.43

      2SLS estimates confirm the positive relationship between equalization and mobility, but

yield larger effects. Controlling for CZ fixed effects, a one-standard deviation reduction in

leads to a 5.8 percentile increase in mobility for children with parental income at the bottom

of the national distribution (estimate of          equal to -5.8120, Table IV, column 1, significant at 10

percent). A positive estimate for ( ⇥ parent centile, significant at 1 percent) indicates that this

effect decreases by 0.026 percentiles with each additional percentile of parental income. These

estimates translate into a 5.6 and 5.2 percentile increase for children with parental income in

the 10th and 25th percentiles (p-values 0.097 and 0.117) respectively, but only an insignificant

3.5 percentile increase for those with parents in the 90th percentile (p-value 0.256). These re-

sults also indicate that the average reform, which decreases                 by approximately 0.64 standard
  43
     This value is above the critical threshold of 7.03 proposed by Stock and Yogo (2002) for a test with two endoge-
nous variables, two instruments, and a test size equal to 0.10.




                                                         24
deviations, would increase mobility of children from families in the 10th percentile by 3.6 per-

centiles and close 13 percent of the gap between the lowest-mobility CZ (Clarksdale, MS) and

the highest-mobility CZ (Sioux Center, IA).

   As explained by Hoxby (2001), different reforms had different effects on overall school

spending in each state: some ended up increasing it, some reduced it. These changes could

have a direct effect on intergenerational mobility, above and beyond the change in spending

inequality captured by     (this effect can be seen in equation (5) through the variable Ks ). To

account for these changes, in columns 3 and 4 of Table IV I control for average per pupil expen-

diture in state s on cohort c (esb ). These estimates reveal that an increase in esb has a positive,

yet small and statistically insignificant effect on mobility. Importantly, the estimates of   0   and

  are robust to controlling for esb . These estimates highlight once more the importance of

studying changes in revenues and expenditures equalization, as opposed to levels, when the

outcome of interest is children’s intergenerational mobility.

   Estimates are slightly smaller when controlling for state fixed effects (Table IV, column 2).

Importantly, in all these specifications 2SLS estimates are approximately 50 percent larger than

OLS. This indicates that failure to account for the endogeneity of        would lead to severely

underestimating the effects of equalization.

   In Figure VII (dashed line) I estimate the effects of a decline in   separately for each decile

of parental income in the national distribution. The patterns of the estimates across the dis-

tribution of parental income resemble OLS, but the magnitudes are larger. A one-standard

deviation reduction in    leads to a 5.4 percentile increase in mobility for children with parental

income in the first decile (significant at 10 percent), but only 3.3 percentiles for children with

parental income in the top decile (p-value equal to 0.28).


Effects on Income     To better quantify the magnitude of these effects in monetary terms, I

use the national distribution of children’s income to map intergenerational mobility measures

by CZ, cohort, and parental income percentile into income levels, and I use the logarithm of

children’s income (conditional on parents’ income rank) as the dependent variable in equation

(10). 2SLS estimates, shown in column 3 of Table V, indicate that a one-standard deviation

reduction in   leads to a 17 percent increase in income for children of parents at the bottom of

the income distribution (with an estimate of      equal to -0.1574, and exp(0.1574)-1=0.17, Table

V, column 3, significant at 10 percent). This effect declines by less than 0.1 percent with each



                                                25
additional percentile of parents’ income (estimate of                  ⇥ parent centile equal to 0.0007, Table

V, column 3, significant at 1 percent). This implies that a one-standard-deviation reduction

in         leads to a 16.2 percent increase in income for children with parental income in the 10th

percentile (p-value 0.095), a 14.9 percent increase for children with parental income in the 25th

percentile (p-value equal to 0.115), and a smaller and insignificant 9.5 percent increase for

children with parental income in the 90th percentile (p-value equal to 0.27). Estimates are

robust to controlling for state fixed effects (Table V, column 4).


Reduced-Form Estimates While useful to capture the causal effects of equalization on mo-

bility, 2SLS estimates might be difficult to use for policy purposes: Since households can sort

after a reform, policy-makers do not have direct control on , but only on                 sim   though changes

in the formula type and parameters. To obtain estimates that can more easily inform public

policies, in columns 5 and 6 of Table IV I estimate the reduced-form effect of                  sim   on intergen-

erational mobility. These estimates indicate that a one-standard deviation decline in                    sim   leads

to a 4.44 percentile increase in the income rank of children with parents in the 10th percentile

(significant at 5 percent). This positive and large estimate implies that a reform which – absent

household responses – is effective at equalizing revenues across districts can have significant

effects on children’s mobility.


Estimates Using Jackson, Johnson, and Persico’s (2015) IV Approaches                        In Table AIV I re-

estimate equation (10) instrumenting                  with the slope coefficient of equation (6) obtained using

JJP’s instruments for expenditure (Jackson et al., 2015, approaches 1 and 2, pages 171-179;

I explain the procedure in more depth in Appendix C).44 These estimates reveal smaller and

imprecise effects of equalization on intergenerational mobility. The significant differences with

my 2SLS estimates indicate that failing to account for heterogeneity in funding formulas across

states could generate biased estimates of the effects of equalization.


7.2.1         Heterogeneous Effects of Equalization by School Grade

The effects of school finance equalization could differ depending on whether equalization hap-

pens earlier or later during a child’s education path. On one hand, a large literature has es-

tablished that education investments made at earlier ages yield higher returns (see Cunha and

Heckman, 2010, for a review). On the other hand, equalization could be beneficial during high
     44
          The first stage estimates are shown in Table AIII.


                                                               26
school if it facilitates the transition to college for lower-income children, as college attendance

is an important engine for mobility (Rothstein, 2019).

   To explore this potential heterogeneity, I estimate the effects of a decline in                          separately

for cohorts in states with a reform during elementary, middle, and high school. I augment

equation (10) as follows:


                  ˆ     + ˆs(c)b ⇥ ✓n(xc) +     e
                                                            ⇥ ˆs(c)b +      e
                                                                                Els(c)b ⇥ ˆs(c)b ⇥ ✓n(xc)
Mcbx =        0 s(c)b                           0 Els(c)b                                                            (11)

             +⌘ m Mids(c)b +      m
                                  0 Mids(c)b   ⇥ ˆs(c)b +        m
                                                                     Mids(c)b ⇥ ˆs(c)b ⇥ ✓n(xc)

             +⌘ hs HSs(c)b +     hs
                                 0 HSs(c)b   ⇥ ˆs(c)b +     hs
                                                                 HSs(c)b ⇥ ˆs(c)b ⇥ ✓n(xc) + c + ⌧b + ✓n(xc) + !cbx


where Els(c)b , Mids(c)b , and HSs(c)b equal one if cohort b in state s experienced a reform dur-

ing elementary school (grades 1-5), middle school (grades 6-8), or high school (grades 9-12),

respectively. In this specification, the parameters               0, 0 ,
                                                                  e m      and     hs
                                                                                   0    represent the additional effect

of a one-standard-deviation increase in            on the income percentile of children with the lowest-

ranked parental income, for cohorts in states where a reform hit during elementary, middle,

and high school, respectively, and relative to cohorts and states without a reform. The param-

eters   e,   m,   and   hs   measure instead how much these effects vary as parents’ income ranks

increase.

   2SLS estimates of equation (11) indicate that a decline in                           is most effective when the re-

form happens during elementary school, relative to middle and high school. Controlling for

CZ fixed effects, a one-standard deviation reduction in                      leads to an additional 8.5 percentile

increase in the income rank of children with parents at the bottom of the income distribution

for cohorts with a reform during elementary school, relative to those with no reform (with an

estimate of ⇥ reform in elementary school equal to -8.458, Table VI, column 3, significant at 10

percent). This effect declines by 0.09 percentiles with each additional percentile of parents’

income (estimate of           ⇥ parent centile⇥ reform in elementary school equal to 0.0859, Table VI,

column 3, significant at 1 percent). These estimates imply that, when a reform hits during ele-

mentary school, a reduction in          leads to an additional 7.6 percentile and 6.3 percentile higher

in mobility for children with parental income in the 10th and 25th percentiles, respectively,

with no significant difference for children with parents in the 90th percentile.

   By comparison, a one-standard-deviation decline in                            leads to a smaller 4.4 and 4.2 ad-

ditional percentiles in the income rank of children with parents at the bottom of the income


                                                            27
distribution if the reform hits during middle or high school, respectively (with an estimate of

 ⇥ reform in middle school equal to -4.412 and of ⇥ reform in high school equal to -4.296, Table

VI, column 3, p-values equal to 0.19 and 0.24). These effects decline by 0.02 percentiles with

each additional percentile of parents’ income (estimate of                     ⇥ parent centile⇥ reform in middle

school equal to 0.024 and of                    ⇥ parent centile⇥ reform in high school equal to 0.019, Table VI,

column 3, significant at 10 and 5 percent, respectively). This implies that a reduction in                    for

these cohorts leads to a 4.1 percentile, 3.8 percentile, and 2.5 percentile increase in mobility

for children with parental income in the 10th, 25th, and 90th percentiles. All these estimates

are robust to controlling for state fixed effects (Table VI, column 4); OLS estimates, shown in

columns 1 and 3 of Table VI, are smaller in magnitude but indicate similar patterns.

       Consistently with the literature on early childhood investments, these estimates indicate

that equalization in school resources is most effective when experienced earlier in a child’s

education career. Once more, the differences between OLS and 2SLS estimates highlights the

importance of accounting for the endogeneity in post-reform revenues.


7.2.2       Equalization and Income Inequality

The results presented so far indicate that a decline in                has a positive effect on intergenerational

mobility, especially for children from low-income families. Intuitively, equalization in school

spending closes the gap in investments on the education of low- and high-income students,

and this promotes equalization in their later-life outcomes.

       The positive average effects of equalization could, however, mask important differences

across CZs depending on how income is distributed across school districts. To see this, con-

sider two CZs in the same state, each containing only two districts. The first has one district

with per capita income equal to $25,000 and per pupil expenditure equal to $7,000 and one

district with income equal to $75,000 and expenditure equal to $9,000. The second has one dis-

trict with income equal to $15,000 and expenditure equal to $5,500 and one district with income

equal to $85,000 and expenditure equal to $8,300. Both CZs have an estimated                     equal to 0.23.45

Due to a more unequal income distribution, however, children in the lowest-spending district

in the second CZ will receive $2,800 less compared with children in the highest-spending dis-

trict (or 34 percent). Children in the lowest-spending district in the first CZ, which has a more

equal income distribution, will receive only $2,000 less compared with children in the highest-
  45         9,000 7,000         8,300 5,500
        =   75,000 25,000
                            =   85,000 15,000
                                                = 0.04.



                                                               28
spending district (or 29 percent). The same reduction in                       could therefore have very different

implications in these two CZs.

          To investigate the heterogeneity in the effects of equalization across CZs with different in-

come inequality, I re-estimate equation (10) separately for CZs above and below the national

median level of inequality, measured as the percentage difference in per capita income be-

tween the richest and the poorest district.46 Estimates of                       0   and    indicate that a decline in

     has smaller effects in CZs with income differences in the bottom 25 percent of the cross-CZ

distribution (“Low inequality,” Table VII, columns 1 and 2) relative to CZs in the top 25 percent

(“High inequality,” columns 3 and 4). Controlling for CZ fixed effects, a one-standard devi-

ation decline in         in “Low inequality” CZs leads to a 4.6, 4.2, and 2.4 percentile increase for

children with parents in the 10th, 25th, and 90th percentile respectively (with an estimate of

equal to -4.8634 and of ⇥ parent centile equal to 0.0269, Table VII, column 1, p-values equal

to 0.19 and 0.02). These effects are instead larger in “High inequality” CZs: The same decline

in         leads to a 6.2, 5.8, and 4.4 percentile increase for children with parents in the 10th, 25th,

and 90th percentile respectively (with an estimate of                    equal to -6.3731 and of ⇥ parent centile

equal to 0.0221, Table VII, column 3, significant at 10 and 1 percent respectively). Estimates are

robust to controlling for state fixed effects (Table VII, column 4).47


7.2.3        Equalization and Income Segregation

The effects of a decline in             could also vary according to the degree of income segregation

across districts within each CZ. When segregation is high, children from low-income families

are more likely to be living and attending school in the same district and, in turn, more likely

to benefit from the relative increase in school expenditure following a school finance reform.

          To test this hypothesis, I re-estimate equation (10) separately for CZs above and below the

national median level of income segregation, measured using the Theil index of districts’ 1990

income within each CZ.48 Estimates of                 0   and     indicate that, controlling for CZ fixed effects,

a one-standard deviation decline in                  in “Low segregation” CZs leads to a 5.2, 4.8, and 3.2

percentile increase for children with parents in the 10th, 25th, and 90th percentile respectively

(with an estimate of         equal to -5.4864 and of ⇥ parent centile equal to 0.0253, Table VII, column
     46
     I calculate this difference using incomes from 1990.
     47
     OLS estimates are shown in Table AV.
  48                                          P      yi    yi
     The Theil index is calculated as Tc = N1    i2c ȳ ln ȳc , where i denotes a district, c denotes a CZ, yi is a district’s
income, and ȳc is median income in the CZ.




                                                             29
1, significant at 10 and 1 percent). Equalization is slightly more effective in CZs with high

income segregation: The same decline in            leads to a 5.8, 5.5, and 3.9 percentile increase for

children with parents in the 10th, 25th, and 90th percentiles, respectively (with an estimate of

  equal to -6.0725 and of ⇥ parent centile equal to 0.0237, Table VIII, column 3, p-values equal

to 0.11 and 0.001, respectively). Estimates are robust to controlling for state fixed effects (Table

VIII, columns 2 and 4).49

       Taken together, these results suggest that the effectiveness of an equalization reform de-

pends on the geographic distribution of income. This heterogeneity could have important

implications for the design of school finance plans.


7.3      Robustness

Estimating         Without Income Interpolation The above estimates are obtained imputing in-

come for intercensal years, using the procedure outlined in Section 5. To check that results are

not dependent on this imputation procedure, in Table AVIII I re-estimate the main specifica-

tions with a version of         estimated using income data from 1990 for all years. These estimates

are similar to those in Table IV, indicating that the main results are not driven by this imputa-

tion procedure.


CZs Without a State Border Out of 327 CZs included in the analysis, 53 are crossed by one or

more state borders (for example, the CZ of New York City, NY also includes Newark, NJ). The

same decline in        might have different effects in one-state and multi-state CZs. On one hand, if

sorting across state borders is more costly than sorting within states, the endogeneity problem

might be more pressing in one-state CZs. On the other hand, a decline in              in a multi-state

CZ might be driven by a change in revenues and expenditures only in some districts (but not

all) and therefore be driven by a much larger absolute change in expenditure in the affected

districts. Table AVII shows 2SLS estimates of the main specifications separately for one-state

and multi-state CZs. Estimates are fairly comparable in magnitude across the two groups,

indicating that the results are not driven by the presence or absence of borders.
  49
       OLS estimates are shown in Table AVI.




                                                    30
8         Channels: School Inputs and Intermediate Outcomes

The results described so far show that equalizing school funding across richer and poorer dis-

tricts increases intergenerational mobility for children from low-income families. This section

investigates the mechanisms behind these effects, focusing on the role of school inputs and on

the effects of equalization on intermediate educational outcomes.


8.1        Inputs: Teacher-Student Ratio

School finance equalization is often described as a way of “leveling the playing field,” i.e., re-

ducing the gap in educational inputs between more and less disadvantaged children. To test

this hypothesis I study the effects of equalization on the gap in inputs between low-income

and high-income districts. I focus on the teacher-student ratio: Teachers are among the most

important factors for student learning (Chetty et al., 2014), and an adequate number of teach-

ers per student is fundamental for the growth in achievement (Krueger and Whitmore, 2001;

Bloom and Unterman, 2013). Yet underfunded districts are often forced to cut instructional

staff to face budget shortages.50

         I investigate the effects of a reduction in               on the teacher-student ratio, measured at the

district-year level, allowing this effect to vary across low-income and high-income districts. I

estimate the following equation:


                              ˆ       1q        ˆ       2q        ˆ       3q        ˆ       4q
                  T Sdt =    1 s(d)t qdt   +   2 s(d)t qdt   +   3 s(d)t qdt   +   4 s(d)t qdt     +   d   + ⌧t + "dt           (12)


                                                                                nq
where T Sdt is the teacher-student ratio of district d in year t; the variable qdt equals 1 for

districts in the n-th quartile of the state income distribution in 1990, and the vectors                                 d   and ⌧st

control for district and year fixed effects. The parameters                         1,   2,   3,   and     4   capture the effects

of equalization on the teacher-student ratio in districts in the first, second, third and fourth

quartile of the income distribution.

         Table IX shows OLS and 2SLS estimates of equation (12). OLS results indicate a positive

relationship between equalization and the number of teachers per student in low-income dis-

tricts and a negative (but imprecise) relationship in high-income ones; these effects, however,

are indistinguishable from zero (Table IX, column 2). 2SLS estimates, shown in columns 3 and
    50
         From an analysis of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                 31
4, yield larger and marginally significant positive effects on low-income districts, but no effect

on high-income ones. Controlling for district fixed effects, a one-standard deviation reduction

in     leads to 0.0076 additional teachers per student in districts in the bottom quartile, or 11

percent more (Table IX, column 4, significant at 5 percent). The same estimate is 0.0017 for

districts in the top quartile and it is indistinguishable from zero (Table IX, column 3, p-value

equal to 0.68).

      Taken together, these estimates indicate that equalizing school spending across richer and

poorer districts promotes intergenerational mobility by reducing the gap in educational in-

puts between low-income and high-income districts. This reduction is achieved through an

improvement in the teacher-student ratio in low-income districts, with no significant change

in high-income ones.


8.2     Intermediate Outcome: College Enrollment

Rothstein (2019) and Chetty et al. (2017) suggest a positive association between college en-

rollment and intergenerational income mobility. To understand whether higher education is

one of the channels through which school finance equalization affects income mobility, I study

the effect of equalization on education mobility. To do this, I re-estimate equation (10) using

the probability of college enrollment at age 19 (expressed in percentage points and measured

separately for each CZ, cohort, and parent percentile within the CZ) as the dependent variable.

      Controlling for CZ fixed effects, 2SLS estimates indicate that a one-standard deviation re-

duction in     leads to a 7.8 percentage point increase in the probability of college enrollment

for children from families at the bottom of the income distribution, although this estimate is

imprecise (estimate of     equal to -0.0777, Table X, column 1, p-value equal to 0.45). Compared

with an average probability of 55.6 percent, this implies a 14 percent increase. This effect is

reduced by 0.02 percentage points for each additional percentile of parental income (estimate

of ⇥ parent centile, Table X, column 1, significant at 5 percent). These estimates imply that the

same reduction in     leads to a 7.6 and 7.3 percentage point increase in the probability of college

enrollment for children with parents in the 10th and 25th percentile, and a 6.1 percentage point

increase for children with parents in the 90th percentile.

      Estimates of the heterogeneous effects of a decline in      by timing of the reform yields

slightly larger effects of equalization in school revenues when experienced during high school,

compared to elementary and middle school. A one-standard deviation decline in               during


                                                 32
high school leads to a 37 percentage points increase in the probability of college enrollment for

children at the bottom of the parental income distribution; the same reduction leads to a 34

percentage point decline if experienced during elementary or middle school (Table X, column

7, p-values equal to 0.11 and 0.08, respectively).

    These estimates should be interpreted with caution because they are imprecise. They do,

however, suggest that access to college could be one of the channels through which school

finance equalization improves low-income children’s long-run outcomes. The effects of equal-

ization on college enrollment appear slightly larger when equalization is experienced during

high school; this can appear in contrast with the estimates in Section 7. Intuitively, however,

high school is the moment of a student’s career that immediately precedes college; this might

explain why equalization in school resources at this particular point in time appears to be

important for college access.



9   Discussion and Conclusion

This paper studies the effects of equalization in school revenues across public school districts

within each state on students’ intergenerational income mobility. Using variation in states’

funding schemes introduced by school finance reforms and exploiting differences in expo-

sure to equalized schemes across cohorts in different states, I find that equalization increases

intergenerational mobility of children from more disadvantaged backgrounds, with insignifi-

cant effects on wealthier children. My results also suggest that equalization increases mobility

through a reduction in the gap in educational inputs (such as the number of teachers) and in

intermediate outcomes (such as college enrollment) between wealthier and poorer districts.

    While being a useful source of variation in funding, school finance reforms should be used

with caution. Funding formulas link property tax revenues to school spending, and tax rev-

enues could be endogenous to mobility. Changes in tax revenues could happen, for example,

if households respond to the change in the tax price introduced by each reform by “voting

with their feet” and moving across districts. This sorting affects house prices and the property

tax base, which in turn affect school districts’ revenues. Importantly, I show that both house-

hold incentives to sort across districts and the ultimate effects on equalization are idiosyncratic

to each reform; this stresses the importance of keeping this heterogeneity into account in the

empirical analysis to obtain unbiased and precise estimates of the effects.



                                                33
   To account for this source of endogeneity and for the differences in funding formulas across

states, I use an instrumental-variable approach that directly exploits the change in the formula

type and parameters following each reform. Using hand-collected information on each pre-

reform and post-reform formula type and parameters, combined with district-level data on the

variables entering each formula, I simulate each district’s post-reform revenues in the absence

of sorting. Simulated revenues can then be used as an instrument for actual expenditure.

2SLS estimates are approximately 50 percent larger in magnitude than OLS. This shows that

not properly accounting for the endogeneity of post-reform expenditure could lead to biased

estimates of the effects of equalization.

   At a first glance, these findings might appear in contrast with Rothstein (2019), who uses

a correlational analysis to conclude that differences in school quality across the US play a mi-

nor role in explaining the observed cross-sectional variation in intergenerational mobility. My

results, however, do not necessarily disprove Rothstein’s argument. In fact, they confirm that

school quality explains a small share (approximately 10 percent) of the total variance in mo-

bility. In spite of this, they also show that equalizing school expenditure has a causal positive

effect on the educational and labor market outcomes of disadvantaged children. This in turn

implies that this type of policy represents an important engine of mobility for low-income

children. These results are in line with Jackson et al. (2015), who show that increased school

spending improves long-run outcomes of disadvantaged students. In addition, my analysis

highlights the importance of accounting for differences across states in the effects of each re-

form on revenues and in household responses to each reform, and it proposes the direct use of

funding formulas as an instrument to obtain more reliable estimates–an approach that can be

used in other studies as well.




                                               34
References

Aaronson, D. (1999). The effect of school finance reform on population heterogeneity. National

  Tax Journal, 5–29.

Abadie, A., S. Athey, G. W. Imbens, and J. Wooldridge (2017). When should you adjust stan-

  dard errors for clustering? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Acciari, P., A. Polo, and G. Violante (2019). And yet, it moves: Intergenerational economic

  mobility in italy.

Angrist, J. D. and G. W. Imbens (1995). Two-stage least squares estimation of average causal

  effects in models with variable treatment intensity. Journal of the American Statistical Associa-

  tion 90(430), 431–442.

Angrist, J. D., G. W. Imbens, and D. B. Rubin (1996). Identification of causal effects using

  instrumental variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association 91(434), 444–455.

Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1979). An equilibrium theory of the distribution of income and

  intergenerational mobility. Journal of Political Economy, 1153–1189.

Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1994). Human capital and the rise and fall of families. In Human

  Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to Education (3rd Edition),

  pp. 257–298. The University of Chicago Press.

Björklund, A. and M. Jäntti (1997). Intergenerational income mobility in Sweden compared to

  the United States. American Economic Review 87(5), 1009–1018.

Bloom, H. S. and R. Unterman (2013). Sustained progress: New findings about the effectiveness

  and operation of small public high schools of choice in New York City.

Bogin, A., W. Doerner, and W. Larson (2016). Local house price dynamics: New indices and

  stylized facts. Real Estate Economics.

Cameron, A. C. and D. L. Miller (2015). A practitioner’s guide to cluster-robust inference.

  Journal of Human Resources 50(2), 317–372.

Card, D., C. Domnisoru, and L. Taylor (2018). The intergenerational transmission of human

  capital: Evidence from the golden age of upward mobility. Technical report.

                                                35
Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1992). Does school quality matter? returns to education and the

  characteristics of public schools in the United States. Journal of Political Economy 100(1), 1–40.

Card, D. and A. A. Payne (2002). School finance reform, the distribution of school spending,

  and the distribution of student test scores. Journal of Public Economics 83(1), 49–82.

Cascio, E. U., N. Gordon, and S. Reber (2013). Local responses to federal grants: Evidence

  from the introduction of title i in the south. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(3),

  126–59.

Cascio, E. U. and S. Reber (2013). The poverty gap in school spending following the introduc-

  tion of title i. American Economic Review 103(3), 423–27.

Chakrabarti, R. and J. Roy (2015). Housing markets and residential segregation: Impacts of

  the Michigan school finance reform on inter-and intra-district sorting. Journal of Public Eco-

  nomics 122, 110–132.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014). Measuring the impacts of teachers II:

  Teacher value-added and student outcomes in adulthood. American Economic Review 104(9),

  2633–2679.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, E. Saez, N. Turner, and D. Yagan (2017). Mobility report cards: The

  role of colleges in intergenerational mobility. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic

  Research.

Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018a). The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobil-

  ity i: Childhood exposure effects. Quarterly Journal of Economics forthcoming.

Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018b). The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobil-

  ity ii: County-level estimates. Quarterly Journal of Economics forthcoming.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. F. Katz (2016). The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods

  on children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experiment. American Economic

  Review 106(4), 855–902.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014). Where is the land of opportunity? the geog-

  raphy of intergenerational mobility in the United States. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4),

  1553–1623.


                                                36
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, E. Saez, and N. Turner (2014). Is the United States still a land of

  opportunity? recent trends in intergenerational mobility. American Economic Review 104(5),

  141–147.

Coleman, J. S. et al. (1966). Equality of educational opportunity.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2010). Investing in our young people. Technical report, National

  Bureau of Economic Research.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010). Estimating the technology of cognitive

  and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78(3), 883–931.

Dee, T. S. (2000). The capitalization of education finance reforms. The Journal of Law and Eco-

  nomics 43(1), 185–214.

Downes, T. A., D. N. Figlio, et al. (1997). School finance reforms, tax limits, and student performance:

  Do reforms level up or dumb down? Institute for Research on Poverty Madison, WI.

Dynarski, S., J. Hyman, and D. W. Schanzenbach (2013). Experimental evidence on the effect

  of childhood investments on postsecondary attainment and degree completion. Journal of

  Policy Analysis and Management 32(4), 692–717.

Epple, D. and M. M. Ferreyra (2008). School finance reform: Assessing general equilibrium

  effects. Journal of Public Economics 92(5-6), 1326–1351.

Figlio, D. N. and M. E. Lucas (2004). What’s in a grade? School report cards and the housing

  market. American Economic Review 94(3), 591–604.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., I. Sorkin, and H. Swift (2018). Bartik instruments: What, when, why,

  and how. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Greene, W. H. (2008). Econometric Analysis (6th Edition). Upper Saddle River, N.J. : Prentice

  Hall.

Gruber, J. and E. Saez (2002). The elasticity of taxable income: evidence and implications.

  Journal of Public Economics 84(1), 1–32.

Guryan, J. (2001). Does money matter? regression-discontinuity estimates from education

  finance reform in Massachusetts. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                  37
Hanushek, E. A. (1986). The economics of schooling: Production and efficiency in public

  schools. Journal of Economic Literature, 1141–1177.

Hanushek, E. A. (1997). Assessing the effects of school resources on student performance: An

  update. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 19(2), 141–164.

Hanushek, E. A. (2003). The failure of input-based schooling policies. The Economic Jour-

  nal 113(485).

Havnes, T. and M. Mogstad (2015). Is universal child care leveling the playing field? Journal of

  Public Economics 127, 100–114.

Howell, P. L. and B. B. Miller (1997). Sources of funding for schools. The future of children,

  39–50.

Hoxby, C. M. (1998). How much does school spending depend on family income? the historical

  origins of the current school finance dilemma. American Economic Review 88(2), 309–314.

Hoxby, C. M. (2001). All school finance equalizations are not created equal. Quarterly Journal

  of Economics 116(4), 1189–1231.

Hoxby, C. M. and I. Kuziemko (2004). Robin hood and his not-so-merry plan: Capitalization

  and the self-destruction of texas’ school finance equalization plan. Technical report, National

  Bureau of Economic Research.

Hyman, J. (2017). Does money matter in the long run? Effects of school spending on educa-

  tional attainment. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9(4), 256–80.

Jackson, C. K., R. Johnson, and C. Persico (2014). The effect of school finance reforms on

  the distribution of spending, academic achievement, and adult outcomes. Technical report,

  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jackson, C. K., R. C. Johnson, and C. Persico (2015). The effects of school spending on educa-

  tional and economic outcomes: Evidence from school finance reforms. Quarterly Journal of

  Economics 131(1), 157–218.

Krueger, A. B. (1999). Experimental estimates of education production functions. Quarterly

  Journal of Economics 114(2), 497–532.



                                               38
Krueger, A. B. and D. M. Whitmore (2001). The effect of attending a small class in the early

  grades on college-test taking and middle school test results: Evidence from Project STAR.

  The Economic Journal 111(468), 1–28.

Lafortune, J., J. Rothstein, and D. W. Schanzenbach (2018). School finance reform and the

  distribution of student achievement. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10(2),

  1–26.

Lee, C.-I. and G. Solon (2009). Trends in intergenerational income mobility. The Review of

  Economics and Statistics 91(4), 766–772.

Lindseth, A. A. (2004). Educational adequacy lawsuits: The rest of the story. PEPG 04-07.

  Program on Education Policy and Governance.

Ludwig, J., G. J. Duncan, L. A. Gennetian, L. F. Katz, R. C. Kessler, J. R. Kling, and L. San-

  bonmatsu (2013). Long-term neighborhood effects on low-income families: Evidence from

  Moving to Opportunity. American Economic Review 103(3), 226–31.

Manwaring, R. L. and S. M. Sheffrin (1997). Litigation, school finance reform, and aggregate

  educational spending. International Tax and Public Finance 4(2), 107–127.

Meghir, C. and M. Palme (2005). Educational reform, ability, and family background. American

  Economic Review 95(1), 414–424.

Mogstad, M., A. Torgovitsky, and C. R. Walters (2019). Identification of causal effects with

  multiple instruments: Problems and some solutions. Technical report, National Bureau of

  Economic Research.

Murray, S. E., W. N. Evans, and R. M. Schwab (1998). Education-finance reform and the distri-

  bution of education resources. American Economic Review, 789–812.

Papke, L. E. (2005). The effects of spending on test pass rates: evidence from Michigan. Journal

  of Public Economics 89(5), 821–839.

Pekkarinen, T., R. Uusitalo, and S. Kerr (2009). School tracking and intergenerational income

  mobility: Evidence from the finnish comprehensive school reform. Journal of Public Eco-

  nomics 93(7-8), 965–973.




                                                39
Picus, L. O. and L. Hertert (1993). Three strikes and you’re out: Texas school finance after

  Edgewood III. Journal of Education Finance, 366–389.

Rothstein, J. (2019). Inequality of educational opportunity? schools as mediators of the inter-

  generational transmission of income. Journal of Labor Economics 37(S1), S85–S123.

Roy, J. (2011). Impact of school finance reform on resource equalization and academic perfor-

  mance: Evidence from Michigan. Education 6(2), 137–167.

Silva, F. and J. Sonstelie (1995). Did serrano cause a decline in school spending? National Tax

  Journal, 199–215.

Solon, G. (1992). Intergenerational income mobility in the United States. American Economic

  Review, 393–408.

Solon, G. (1999). Intergenerational mobility in the labor market. Handbook of Labor Economics 3,

  1761–1800.

Solon, G. (2002). Cross-country differences in intergenerational earnings mobility. Journal of

  Economic Perspectives 16(3), 59–66.

Stevens, N. (1989). Texas school finance system: New legislation. Journal of Education Finance,

  269–277.

Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2002). Testing for weak instruments in linear iv regression.

Tiebout, C. M. (1956). A pure theory of local expenditures. Journal of Political Economy, 416–424.

Verstegen, D. A. and T. S. Jordan (2009). A fifty-state survey of school finance policies and

  programs: An overview. Journal of Education Finance, 213–230.

Wolff, E. N. and A. Zacharias (2009). Household wealth and the measurement of economic

  well-being in the United States. The Journal of Economic Inequality 7(2), 83–115.




                                               40
     Figure I: Event Study of Equalization Measure       Around A School Finance Reform




Note: Point
       P estimates and 90 percent confidence intervals for the coefficients k in regression
  st =    k k Rs 1(t   ryears = k) + "st , where st is the slope coefficient in equation (6), es-
timated separately for each state s and year t from 1986 to 2004, Rs equals 1 if state s had a
school finance reform in the years 1980-2004, and ryears is the year of the first reform in this
time period. The coefficient 1 is normalized to equal zero. Standard errors are clustered at
the state level. The sample is restricted to California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Ken-
tucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New
York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and Wisconsin.




                                                41
    Figure II: Equalization Measure    Around A School Finance Reform - Selected States




Note: The figure shows estimates of the coefficient st (defined in equation (6)) for a sample of
states in the years surrounding each school finance reform.




                                              42
Figure III: Event Studies of Migration Rates (Top Panel) and Incomes of Migrants vs Incum-
bents (Bottom Panel) Around A School Finance Reform




Note: Changes in total migration rates and incomes of migrants in a 10-year window around
each school finance reform. Each point and spike represent thePestimate and the 90 percent
confidence interval of the coefficients n in the regression ykt = 5n= 5 n Rs(k) 1(t ryeark =
n) + k + ⌧t + "kt , where Rs(k) equals 1 if state s of county k experienced a school finance
reform in the years 1980-2004, ryears(k) is the year of the earliest reform, k are county fixed
effects, and ⌧t are year fixed effects. In the top panel, ykt is the total in-migration or out-
migration rate in county k and year t (the ratio between the sum of in-migrants or out-migrants
and the total population in each county). In the bottom panel, ykt is the absolute percentage
difference between incomes of in-migrants or out-migrants and incomes of stayers in county k
and year t, divided by 100. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. County-year level
observations are weighted by population. Data on migration are from the Statistics of Income
of the Internal Revenue Service and cover years from 1991 to 2004.




                                              43
   Figure IV: Variation in House Prices Around a School Finance Reform - Selected States




Note: Changes in the difference in house prices between households with incomes above
and below the median in 1990, in a 10-year window around each reform and relative to the
year before the reform. Each point and spike represent the estimate   P6 and the 90 percent con-
fidence interval of the coefficients n in the regression HPdt =         n= 4 n 1(Incomed,1990 >
M edians )Rs(d) 1(t ryears(d) = n) + ✓d + ⌧t + "dt , where HPdt is the house price index of
district d in year t, Incomed,1990 is average household income of district d in 1990, M edians is
median household income across districts in state s in 1990, Rs(d) equals 1 if state s where the
district is located experienced a school finance reform in the years 1980-2004, ryears(d) is the
year of the earliest reform, and ✓d and ⌧t are district and year fixed effects. The coefficient 1
is normalized to zero. The parameters are estimated separately for each state. Standard errors
are clustered at the district level. Observations are weighted by population. Annual House
Price Indexes data are taken from the FHFA, aggregated at the district level using population
weights, and cover years from 1986 to 2004.




                                               44
Figure V: Simulated and Actual Revenues, Districts In The Top And Bottom Quartiles of Ex-
penditure - Selected States




Note: Trends in average simulated and actual per pupil revenues, for districts in the top and
bottom quartiles of the state’s distribution of per pupil expenditure at the beginning of each
sample. Vertical lines denote reform years. Simulated expenditures are calculated using the
funding formula in place in every state and year and pre-reform district variables, using the
procedure described in the text.




                                             45
Figure VI: Changes in Intergenerational Income Mobility by Exposure to a School Finance
Reform, in States with Effective vs. Ineffective Reforms




Note: The figure shows OLS points  Pestimates and 90 percent confidence intervals of the coef-
ficients n in the equation mcb = 12   n= 6 n En(sb) + ✓c + ⌧b + "cv , where mcb is the mean rank
of children in CZ c, cohort b, and with parents’ income on the 25th percentile in the national
income distribution, En equals one if cohort b in state s was exposed to a post-school finance
reform regime for n years (and En = b + 17 ryears , where ryears is the year of the first
school finance reform in state s between 1980 and 2004), and the vectors ✓c and ⌧b contain CZ
and cohort fixed effects. Estimates are obtained and shown separately for states with effective
reforms (i.e. those which resulted in a negative post-reform or a decline in of at least 50 per-
cent, including Colorado, Kentucky, Montana, Nebraska, Texas, and Wisconsin, solid line) and
ineffective reforms (including Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, and New Jer-
sey, dashed line), using states with no reform (including California, Florida, Georgia, Illinois,
New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Utah) as a control group. Observations are
at the CZ ⇥ birth cohort level, and they are weighted by the number of children in each CZ
and cohort. The coefficient 0 is normalized to equal zero for both groups. Standard errors are
clustered at the state and cohort level.




                                               46
              Figure VII: Effect of an Increase in , by Parents’ Income Percentile




Note: OLS (solid line) and 2SLS (dashed line) Pestimates and     90-percent confidence intervals for
the coefficients d in the regression Mcxb = 10        d D      ˆ
                                                          d(cx) s(c)b + c + ✓n(xc) + b + !cxb , where
                                                d=1
Mcxb is the average national income percentile of children with parents on the x percentile of
the CZ income distribution, born in cohort b in CZ c, ˆs(c)b is the estimated, cohort-specific
measure of school finance equalization, Dd(cx) equals 1 if the income of the parents of children
in cohort c and percentile x falls in decile d of the national distribution, ✓n(xc) are fixed effects
for the parent percentile on the national income distribution, c are CZ fixed effects, and b are
cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state and birth level. The sample is re-
stricted to California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Penn-
sylvania, Utah, Texas, and Wisconsin.




                                                 47
Table I: Summary Statistics: School District Revenues, Intergenerational Mobility, and Mea-
sures of Equalization ( )

                                  Panel A: Per Pupil Revenues and Income
                                                     mean    sd     median              min       max         N
Median income
1980                                                     36417      11041   33961      18286     67924    7578
1990                                                     46552      17916   41249      18149     115499   7621
2000                                                     44018      15891   37500      17500     87500    7936
2010                                                     42974      16444   46250      14800     92500    7942
     exp, richest vs poorest district within state ($)
1986                                                      3031      5964    -1065      -1262     14162    2788
1990                                                      4012      4539    2320       -4024     12965    4895
2000                                                      2135      6242     885       -13014    15415    7146
2004                                                      1185      7264    -330       -8083     18120    6653
     exp, richest vs poorest district within CZ ($)
1986                                                      1291      4731     377       -13816    13890    2788
1990                                                      1223      3750     451       -11045    14518    4895
2000                                                      104       5046    -153       -16378    17917    7146
2004                                                      297       5744    -256       -16299    18332    6653

                       Panel B: Intergenerational Income Mobility Measures
                 Expected Income Percentile of Children by Percentile of the Parents
                     10th           25th           75th                       90th
1980-82               0.394             0.435             0.569                         0.609
                     (0.040)           (0.033)           (0.024)                       (0.028)
1983-86               0.398             0.437             0.567                         0.607
                     (0.034)           (0.030)           (0.031)                       (0.036)
N (CZs)                589               589               589                           589
                         Panel C: Measures of School Finance Equalization ( )
                     All        No reform        Pre-Reform       Post-Reform                    Difference
                    0.011            0.028                 0.044             -0.009              -0.053⇤⇤⇤
                   (0.068)          (0.091)               (0.038)            (0.048)              (0.008)
 s                  0.016            0.028                 0.044             -0.000              -0.045⇤⇤⇤
                   (0.067)          (0.091)               (0.039)            (0.048)              (0.008)
N (CZs)              283               93                    45                145                  190
 Note: Panel A: Summary statistics of income and per-pupil revenues (measured in 2000 dollars), and
difference in per-pupil revenues between the highest-income district and the lowest-income district
within each state and CZ. Panel B: Means and standard deviations of CZ-cohort level intergenera-
tional mobility measures for cohorts 1980 to 1986, published as part of the Opportunity Insights Project
(https://opportunityinsights.org/). Panel C: means and standard deviations of the slope coefficient in
equation (6), estimated separately for each state and year using actual revenues ( ) and simulated rev-
enues ( sim ). In Panels A and C, the sample is restricted to school districts and CZs in 20 states with
available data to construct the simulated instruments.

                                                         48
Table II: School Finance Equalization and Intergenerational Mobility. OLS, De-
pendent Variable is Children’s Income Percentile

                                           (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
                                        -3.8397    -3.7174     -3.7667     -3.6370
                                        (2.1546)   (2.1259)    (2.2392)    (2.2195)

  ⇥ parent centile                     0.0246⇤⇤⇤   0.0239⇤⇤⇤   0.0246⇤⇤⇤   0.0239⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.0044)    (0.0044)    (0.0044)    (0.0044)

 esb ($1,000)                                                   0.2472      0.2729
                                                               (0.8907)    (0.8886)

 Parent centile FE                        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

 Cohort FE                                Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

 CZ FE                                    Yes        No          Yes         No

 State FE                                 No         Yes         No          Yes
 N (CZ ⇥ parent cent. ⇥ cohort)          13578      13578       13578       13578

 Effect of a 1sd #   by parents’ percentile:
 10th                                     3.593      3.478       3.520       3.398
 10th [p-value]                          [0.146]    [0.153]     [0.166]     [0.177]
 25th                                     3.224      3.119       3.151       3.038
 25th [p-value]                          [0.184]    [0.194]     [0.207]     [0.220]
 90th                                     1.622      1.562       1.549       1.482
 90th [p-value]                          [0.480]    [0.499]     [0.512]     [0.534]
Note: The table shows OLS estimates of the parameters 0 and in equation (10).
The dependent variable is children’s income percentile in the national distribu-
tion for each parental income percentile in the distribution of each CZ, for co-
horts 1980 to 1986. The variable is the OLS estimate of the slope coefficient in
equation (6), computed separately for each state and cohort, and standardized
across all states and cohorts. The variable parent centile is the percentile of par-
ents in the national income distribution. The variable es is average per-pupil ex-
penditure for each state and cohort. All specifications include parent percentile
and cohort fixed effects; columns 1 and 3 include CZ fixed effects, and columns
2 and 4 include state fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered
at the state and birth cohort level. The sample is restricted to California, Col-
orado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and Wisconsin. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                           49
     Table III: School Finance Equalization and Intergenerational Mobility. 2SLS, First Stage

                                                 ⇥ parent centile                 ⇥ parent centile
                                        (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)
   simulated                        0.7526⇤⇤⇤        -12.6055⇤      0.7525⇤⇤⇤       -12.5859⇤
                                     (0.1204)         (6.2276)       (0.1203)        (6.2186)

   simulated ⇥ parent centile        0.0000          0.9908⇤⇤⇤        0.0000         0.9907⇤⇤⇤
                                    (0.0000)          (0.0163)       (0.0000)         (0.0166)

 Parent centile FE                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

 Cohort FE                             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

 CZ FE                                 Yes             Yes             No               No

 State FE                              No              No              Yes             Yes
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat          19.56                           19.58
 N (CZ ⇥ parent cent. ⇥ cohort)       13578           13578           13578           13578
Note: The table shows the first stage of the 2SLS estimation of the parameters 0 and in equation
(10). The variable is the OLS estimate of the slope coefficient in equation (6), computed sepa-
rately for each state and cohort, and standardized across all states and cohorts. The variable par-
ent centile is the percentile of parents in the national income distribution. The variable simulated
is estimated as using simulated revenues instead of actual revenues. In this first stage, the vari-
ables simulated and simulated ⇥ parent centile are used as instruments for and ⇥ parent cen-
tile. All specifications include parent percentile and cohort fixed effects; columns 1 and 2 include
CZ fixed effects, and columns 3 and 4 include state fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses
are clustered at the state and birth cohort level. The sample is restricted to California, Colorado,
Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana,
Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and Wiscon-
sin. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                50
Table IV: School Finance Equalization and Intergenerational Mobility. 2SLS, Dependent Variable is
Children’s Income Percentile

                                          (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                       -5.8120⇤     -5.6920⇤    -5.6430⇤    -5.4974⇤
                                       (2.8364)     (2.8014)    (2.6623)    (2.6271)

  ⇥ parent centile                     0.0253⇤⇤⇤   0.0244⇤⇤⇤    0.0253⇤⇤⇤   0.0244⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.0044)    (0.0044)     (0.0044)    (0.0044)

 esb ($1,000)                                                    0.1731      0.1993
                                                                (0.9230)    (0.9195)

   simulated                                                                            -4.6927⇤    -4.5900⇤
                                                                                        (1.9486)    (1.9184)

   simulated ⇥ parent centile                                                           0.0250⇤⇤⇤   0.0241⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                         (0.0044)    (0.0043)

 Parent centile FE                        Yes            Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes

 Cohort FE                                Yes            Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes

 CZ FE                                    Yes            No       Yes         No          Yes         No

 State FE                                 No             Yes      No          Yes         No          Yes
 N (CZ ⇥ parent cent. ⇥ cohort)          13578          13578    13578       13578       13578       13578

 Effect of a 1sd #   by parents’ percentile:
 10th                                     5.559      5.448        5.390       5.253       4.443       4.349
 10th [p-value]                          [0.097]    [0.100]      [0.088]     [0.092]     [0.063]     [0.064]
 25th                                     5.181      5.082        5.012       4.888       4.068       3.987
 25th [p-value]                          [0.117]    [0.120]      [0.106]     [0.111]     [0.082]     [0.084]
 90th                                     3.539      3.497        3.370       3.302       2.443       2.418
 90th [p-value]                          [0.256]    [0.262]      [0.242]     [0.252]     [0.263]     [0.270]
Note: The table shows 2SLS second-stage estimates of the parameters 0 and in equation (10). The de-
pendent variable is children’s income percentile in the national distribution for each parental income
percentile in the distribution of each CZ, for cohorts 1980 to 1986. The variable is the OLS estimate
of the slope coefficient in equation (6), computed separately for each state and cohort, and standard-
ized across all states and cohorts. The variable parent centile is the percentile of parents in the national
income distribution. The variable es is average per-pupil expenditure for each state and cohort. The
variables and ⇥ parent centile are instrumented using simulated and simulated ⇥ parent centile; the
variable simulated is estimated as using simulated revenues instead of actual revenues. All spec-
ifications include parent percentile and cohort fixed effects; columns 1, 3, and 5 include CZ fixed ef-
fects, and columns 2, 4, and 6 include state fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at
the state and birth cohort level. The sample is restricted to California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illi-
nois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New
York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and Wisconsin. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                   51
Table V: School Finance Equalization and Intergenerational Mobility. OLS and
2SLS, Dependent Variable is Children’s log(Income)

                                                   OLS             2SLS, Second stage
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)
                                        -0.1035      -0.1004       -0.1574⇤    -0.1541⇤
                                        (0.0566)     (0.0557)      (0.0761)    (0.0752)

  ⇥ parent centile                     0.0007⇤⇤⇤     0.0007⇤⇤⇤     0.0007⇤⇤⇤   0.0007⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)    (0.0001)

 Parent centile FE                        Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes

 Cohort FE                                Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes

 CZ FE                                    Yes             No         Yes         No

 State FE                                 No              Yes        No          Yes
 N (CZ ⇥ parent cent. ⇥ cohort)          13578           13578      13578       13578

 Effect of a 1sd #   by parents’ percentile:
 10th                                     0.101           0.098      0.162       0.158
 10th [p-value]                          [0.138]         [0.144]    [0.095]     [0.098]
 25th                                     0.089           0.086      0.149       0.146
 25th [p-value]                          [0.178]         [0.187]    [0.115]     [0.119]
 90th                                     0.039           0.038      0.095       0.094
 90th [p-value]                          [0.515]         [0.532]    [0.269]     [0.275]
Note: The table shows OLS (columns 1 and 2) and 2SLS second-stage estimates
(columns 3 and 4) of the parameters 0 and in equation (10). The dependent
variable is the natural logarithm of children’s income for each parental income
percentile in the distribution of each CZ, for cohorts 1980 to 1986. The variable
   is the OLS estimate of the slope coefficient in equation (6), computed sepa-
rately for each state and cohort, and standardized across all states and cohorts.
The variable parent centile is the percentile of parents in the national income dis-
tribution. In columns 3 and 4, the variables and ⇥ parent centile are instru-
mented using simulated and simulated ⇥ parent centile; the variable simu-
lated is estimated as using simulated revenues instead of actual revenues. All
specifications include parent percentile and cohort fixed effects; columns 1 and
3 include CZ fixed effects, and columns 2 and 4 include state fixed effects. Stan-
dard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state and birth cohort level. The
sample is restricted to California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Jer-
sey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and Wisconsin.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                           52
Table VI: Heterogeneous Effects of School Finance Equalization Across School Grades. OLS and
2SLS, Dependent Variable is Children’s Income Percentile

                                                                 OLS                     2SLS
                                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
  ⇥ reform in elementary school                         -3.5210     -3.1433     -8.4582⇤    -8.0583⇤
                                                       (2.6070)    (2.5024)     (4.0107)    (3.9468)

  ⇥ parent centile ⇥ reform in elementary school      0.0704⇤⇤     0.0676⇤⇤     0.0859⇤⇤⇤   0.0810⇤⇤⇤
                                                      (0.0269)     (0.0235)      (0.0193)    (0.0169)

  ⇥ reform in middle school                             -1.4628     -1.3803      -4.4117     -4.3311
                                                       (1.7470)    (1.7809)     (2.9891)    (2.9831)

  ⇥ parent centile ⇥ reform in middle school          0.0237⇤⇤     0.0240⇤⇤     0.0241⇤     0.0241⇤
                                                      (0.0087)     (0.0098)     (0.0105)    (0.0113)

  ⇥ reform in high school                               -1.5429     -1.4843      -4.2956     -4.2679
                                                       (1.7644)    (1.7677)     (3.3262)    (3.2903)

  ⇥ parent centile ⇥ reform in high school            0.0201⇤⇤     0.0198⇤⇤     0.0195⇤⇤    0.0193⇤⇤
                                                      (0.0074)     (0.0076)     (0.0074)    (0.0076)

 Parent centile FE                                       Yes            Yes       Yes            Yes
 Cohort FE                                               Yes            Yes       Yes            Yes
 CZ FE                                                   Yes            No        Yes            No
 State FE                                                No             Yes       No             Yes
 Reform in elem, middle, high                            Yes            Yes       Yes            Yes
 N (CZ ⇥ parent cent. ⇥ cohort)                         13578          13578     13578          13578

 Effect of a 1sd #   by parents’ percentile:
 10th, elem                                              2.817         2.467     7.599          7.248
 25th, elem                                              1.761         1.452     6.311          6.033
 90th, elem                                             -2.816         -2.945    0.727          0.766
 10th, high                                              1.342         1.286     4.101          4.075
 25th, high                                              1.041         0.989     3.809          3.785
 90th, high                                             -0.262         -0.298    2.545          2.529
Note: The table shows OLS (columns 1 and 2) and 2SLS second-stage estimates (columns 3 and
4) of the parameters in equation (11). The dependent variable is children’s income percentile
in the national distribution for each parental income percentile in the distribution of each CZ,
for cohorts 1980 to 1986. The variable is the OLS estimate of the slope coefficient in equation
(6), computed separately for each state and cohort, and standardized across all states and co-
horts. The variable parent centile is the percentile of parents in the national income distribution.
In columns 3 and 4, the variable is instrumented with simulated, estimated as using sim-
ulated revenues instead of actual revenues. The variables reform in elementary school, reform in
middle school, and reform in high school equal one for cohorts and states for which a reform hit
during elementary, middle, and high school, respectively. All specifications include parent per-
centile and cohort fixed effects; columns 1 and 3 include CZ fixed effects, and columns 2 and 4
include state fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state and birth co-
hort level. The sample is restricted to California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York,
North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and Wisconsin. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                53
Table VII: Heterogeneous Effects of School Finance Equalization by CZs’ In-
come Inequality. 2SLS, Dependent Variable is Children’s Income Percentile

                                        Low Inequality         High Inequality
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)
                                       -4.8634    -4.6557    -6.3731⇤    -6.4087⇤
                                       (3.2733)   (3.2213)   (3.1138)    (3.0938)

  ⇥ parent centile                     0.0269⇤⇤   0.0237⇤⇤   0.0221⇤⇤⇤   0.0235⇤⇤⇤
                                       (0.0077)   (0.0072)    (0.0025)    (0.0031)

 Parent centile FE                       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes

 State FE                                No         Yes        No          Yes

 CZ FE                                   Yes        No         Yes         No

 Cohort FE                               Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 N (CZ ⇥ parent cent. ⇥ cohort)         5586       5586        7950        7950

 Effect of a 1sd #   by parents’ percentile:
 10th                                    4.595     4.418       6.152       6.174
 10th [p-value]                         [0.208]   [0.218]     [0.096]     [0.093]
 25th                                    4.191     4.062       5.821       5.822
 25th [p-value]                         [0.242]   [0.251]     [0.111]     [0.109]
 90th                                    2.444     2.520       4.385       4.295
 90th [p-value]                         [0.470]   [0.458]     [0.210]     [0.215]
Note: The dependent variable is children’s income percentile in the national
distribution for each parental income percentile in the distribution of each CZ,
for cohorts 1980 to 1986. The variable is the OLS estimate of the slope co-
efficient in equation (6), computed separately for each state and cohort, and
standardized across all states and cohorts. The variable parent centile is the
percentile of parents in the national income distribution. The variable is in-
strumented by simulated, estimated as using simulated revenues instead of
actual revenues. All specifications include parent percentile and cohort fixed
effects; columns 1 and 3 include CZ fixed effects, and columns 2 and 4 include
state fixed effects. “Low Inequality” (“High Inequality”) refers to CZs below
(above) the median level of income inequality, measured as the percentage dif-
ference in average income between the richest and poorest district in each CZ
in 1990. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state and birth co-
hort level. The sample is restricted to California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia,
Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana,
Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah,
Texas, and Wisconsin. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                          54
Table VIII: Heterogeneous Effects of School Finance Equalization by CZs’ In-
come Segregation. 2SLS, Dependent Variable is Children’s Income Percentile

                                         Low Segregation        High Segregation
                                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
                                       -5.4864⇤    -5.4230⇤    -6.0725     -6.0227
                                       (2.6903)    (2.6721)    (3.2122)    (3.2019)

  ⇥ parent centile                     0.0253⇤⇤⇤   0.0242⇤⇤⇤   0.0237⇤⇤⇤   0.0244⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.0067)    (0.0065)    (0.0034)    (0.0037)

 Parent centile FE                        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

 State FE                                 No         Yes         No          Yes

 CZ FE                                    Yes        No          Yes         No

 Cohort FE                                Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 N (CZ ⇥ parent cent. ⇥ cohort)          5880        5880        7698        7698

 Effect of a 1sd #   by parents’ percentile:
 10th                                     5.233      5.181       5.835       5.778
 10th [p-value]                          [0.098]    [0.099]     [0.120]     [0.122]
 25th                                     4.853      4.819       5.479       5.411
 25th [p-value]                          [0.117]    [0.118]     [0.140]     [0.144]
 90th                                     3.207      3.249       3.935       3.822
 90th [p-value]                          [0.265]    [0.262]     [0.274]     [0.287]
Note: The dependent variable is children’s income percentile in the national dis-
tribution for each parental income percentile in the distribution of each CZ, for
cohorts 1980 to 1986. The variable is the OLS estimate of the slope coefficient
in equation (6), computed separately for each state and cohort, and standardized
across all states and cohorts. The variable parent centile is the percentile of par-
ents in the national income distribution. The variable is instrumented by sim-
ulated, estimated as using simulated revenues instead of actual revenues. All
specifications include parent percentile and cohort fixed effects; columns 1 and
3 include CZ fixed effects, and columns 2 and 4 include state fixed effects. “Low
Segregation” (“High Segregation”) refers to CZs below (above) the median level
of income segregation across all CZs, where income segregation is measured
with a Theil index calculated across districts within each CZ using data from
1990. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state and birth cohort
level. The sample is restricted to California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska,
New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and
Wisconsin. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                           55
Table IX: School Finance Equalization and School Inputs. OLS and 2SLS,
Dependent Variable is the Number of Teachers per Student

                                           OLS                   2SLS
                                     (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
  ⇥ income in the 1st quartile    -0.0029⇤   -0.0060⇤⇤   -0.0051⇤   -0.0076⇤⇤
                                  (0.0015)    (0.0024)   (0.0028)    (0.0032)

  ⇥ income in the 2nd quartile     -0.0002    0.0010      -0.0027    -0.0035
                                  (0.0015)   (0.0012)    (0.0026)   (0.0029)

  ⇥ income in the 3rd quartile     0.0017     0.0018      -0.0009    0.0003
                                  (0.0018)   (0.0023)    (0.0025)   (0.0027)

  ⇥ income in the 4th quartile     0.0021     0.0021      -0.0000    0.0017
                                  (0.0017)   (0.0036)    (0.0031)   (0.0040)

 Year FE                            Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes

 State FE                           Yes          No        Yes          No

 District FE                        No           Yes       No           Yes

 Quartile FE                        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
 N (district ⇥ year)              110833      110773     110833      110773
 Y-mean                            0.072       0.072      0.072       0.072
Note: The dependent variable is the total number of teachers employed in
a district, divided by the total number of students; observations are at the
district-year level and cover years 1988-2004. The variable is defined as
the OLS estimate of the slope coefficient in equation (6), computed sepa-
rately for each state and year, and standardized across all states and years.
The variable income in the X th quartile equals 1 for districts with median
household income in the X th quartile of the national distribution in 1990.
Columns 1 and 2 estimate OLS; columns 3 and 4 estimate 2SLS, with sim
(obtained using simulated revenues instead of actual revenues) as an instru-
ment for . All specifications include year fixed effects; columns 1 and 3 in-
clude state fixed effects, and columns 2 and 4 include district fixed effects.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state and year level. The
sample is restricted to California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Ken-
tucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska,
New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and
Wisconsin. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                     56
Table X: School Finance Equalization and College Enrollment. 2SLS, Dependent Variable is
Children’s Probability of College Enrollment at Age 19

                                                                (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
                                                             -0.0777     -0.0746
                                                            (0.0971)    (0.0959)

   ⇥ parent centile                                         0.0002⇤⇤     0.0001
                                                            (0.0001)    (0.0001)

   ⇥ reform in elementary school                                                      -0.3359      -0.3286
                                                                                     (0.1780)     (0.1757)

   ⇥ parent centile ⇥ reform in elementary school                                     -0.0000      -0.0001
                                                                                     (0.0002)     (0.0002)

   ⇥ reform in middle school                                                          -0.3402      -0.3333
                                                                                     (0.1757)     (0.1740)

   ⇥ parent centile ⇥ reform in middle school                                         -0.0000      -0.0000
                                                                                     (0.0001)     (0.0001)

   ⇥ reform in high school                                                           -0.3677⇤     -0.3644⇤
                                                                                     (0.1718)     (0.1691)

   ⇥ parent centile ⇥ reform in high school                                         0.0008⇤⇤⇤     0.0008⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                     (0.0002)      (0.0002)
 Parent centile FE                                             Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Cohort FE                                                     Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 CZ FE                                                         Yes         No           Yes           No
 State FE                                                      No          Yes          No            Yes
 N (CZ ⇥ parent cent. ⇥ cohort)                               13296       13296       13296         13296
 Mean of dep. var.                                            0.556       0.556       0.556         0.556

 Effect of a 1sd # by parents’ percentile:
 10th                                                         0.076       0.073
 25th                                                         0.073       0.071
 90th                                                         0.061       0.061
 10th, High School                                                                     0.360        0.356
 25th, High School                                                                     0.347        0.344
 90th, High School                                                                     0.294        0.289
Note: The dependent variable is the probability of college enrollment by age 19 for each parental income
percentile in the distribution of each CZ, for cohorts 1984 to 1990. The variable is the OLS estimate
of the slope coefficient in equation (6), computed separately for each state and cohort, and standardized
across all states and cohorts. The variable parent centile is the percentile of parents in the national income
distribution. The variable is instrumented with simulated, estimated using simulated revenues in-
stead of actual revenues. The variables reform in elementary school, reform in middle school, and reform in
high school equal one for cohorts and states for which a reform hit during elementary, middle, and high
school, respectively. All specifications include parent percentile and cohort fixed effects; columns 1 and 3
include CZ fixed effects, while columns 2 and 4 include state fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses
are clustered at the state and birth cohort level. The sample is restricted to California, Colorado, Florida,
Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New
Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Texas, and Wisconsin. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.


                                                     57
