                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               "SUPERSTITIOUS" INVESTORS

                                          Hongye Guo
                                       Jessica A. Wachter

                                      Working Paper 25603
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25603


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2019




We thank Nicholas Barberis, John Campbell, Anna Cieslak, Marco Grotteria, Campbell Harvey,
David Hirshleifer, Michael Kahana, Karen Lewis, Andrei Shleifer, Adrien Verdelhan, and
seminar participants at Duke, MIT, and at Wharton for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Hongye Guo and Jessica A. Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
"Superstitious" Investors
Hongye Guo and Jessica A. Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 25603
February 2019
JEL No. G02,G11,G12

                                           ABSTRACT

We consider an economy in which investors believe dividend growth is predictable, when in
reality it is not. We show that these beliefs lead to excess volatility and return predictability. We
also show that these beliefs are rational in the face of evidence on dividend growth. We apply
this framework to explaining the value premium, predictability of bond returns, and the violation
of uncovered interest rate parity.


Hongye Guo
University of Pennsylvania
silver.hongye.guo@gmail.com

Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu
1       Introduction

Why is aggregate stock price volatility so high? Starting with Shiller (1981) and
Campbell and Shiller (1988), an influential literature shows that stock market volatility
is too large to arise from rational expectations of future dividends. In response, the
literature has proposed several explanations that maintain the notion of the rational
investor. The “excess” volatility could arise from time-varying discount rates, which
could in turn be driven by time-varying volatility of dividends (Bansal and Yaron, 2004;
Calvet and Fisher, 2007; Lettau et al., 2008), or time-varying risk aversion Campbell
and Cochrane (1999). Stock price volatility could also arise from time-varying forecasts
of the occurrence or impact of rare events (Gabaix, 2012; Wachter, 2013).
    These rational expectation models have considerable appeal. They hold out the
promise that asset pricing puzzles can be solved in a world that is complicated and un-
predictable, yet well-understood by investors. The careful development of these models
have led to specific tests, which have not always worked in the models’ favor. Problems
include counterfactual predictions for the term structure of dividend claims (Binsber-
gen et al., 2012; Lettau and Wachter, 2007), interest rates (Backus et al., 2014) and
variance risk (Dew-Becker et al., 2017). Some models do not extend well to economies
where agents in aggregate can transfer resources across states and time (Lettau and
Uhlig, 2000; Kaltenbrunner and Lochstoer, 2010). Finally, because these models are
rational, risk premia must ultimately represent a return for bearing risk. Empirical
studies have looked for this relation and failed to find it.(Duffee, 2005; Moreira and
Muir, 2017).1
    This paper proposes a model for stock return volatility that does not assume rational
expectations. This is not the same as assuming investors are irrational, it simply
    1
    Models with time-varying rare events would seem to hold out the best hope, among rational
models, for disentangling the relation between risk and return. However, requiring infinitely precise
knowledge of a difficult-to-measure time-varying quantity does not seem like a victory for rational
expectations.


                                                 1
means that investors have a biased prior on the data generating process. Inspired by
the literature on behavioral finance (Barberis et al., 2003; Shiller, 2003; Hirshleifer,
2015), we motivate beliefs based on psychological studies. We take as motivation the
classic animal learning study of Skinner (1948). In Skinner’s study, hungry pigeons
were presented food at regular intervals. Most of the pigeons developed bizarre habits
of behavior, the reason for which is that they happened to have displayed that specific
behavior when the food was offered.
   What do these pigeons have to do with investors? While the pigeons’ associations
between behavior and food may seem ridiculous, their behavior illustrates a tendency
to create structure out of randomness. The strong tendency to find structure where
none exists characterizes human subjects as well, both in the laboratory and real-world
situations (Bar-Hillel and Wagenaar, 1991). It persists even when subjects are trained
to know what is random and what is not (Neuringer, 1986).
   In our base case, we assume (for simplicity) that investors are risk-neutral. They
believe they can forecast dividend growth using a persistent signal, though dividend
growth is in fact iid. Like the pigeons they believe events can be forecasted (dividend
growth, as opposed to food) even when they are completely random. We show that
this condition itself is sufficient to generate excess volatility and return predictability
seen in the data. Prices embed the incorrect beliefs about dividend growth, and thus
are excessively volatile. Moreover, prices revert to more correct values as the expected
growth fails to materialize, generating excess returns that appear to vary over time.
However, in this risk-neutral environment, true risk premia are always equal to zero.
   A slightly generalized model can produce an unconditional equity premium as-
suming investors have time-additive CRRA utility and rare disasters that occur with
constant probability(Barro, 2006; Rietz, 1988). In such a model, there is no time se-
ries relation between risk and return. Moreover, time-additive CRRA utility implies
flat term unconditional term structures of equity and interest rates, rather than a


                                            2
counterfactual upward-sloping term structure of equities and a downward-sloping term
structure of interest rates.
    Finally, we extend the model to address other asset pricing puzzles. A longstanding
puzzle is the high abnormal returns on value stocks (Fama and French, 1992). We show
that the same mechanism that explains excess volatility in the time series can explain
this abnormal performance. We show that a belief in an excessive amount of interest
rate predictability can explain the ability of the yield spread to forecast excess returns
(Campbell and Shiller, 1991). We apply the model to forecastability of exchange rates,
and shows it accounts for the failure of uncovered interest rate parity and the forward
premium puzzle.
    A well-developed literature explores the potential for deviations from a full-information
rational-expectations benchmark to explain asset pricing anomalies. Some early work
on this subject focused on Bayesian learning with incorrect priors (Timmermann, 1993;
Veronesi, 1999; Lewellen and Shanken, 2002). Such a setting does induce excess volatil-
ity and predictability, but effects eventually dissipate.2 Other early work introduced ad
hoc specifications of investor irrationality (Barsky and De Long, 1993; Cecchetti et al.,
2000) to address excess stock market volatility. More recent work motivates subjective
beliefs in various ways. One motivation is that they arise as a worst-case scenario
under ambiguity aversion (Bidder and Dew-Becker, 2016; Hansen and Sargent, 2010).
Investors may be over-confident in their own signals relative to others (Scheinkman and
Xiong, 2003; Dumas et al., 2009).3 They may form expectations based on an intuitive
but incorrect model of autocorrelated growth rates (Fuster et al., 2010). They may
incorrectly extrapolate from past data (Barberis et al., 2015; Hirshleifer et al., 2015;
   2
      More recently, Collin-Dufresne et al. (2016) combine learning with recursive utility to explain the
equity premium.
    3
      Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) focus on the interaction of overconfidence and short-sale con-
straints, which can create asset bubbles. In this paper, we assume a representative agent; however
our model could serve as a motivation for heterogeneous beliefs, which, in the presence of short-sale
constraints, would lead to yet greater volatility.



                                                   3
Adam et al., 2017; Jin and Sui, 2018; Nagel and Xu, 2018).
    Our contribution relative to this literature is to quantitatively explain a number
of seemingly unrelated asset pricing anomalies (e.g. stock return predictability, stock
return volatility, the value premium, the success of the value-minus-growth factor,
the failure of the expectations hypothesis and of uncovered interest rate parity) with
a single behavioral mechanism that has a long-established psychological foundation.
Note that our mechanism is consistent with many behavioral models that have already
been proposed. As we will argue, the precise form of the investor’s expectation does
not matter so much as the fact that the expectation varies over time and over assets,
indicating that investors think they know more than they in fact do. Regardless of
the form of the expectation, it is embedded into the asset price, creating the myriad
of anomalies described above, which together are very difficult to explain in a fully
rational model.



2     Model

Consider an infinite-horizon discrete time economy with risk-neutral investors. Let
Dt denote the aggregate dividend at time t, and dt = log Dt . Assume that investors
believe
                                     ∆dt+1 = xt + ut+1 ,                            (1)

where
                                     xt+1 = φxt + vt+1 ,                            (2)

and                                                        
                                ut                 σu2     0
                                     iid
                                       ∼ N 0,                                   (3)
                                vt                 0     σv2




                                             4
Assume 0 < φ < 1, so that dividend growth is stationary and positively autocorre-
lated. The assumption that realized and expected dividends are uncorrelated is for
convenience.4
     Under risk neutrality and assuming a discount factor δ, the absence of arbitrage
implies that the value today of a dividend paid an integer n ≥ 0 periods in the future
is
                                             Pnt = Et∗ [δ n Dt+n ],                   (4)

where we use the notation E ∗ to denote the expectations of investors. The law of
iterated expectations then implies the following recursion for (4):


                                       Pnt = Et∗ [δPn−1,t+1 ],           n ≥ 1,       (5)


with boundary condition P0t = Dt . The asset priced in (4) is an “equity strip” (see
Lettau and Wachter (2007)), analogous to a zero-coupon bond.
     Equations (1–3) define a Markov structure for dividend growth, so if we divide both
sides of (4) by Dt , we obtain a function of xt . Let

                                                                 Pnt
                                                  Fn (xt ) =         .                (6)
                                                                 Dt

The recursion (5) pins down the functions Fn (·):

                                                                                 
                                                                          Dt+1
                                     Fn (xt ) =   Et∗       δFn−1 (xt+1 )             (7)
                                                                           Dt

with boundary condition F0 (xt ) = 1. The solution is


                                             Fn (xt ) = ean +bn xt ,                  (8)
     4
         Dividend data alone is not sufficient to identify the correlation in (3).




                                                             5
where the coefficients are defined recursively as

                                            1           1
                                 an = an−1 + b2n−1 σv2 + σu2 + log δ
                                            2           2                                    (9)
                                 bn = bn−1 φ + 1.

with boundary conditions a0 = b0 = 0. The recursion for bn has the well-known solution

                                                     1 − φn
                                              bn =          .                               (10)
                                                     1−φ

The price-dividend ratio on the aggregate stock market is a sum of these claims:

                                             ∞            ∞
                                     Pt   X Pnt X
                                        =        =     Fn (xt ).                            (11)
                                     Dt   n=1
                                              Dt   n=1


Defining Rtm as the net return on the aggregate market and Rn,t+1 as that on the
n-period equity strip, it follows from (11) that

                                                         ∞                  
                               Pt+1 − Pt + Dt+1 X                   P
                       m
                      Rt+1   ≡                 =                  P∞ nt          Rn,t+1 .   (12)
                                      Pt         n=1               k=1 Pkt



Namely, the market return is a weighted average of the returns on the equity strips.5
The weights depend on the value of xt (an increase in xt shifts the weight toward high-
maturity claims), but this effect is second-order under our distributional assumptions.
It will also be useful, in what follows, to note that an alternative characterization of
prices and of Fn (xt ), following directly from the recursion (7), is

                                 Pnt                 h Pn             i
                                     = Fn (xt ) = Et∗ δ n e s=1 ∆dt+s                       (13)
                                 Dt
   5
       The intermediate steps in this calculation are as follows:
               P∞                       P∞                 ∞                       
    m              Pn,t+1 + Dt+1
                n=1P                     n=1 Pn−1,t+1     X      Pnt       Pn−1,t+1
   Rt+1    =        ∞               −1=  P∞           −1=      P∞                   −1 .
                    n=1 Pnt                n=1 Pnt        n=1   k=1 Pkt      Pnt




                                                     6
   Up until now, the assumption of risk-neutral investors is without loss of generality,
as we simply could have considered E ∗ as the risk-neutral expectation, which generates
prices even when investors are risk averse. The assumption of risk neutrality enters
when we consider the physical distribution, necessary for calculating realized returns.
We focus on returns on an equity strip because it makes the calculations easier and,
because of (12), the intuition caries over to the market. The return on the equity strip
with maturity n is given by

                                          Pn−1,t+1
                           1 + Rn,t+1 =
                                            Pnt
                                          Fn−1 (xt+1 ) Dt+1
                                        =                   .                        (14)
                                            Fn (xt )    Dt

Suppose first that the investor’s beliefs match reality, so that (1–3) represent the phys-
ical process for dividends. Substituting (1) and (8) into (14), we find


                 ∗
        log(1 + Rn,t+1 ) = an−1 − an + bn−1 xt+1 − bn xt + xt + ut+1

                          = an−1 − an + (bn−1 φ − bn + 1)xt + bn−1 vt+1 + ut+1 ,


where we use R∗ to denote returns when the physical distribution matches the subjec-
tive one. Substituting from (9) implies that


                              ∗
                     log(1 + Rn,t+1 ) = an−1 − an + bn−1 vt+1 + ut+1 .               (15)


When dividend growth is in fact predictable, returns are iid. Prices incorporate all
available information, and so any innovation to returns must come from an innovation
to expected dividend growth represented by vt+1 , or an innovation to dividend growth
itself, represented by ut+1 . Furthermore, (9) implies E ∗ [Rt∗ ] = δ −1 , namely there is
zero risk premium, as must be the case because investors are risk neutral.



                                            7
    Assume however, that investors’ beliefs do not match reality. The physical process
for dividends is not (1–3), but rather


                                          ∆dt+1 = ut+1 .                                        (16)


For simplicity, we assume investors are correct about the evolution of the state variable
xt , namely (2) represents the physical process. Additional effects could arise from
incorrect beliefs concerning the persistence of xt . For simplicity, we do not consider
these here.6
    Prices reflect agents’ (incorrect) beliefs and are given by (8) and (9). These prices
are identical under both correct and incorrect beliefs and, because they accurately
represent some form of beliefs, are arbitrage-free. However, consider returns:

                                                      
                                     Fn−1 (xt+1 ) Dt+1
             log(1 + Rn,t+1 ) = log                                                             (17)
                                       Fn (xt )    Dt
                              = an−1 − an + bn−1 xt+1 − bn xt + ut+1                            (18)

                                = an−1 − an + bn−1 (φxt + vt+1 ) − bn xt + ut+1 .               (19)


Thus,


                  log(1 + Rn,t+1 ) = an−1 − an − xt + bn−1 vt+1 + ut+1 ,                        (20)
   6
     Cochrane (2008) argues that dividend growth is in fact unpredictable. The strength of the
predictability in the data depends on how dividends are measured, a point made by van Binsbergen
and Koijen (2010), Larrain and Yogo (2008). Dividend predictability, to the extent it exists, appears
to be transient (Lettau and Ludvigson, 2005; Li and Wang, 2018). While we focus, for clarity, on
the case in which investors believe there is no persistence in dividend growth, what matters for our
mechanism is that investors overestimate the persistence of expected dividend growth. In recent work,
de la O and Myers (2018) offer direct evidence that stock prices are driven primarily by investors’
expectations of cash flows.




                                                 8
and, under the physical expectation,


                            log Et [1 + Rn,t+1 ] = − log δ − xt .


Unlike the case where investors’ beliefs are correct (see Eq.15) excess returns are pre-
dictable. When xt is high, prices are high and future returns are low.
   Equation (20) shows that superstition on the part of investors leads to return pre-
dictability. It also leads to return volatility. It is again useful to contrast superstition
with rational (i.e. correct) beliefs. When the physical and subjective distributions
coincide,
                                         ∗
                            Var(log(1 + Rnt )) = b2n−1 σv2 + σu2 ,                      (21)

whereas
                         Var(log(1 + Rnt )) = σx2 + b2n−1 σv2 + σu2 ,                   (22)

where
                                                 σv2
                                       σx2 ≡          .
                                               1 − φ2

   At first glance, it appears that return volatility arises from the term σx2 , because this
is the source of predictability. Also, this is missing in the case of rationality. However,
the link between superstition and volatility is more subtle. In fact, almost all of the
volatility arises, in both cases, from the σv2 term: as discussed in the next paragraph,
this term is an order of magnitude bigger than the others. It appears in both the
rational and superstition cases, and in both cases it represents changes in investors
subjective expectations about dividend growth. In the rational case, however, these
expectations coincide with the true distribution. In the case with superstition, it will
appear, ex post, as a time-varying discount rate. Volatility is similar in both cases; in
one case it is accompanied by predictable dividends (counterfactually) whereas in the
other it is accompanied by predictable returns.


                                               9
    We now return to the question of the volatility decomposition in (22). In the
paragraph above, we claimed that nearly all the volatility in returns arises from the
volatility in expected dividends, as represented by b2n−1 σv2 . We now explain why this
is so. First note that σu2 is the volatility of realized dividends. This 0.072 per an-
num in postwar data. On the other hand, the volatility of shocks to xt , σv , and the
unconditional volatility of xt , σx , are unobserved. To understand the magnitude of
the remaining terms, we turn to the prices of dividend claims, normalized by current
dividends. These are denoted by Fn (xt ) and given in (8) and (9).
    Recall that the price-dividend ratio on the market is a sum of these component price-
dividend ratios. Furthermore, even if the persistence φ is high, decay is geometric, and
so for n sufficiently large, bn ≈ (1 − φ)−1 . If we let σpd
                                                         2
                                                            be the variance of the log
price-dividend ratio on the market, roughly speaking,7


                               2                                              σx2
                              σpd ≡ lim Var(log Fn (xt )) =
                                       n→∞                                 (1 − φ)2

Then, for long-maturity equity strips (which, due to the properties of geometric decay,
best represents the return on the market) the decomposition (22) takes the form

                                                              σv2
                  lim Var(log(1 + Rnt )) = σx2 +                    + σu2
                  n→∞                                     (1 − φ)2
                                                   ≈ (1 − φ)2 σpd
                                                               2
                                                                  + (1 − φ2 )σpd
                                                                              2
                                                                                 + σu2 .    (23)


While σu ≈ 0.07, σpd ≈ 0.42. The persistence φ will equal the persistence of the
price-dividend ratio. At φ = 0.92, the first term in (23) equals (0.08 × 0.42)2 , whereas
the second term equals (0.39 × 0.42)2 . The second term, representing the effect of
   7
       Note that the log price-dividend ratio equals
                                       ∞
                                       X                  ∞
                                                          X
                            pd = log         Fn (xt ) ≈         an + bn xt = a∗ + b∗ xt .
                                       n=1                n=1

Because of geometric decay, b∗ ≈ (1 − φ)−1 .


                                                          10
innovations to xt is thus roughly 25 times larger than the term representing xt itself,
and roughly 5 times larger than the term representing dividend volatility.8 Finally note
that these terms add up to (0.18)2 , thus (roughly) accounting for the annual volatility
in stock returns.
    This accounting exercise suggests that this simple model can explain return volatil-
ity, predictability in excess returns, together with the lack of predictability in dividends.
As yet, it has nothing to say about the equity premium. Below, we address this lack,
and perform a more formal calibration exercise.



3       Model with IID Disasters

We now show that a realistic equity premium can be incorporated into the model
above. Assume a representative agent who maximizes a time-additive utility function
with constant relative risk aversion:

                                            ∞            1−γ
                                            X
                                                      t Ct−1
                                        E         δ          ,
                                            t=0
                                                        1−γ

where γ is relative risk aversion and δ remains the time discount factor. The agent
holds the following beliefs about the consumption and dividend growth processes:


                                    ∆ct+1 = µ + ut+1 + wt+1 ,                                     (24)


                                 ∆dt+1 = µ + xt + ut+1 + wt+1 ,                                   (25)
    8
     This will also be true in a rational model with prices driven by discount rate variation. Most of
the variation in realized returns comes from innovations in the discount rate, which are unpredictable.
Very little comes from the variation in the discount rate itself.




                                                      11
where xt is as in (2) above, with shocks ut+1 and vt+1 distributed as in (3). We further
assume, following Barro (2006), that
                               
                               
                                      ξ          probability = p
                               
                               
                         iid
                      wt ∼                                                           (26)
                               
                               
                                     0          probability = 1 − p


where ξ is a constant and wt is independent of ut and vt .
   In equilibrium, the aggregate market and the riskfree rate are priced using the
representative investor’s Euler equation. That is, if we let Pnt be the price of an n
period ahead equity strip, then Pnt satisfies the recursion
                                        "        −γ         #
                                            C t+1
                           Pnt     = Et∗ δ            Pn−1,t+1 ,
                                             Ct

where E ∗ denote expectations taken with respect to the subjective distribution, and
where P0t = Dt . Defining Fn (xt ) = Pnt /Dt , as in the previous section, we have
                                    "        −γ                   #
                                        C t+1                  Dt+1
                      Fn (xt ) = Et∗ δ            Fn−1 (xt+1 )                       (27)
                                         Ct                     Dt

with boundary condition F0 (xt ) = 1. The solution is again


                                       Fn (xt ) = ean +bn xt ,                       (28)


where an follows the modified recursion

                               1           1
 an = an−1 + log δ + (1 − γ)µ + b2n−1 σv2 + (1 − γ)2 σu2 + log(pe(1−γ)ξ + (1 − p)) (29)
                               2           2

with a0 = 0. The recursion for bn is the same, and so bn = (1 − φn )/(1 − φ) still holds.
   The riskfree asset is also priced using the investor’s Euler equation. Let Rf be the


                                                 12
one-period riskfree rate. Then:
                              "        −γ          #
                                  C t+1
                            E∗ δ            (1 + Rf ) = 1,
                                   Ct

implying

                                           1
              log(1 + Rf ) = − log δ + γµ − γ 2 σu2 − log(pe−γξ + (1 − p)).         (30)
                                           2

   We assume that the investor has correct beliefs about the consumption distribution
(24). Moreover, the investor correctly assumes that dividends are equally subject
to disasters as are consumption. However, the investor believes that dividends are
predictable, when in reality they are not. We parsimoniously capture these assumptions
by setting the physical distribution of ∆dt+1 equal to ∆ct+1 .
   Defining Rn,t+1 , as in the previous section, as the return on the n-period dividend
claim:

                                                    
                                   Fn−1 (xt+1 ) Dt+1
           log(1 + Rn,t+1 ) = log
                                     Fn (xt )    Dt
                            = an−1 − an + bn−1 xt+1 − bn xt + µ + ut+1 + wt+1

                           = an−1 − an + µ − xt + bn−1 vt+1 + ut+1 + wt+1 .


We therefore have, under the physical measure,

                                               1           1
    log Et [1 + Rn,t+1 ] = an−1 − an + µ − xt + b2n−1 σv2 + σu2 + log(peξ + (1 − p)),
                                               2           2




                                           13
and, for the expected excess return under the physical measure:


  log Et (1 + Rn,t+1 )/(1 + Rf ) = −xt + γσu2 +
                               

                     log(peξ + (1 − p)) + log(pe−γξ + (1 − p)) − log(pe(1−γ)ξ + (1 − p)).


For small p (or, as the time interval shrinks):


            log Et (1 + Rn,t+1 )/(1 + Rf ) ≈ −xt + γσu2 − p(1 − e−γξ )(1 − eξ ),
                                         
                                                                                              (31)


where we have used, e.g., log(peξ +(1−p)) = log(1+p(eξ −1)) ≈ p(eξ −1). The expected
excess return has its usual unconditional component, γσu2 − p(1 − e−γξ )(1 − eξ ), the
first term of which represents the normal risk, and the second term of which represents
the risk of disasters. This term captures the negative covariance between returns and
marginal utility during disaster periods. These components represent a risk premium,
namely a return to bearing the risk of equity, which might go down during a disaster.
The first term, xt , does not represent a return to bearing risk, but rather is mispricing.9
   Note that our assumption that the agent correctly assesses disaster risk is to dis-
cipline the model. We would find nearly the same equity premium if the agent overly
assessed disaster risk; i.e. was pessimistic. If the values here represent an optimistic
assessment of disaster risk (namely, disasters should have occurred with probability
greater than 2%), then that simply implies that we were lucky and that the equity
premium is not as much of a puzzle as believed. Also, allowing the agent to believe
consumption growth is forecastable would also not affect our results; however we be-
lieve this is less of a plausible assumption. As discussed above, the literature shows
less predictability in consumption growth than in dividend growth. As we show below,
   9
      As described in the previous section, the variance of xt is relatively small. Thus the wedge
between the unconditional expectation of (31) and the true unconditional equity premium is small as
well.



                                                14
beliefs in favor of dividend growth predictability are reasonable (though not required)
given the data.



4     Data and Calibration Results

4.1    Data

We use the value-weighted CRSP index to represent the market. We compute an
annual dividend by taking monthly dividends and summing. The dividend-price-ratio
of the market is the trailing one year aggregate dividend divided by the ex-dividend
price of the market. We use 3-month Treasury bill returns to proxy for the riskfree
rate. We use the CPI index to go from nominal returns and dividend growth to real
returns and dividend growth. The full sample for this study ranges from 1927 to 2017,
and the post-war subsample ranges from 1948 to 2017. All data are annual.


4.2    Parameters Values

Table 1 shows the parameter choices for our simulations, done at an annual frequency.
We choose σu to be the volatility of log real dividend growth in the data. We choose φ =
0.95 to match the observed first-order autocorrelation in the log dividend price ratio
in postwar data. The discount factor δ, provided it is within a reasonable range and
high enough to ensure convergence, has a second-order effect on the results. We choose
δ = 0.97, which is consistent with a low riskfree rate, and still allows for convergence
of the infinite sum (11). For the risk-neutral model, the remaining parameter is σv ,
which we choose to be 0.01. This generates the correct volatility of the price-dividend
ratio under risk neutrality.
    For the model with disaster risk, we follow Barro (2006) and choose risk aversion
γ to be 3, the average growth rate of consumption µ to be 2%, the annual disaster


                                          15
probability p to be 2%, and the size of the disaster to be 33%. We set the time-
discount factor δ to match the average return on the riskfree asset, which we set at the
average annual (real) return on three-month Treasury bills.


4.3    Results

We simulate 4000 samples of either 91 years of data (to represent the 1927–2017 sample)
or 70 years of data (to represent the 1948 to 2017 sample). We report three types of
results: the results for the risk neutral model with the longer simulation, the results
for the disaster model, with the longer simulation, and the results from the disaster
model for the shorter simulation, in which we consider only samples with no disasters.
Reporting the risk-neutral results for the shorter simulations would be repetitive, as
the only difference is in the degree of small-sample bias of some of the statistics.
   Table 2 show the results for the 1927–2017 sample, and compare these to the model.
This comparison confirms the informal analysis in Section 2: the model can simultane-
ously match the standard-deviation of returns, of the price-dividend ratio, of dividend
growth. The model fits the slight negative autocorrelation of annual returns. However,
the model, by construction does not fit the slight autocorrelation in dividend growth,
which is 20% at an annual horizon.
   Including rare disasters in the model, which account for a high equity premium and
low riskfree rate, have little impact on the second moments. While there is a slight
reduction in the standard deviation of the divided-price ratio (due to the duration
effect; the equity premium causes a down-weighting of long-horizon claims which are
the most sensitive to changes in expectations), the data value remains well-within the
10% confidence bounds. Table 3 show similar results for the postwar sample.
   Table 4 reports reports from regressions of excess returns on the price-dividend
ratio. The first panel replicates the well-known result that excess returns are indeed
predictable by the dividend-price ratio. This result also holds in post-war data (Ta-

                                           16
ble 5). Coefficients are statistically significant at nearly all horizons, with R2 statistics
increasing from 2% to 28%. Table 6 shows that, in contrast, dividend growth is sig-
nificantly forecastable only at the 1-year horizon.10 This forecastability is transient,
in that the R2 statistics do not increase with horizon. Even this short-horizon effect
becomes insignificant in post-war data (Table 7).
    These tables also show simulations from the model. Note that by simulating the
series of the correct length under a model that captures the correlational structure of the
data, we capture the source of bias in the model that is also in the data (Stambaugh,
1999). The superstitious investor model captures the correct magnitude of return
predictability, and the lack of dividend growth predictability. The amount of dividend
growth predictability in the data (with the exception of the shortest horizon in the
1927–2017 series) can easily be accounted for by finite-sample noise. The superstitious
investor model captures the economically and statistically significant predictability.
However, returns are not too predictable in the model; the data coefficients lie within
the confidence intervals. It is not easy to take advantage of the superstitious agent
because there is a sense in which he is correct.
    Finally, Figure 1 shows a time series plot of the level of prices and the level of
dividends, post-1926. On the figure, the level of dividends is multiplied by a constant
so the average level of the series are the same. Consistent with the superstition model,
but inconsistent with a model in which investors have correct beliefs, deviations from
the mean of the price-dividend ratio are usually followed by adjustments in prices,
rather than adjustments in dividends. This is a graphical illustration of the results in
Table 4. Figure 2 shows that this effect holds more dramatically in postwar data.
  10
     This and earlier statements of significance are under the assumption of a single test. Accounting
for multiple comparisons would likely further decrease the significance of dividend growth predictabil-
ity.




                                                  17
5        A Bayesian view of dividend predictability

A possible objection to the model in Section 2 is that, over time, investors would learn
that dividends are in fact unpredictable. If investors did learn the correct distribution,
prices would remain volatile, but return predictability would dissipate. In this section,
we confront the hypothesized beliefs with data. We consider an investor whose prior
beliefs include the possibility of dividend growth predictability. The agent updates
these beliefs given the historical time series, seen through the lens of the likelihood
implied by (1–3). Our evidence speaks to the difficulty of learning the true process for
dividend growth.
     We assume, as in Section 2, the agent believes that dividend growth contains a
predictable component. Should this predictable component exist, it follows from the
reasoning in Section 2 that it should be captured by the price-dividend ratio.11 The
agent therefore considers the predictive system:


                                      ∆dt+1 = β x̂t + ut+1                                         (32)

                                          x̂t+1 = φ̂x̂t + v̂t+1 ,                                  (33)


where x̂t = pt − dt , the log price-dividend ratio, and where

                                                                       
                                    ut                      σu2      0
                                          iid
                                            ∼ N 0,                        .                    (34)
                                    v̂t                     0       σ̂v2

We refer to the predictor variable as x̂t in contrast to xt . Up to linearization error, the
assumptions in Section 2 imply that x̂ and x differ only by a scale factor, approximately
equal to 1/(1 − φ). For convenience, we de-mean both variables.12
    11
      To the extent that the price-dividend ratio fails to capture this component, we are biased against
finding dividend growth predictability, and therefore proving the beliefs to be less justifiable than
otherwise.
   12
      De-meaning the variables simplifies the analysis, and only affects the conclusions through a


                                                     18
    Under conditions described in Appendix A, it suffices to consider a prior on the
parameters of the dividend process and the marginal likelihood for the dividend process,
taking observations on x̂t as given. That is, the time-series regression (32) for dividend
growth is, in this case, equivalent to standard OLS in which the regressor is strictly
exogenous.
    We assume a prior inverse-gamma distribution for σu2 and, conditional on σu2 , a
normal distribution for the predictive coefficient β:


                                   β | σu ∼ N (β0 , g −1 σu2 Λ−1
                                                              0 )                                 (35)

                                       σu2 ∼ IG(a0 , b0 ).                                        (36)


We set parameters a0 and b0 so that the prior on σu2 is diffuse.13 Equation 36 implies a
conjugate prior on β (Zellner, 1996). As explained below, Λ0 is a scale factor that will
allow us to interpet g as indexing the strength of the prior.
    Given the priors (35) and (36), and the likelihood defined by (32–34), the agent
forms a posterior. Let x̂t = {x̂0 , . . . , x̂t }, namely the set of observations on x̂s , up to
and including time t. Let yt = {∆d1 , . . . ∆dt } be the dividend growth observations up
to and including time t. The agent calculates


                           p(β, σu | x̂t , yt ) ∝ L(yt | x̂t , β, σu )p(β, σu ),                  (37)


where p(β, σu ) is the prior specified in (35) and (36) and L(yt | x̂t , β, σu ) is the likelihood
of observing the dividend growth data given the predictor variable and the parameters.
    We fix time T as the last data point observed. We stack the observations on x̂t and
degree-of-freedom adjustment that becomes negligible as the same size grows.
   13
      Because our focus will be on the posterior mean of β, these play no further role in our analysis.




                                                    19
∆dt into vectors:                                                    
                                       ∆d1                         x̂0
                                      .                       . 
                                                                     
                                 Y =  ..  ,              X =  ..  .
                                                                     
                                       ∆dT                       x̂T −1

Note that the OLS estimate of β equals


                                             β̂ = (X > X)−1 X > Y,


and that (32) implies
                                                 Y = βX + U,

where U ∼ N (0, σu2 I), and I is the T × T identity matrix. It follows that the posterior
(37) is given by

                                                                      gΛ0 (β − β0 )2
                                                                                  
                                        1
p(β, σu |, x̂T , yT ) ∝   σu−n   exp −             >          −1
                                           (Y − Xβ) (Y − Xβ) σu exp −
                                       2σu                                 2σu2

where ∝ means up to a proportionality factor that does not depend on β and σu .
Completing the square implies

                                              (X > X + gΛ0 )(β − β̄)2
                                                                       
     p(β, σu |, x̂T , yT ) ∝     σu−1   exp −                               × p(σu | x̂T , yT ),   (38)
                                                       2σu2

where


                           β̄ = (gΛ0 + X > X)−1 (gΛ0 β0 + X > Y )

                                 = (gΛ0 + X > X)−1 (gΛ0 β0 + (X > X)β̂),


and where p(σu | x̂T , yT ) is a term that does not depend on β and is therefore the
marginal posterior of σu (see (Zellner, 1996, Chapter 8) for more detail). It is clear
from (38) that the posterior of β conditional on σu is multivariate normal with posterior

                                                      20
mean β̄. Note also that β̄ is a weighted average between the prior mean β0 and the
sample mean β̂, with the weights determined by the precisions of the prior and of the
sample respectively.
    If we, ex post, set Λ0 = X > X, then g corresponds to the weight on β0 as a percent
of the weight on β̂, so that g = 0.1 implies that the prior receives 1/10 of the weight
of the sample, and g = 0.01 means it receives 1/100 of the weight. Because we are
asking whether, if the agent had the beliefs we attribute to her in Section 2, her beliefs
would change, we set the prior mean to equal 1/(1 − φ) = 0.05. For comparability with
Tables 4–7, which show regressions on the dividend-price ratio, Figure 3 shows the
negative of the posterior mean of β. We consider an informative prior, with g = 0.10,
and a diffuse prior, with g = 0.01.
    Figure 3 shows that the agent does indeed revise her prior beliefs, at least at first.
She revises it to imply more, not less predictability of dividend growth. Indeed, from
the 1930s to the 1970s, it appears that dividend growth was more predictable than
later in the sample. Only when nearly the full sample is used, namely around 2000,
does the posterior mean converge to the sample estimate, which happens to be close to,
though implying slightly more predictability than, the prior. Note that the convergence
implies that the prior does not matter when the full sample is used.
    Thus an agent, viewing the evidence on annual dividend growth rates in isolation,
would be justified in maintaining a belief that dividend growth rates are predictable.
This agent, however, is not fully rational. He incorrectly extrapolates the predictability
from the one-year horizon to long horizons. Moreover, he fails to notice that excess
returns are also predictable.



6     Extensions

Cochrane (2011) notes that predictability, both in the time series and in the cross-


                                            21
section, appears to be ubiquitous. He attributes this predictability to variation in
discount rates across time and across assets. He notes that, within a no-arbitrage
setting (like the current paper), discount-rate based explanations of phenomena and
belief-based explanations are isomorphic (see Harrison and Kreps (1979)). However,
the fact that one can be mapped into the other does not necessarily make them equally
good explanations, as the discount-rate equivalent of a belief-based model might be
complicated (and likewise, for a belief-based equivalent of an discount-rate explana-
tion). Furthermore, time-varying discount rates are ideally viewed as an endogenous
outcome of an economic model. In most models, time-varying discount rates are tied to
time-varying risk, providing testable implications discussed in the introduction. Dis-
count rates might also vary because risk aversion varies, or a rare event probability
varies; yet this would suggest a co-movement in measures of discount rates, which is
absent in the data Lettau and Wachter (2011).14
    On the other hand, if investors display superstitious behavior about aggregate mar-
ket dividends, it is natural to assume that this behavior could be seen in other asset
classes, and would produce the kind of (ex post) predictability seen in the data. We
give specific parametric examples below.


6.1     The value premium

Fama and French (1992) show that stocks with high ratios of book equity to market
equity (value stocks) exhibit significantly higher excess returns than those with low
ratios (growth stocks). Moreover, market betas line up in roughly the opposite direction
of the expected returns, as do standard deviations. Thus standard risk-based stories
fail to account for the observed value premium. Here, we show that a simple extension
  14
     Differential time-varying exposure to rare events offers another potential route for unifying this
evidence (Gabaix, 2012). Moreover, existing models of time-varying risk aversion or rare events do
not in practice entirely break the link between first and second moments.




                                                  22
to the model presented in Section 2 naturally accounts for this finding.15
    As is well known, the value premium result extends to ratios of other fundamentals
to price, such as earnings to price (see, e.g. Lettau and Wachter (2007)). What appears
to be important is having price in the denominator and a plausible non-price scaling
variable in the numerator. For our model, the most natural scaling variable is payouts,
namely dividends, though these could be connected, through a standard production
framework, to book value. We focus on the earnings-to-price ratio in the data because
dividends are to some extent arbitrary.
    Assume n risky assets. Let Djt denote the time-t dividend, and ∆djt log dividend
growth, for stock j, where j = 1, ..., n. Investors believe that dividend growth is
predictable, as before. However, besides a component that effects all firms in the same
way, there is a second component that effects firms differentially. That is,


                                   ∆dj,t+1 = xt + βz,j zt + uj,t+1 ,                                 (39)


where


                                      xt+1 = φx xt + vx,t+1                                          (40)

                                      zt+1 = φz zt + vz,t+1 .                                        (41)


We assume the shocks uj,t+1 (for j = 1, . . . , n), vx,t+1 , and vz,t+1 , are normally dis-
tributed, independent of one another, and independent over time, with variances σu2
       2         2
(∀j), σvx , and σvz respectively.
    Equation 39 indicates that subjective expectations are driven by xt and zt . Firms
are affected by xt in the same way, while they are differentially affected by zt . So that
   15
      Other approaches to explaining the value premium that rely on subjective expectations include
Barberis et al. (1998); Daniel et al. (2001); Alti and Tetlock (2014); Tsai and Wachter (2016); Bordalo
et al. (2017). La Porta (1996) finds direct evidence for the role of incorrect expectations in the observed
value premium.


                                                    23
xt has the interpretation of expected dividend growth in the aggregate, we assume that
P
   j βz,j = 0.

    We assume risk-neutral investors with discount rate δ. Let Ptj denote the price of
stock j. As in Section 2,
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                            Ptj   =          j
                                                            Pn,t ,
                                                      n=1

       j                                                                    j
where Pn,t is the price of the n-period dividend strip for stock j. Prices Pn,t satisfy a
recursion analogous to (7). Conjecture that the solution takes the form

                            j
                           Pn,t
                                = Fnj (xt , zt ) = eaj,n +bx,n xt +βz,j bz,n zt .     (42)
                           Dj,t

Using a recursion analogous to (7), we find the difference equations

                                1             1 2 2             1
                 aj,n = aj,n−1 + b2x,n−1 σvx
                                          2
                                             + βz,j         2
                                                    bz,n−1 σvz + σu2 + log δ
                                2             2                 2
                 bx,n = bx,n−1 φx + 1                                                 (43)

                 bz,n = bz,n−1 φz + 1,

      j
with P0,t /Djt = 1 implying boundary conditions aj,0 = bx,0 = bz,0 = 0. Thus

                                                    1 − φnx
                                          bx,n =
                                                    1 − φx
                                                    1 − φnz
                                          bz,n    =         .
                                                    1 − φz

It is also useful to note that:

                 j
                Pn,t    ∗
                          h Pn
                           n      ∆dj,t+s
                                          i
                     = Et δ e s=1           = exp{aj,n + bx,n xt + βz,j bz,n zt },    (44)
                Dj,t

with aj,n , bx,n , bz,n as above.
    Equation 42 implies a cross-section of scaled-price ratios as long as there is a cross-


                                                      24
section of exposures βz,j . Following the empirical literature, we refer to stocks with
high price ratios as growth and those with low price ratios as value. For example, if
zt > 0, then growth stocks will have high βzj and value stocks will have low βzj . On
the other hand, if zt < 0, the reverse pattern will be the case.16 Note that all that is
required to produce a spread in price-dividend ratios is variation in the loadings βz,j .
Value stocks need not be pre-assigned some βz,j .17
    We assume, as in Section 2, that dividend growth is in fact unpredictable. We define
the market portfolio to be the weighted average of the individual assets. We take this
simple model to the data.18 Table 8 reports means of portfolios formed on earnings-
to-price ratios in postwar data, and in simulations from the model. In historical data,
firms are sorted into quintiles based on earnings-to-price ratios (details can be found on
Kenneth French’s website). In the data, value firms (those with high earnings-to-price
ratios) have high expected returns relative to growth firms. Except for the extreme
value quintile, they have lower standard deviations and lower betas with respect to the
market. Thus the Capital Asset Pricing Model does not explain the spread in expected
returns, and abnormal returns are large.
    Table 8 also reports means from simulations in the model. True risk premia in the
model equal zero. However measured risk premia do not. Just as in the data, the
higher is the earnings-to-price ratio, the higher the return, with the difference in the
model being 3%. All of this is abnormal return because risk premia equal zero.
    Why does the model produce a spread in returns? In the spirit of Cohen et al.
(2003), consider the value spread, defined by as the difference in dividend-to-price
  16
      We disregard for the moment the Jensen’s inequality adjustments in the aj,n terms. In our
calibration, these are small.
   17
      While we focus on a common component in subjective beliefs on which stocks load differentially,
a reasonable extension would be to allow for firm-specific components. Firm-specific differences in
beliefs would produce a long-run reversal effect distinct from an over-reaction mechanism (Daniel
et al., 1998; Hong and Stein, 1999).
   18
      The persistences φx = φz = 0.85. The volatilities σvx = σvz = 2.5%, while σu = 20%. log δ =
−5.7% so that prices converge. The loading on zt , βjz ranges from -1 to 1.



                                                 25
ratios between value and growth stocks. The value spread in the model is given by

                                                             n−1
              Dj,t    Dk,t  1 2       2     2
                                               X
           log j − log k = − (βz,j − βz,k )σvz     b2z,s − (βz,j − βz,k )bz,n zt ,                 (45)
              Pn,t    Pn,t  2                  s=1


with βz,j < 0 and βz,k > 0 when zt > 0, and the signs reversed when zt < 0.19 When
zt > 0, firms that have the highest valuations relative to their dividends (and thus
the lowest dividend-price ratios) have the greatest loadings on zt . Note that the value
spread in the model is perfectly correlated with the perceived differential forecast zt .
    Then realized returns on the n-period dividend strip for stock j equal:


         j              j              j
log(1 + Rn,t+1 ) = log Pn−1,t+1 − log Pn,t

                   = aj,n−1 − aj,n + bx,n−1 xt+1 − bx,n xt + βz,j (bz,n−1 zt+1 − bz,n zt ) + uj,t+1

                   = aj,n−1 − aj,n − xt − βz,j zt + bx,n−1 vx,t+1 + βz,j bz,n−1 vz,t+1 + uj,t+1


Consider the differential return between a value stock j and growth stock k.


           j                  k
  log(1 + Rn,t+1 ) − log(1 + Rn,t+1 ) = (aj,n−1 − aj,n − (ak,n−1 − ak,n )) − (βz,j − βz,k )zt +

                                                       (βz,j − βz,k )bz,n−1 vz,t+1 + uj,t+1 − uk,t+1 .


The preceding argument implies that, for zt > 0, we have βz,k > βz,j .20 Note that


                              j                     k
                                                       
                  log Et 1 + Rn,t+1   − log Et 1 + Rn,t+1   = (βz,k − βz,j )zt                     (46)


Because zt > 0, value stocks appear to offer a premium over growth stocks. It follows
that the value factor always has a positive average return. The model not only predicts
that value stocks have higher average returns, but that the degree of the mispricing is
  19
       Again, we ignore for the purpose of discussion, the second-order Jensen’s inequality term, which
is the first term in (45).
    20
       Note that for zt < 0, we would have the opposite inequality.


                                                  26
perfectly correlated with the value spread, as Cohen et al. (2003) show.
   Interestingly, however, the model reproduces the u-shape in volatilities. The ex-
treme growth and value stocks are those with extreme β loadings in either direction,
and hence are the most volatile. The model also reproduces the high market betas
of growth stocks. Growth stocks are especially sensitive to changes in xt because of
the effect of duration, and xt is what drives the market portfolio. The model cannot,
however, reproduce all the results in the data. Besides the fact that average returns
are too low (this, however, is by construction and could be altered in the same way as
in Section 2), the model also produces a high-minus-low portfolio that is too volatile.
   An important aspect of the value premium in that, while it cannot be explained by
conventional risk measures, it can be explained by factor loadings on the HML (high-
minus-low) factor. However, this too can be replicated in the model. When we run
time-series regressions using the market return and the HML return (the return on the
value portfolio minus the return on the growth portfolio), we find zero abnormal return,
just as in the data. The reason is that the value-minus-growth return is almost perfectly
correlated with innovations in zt . Note that the factor loading on zt innovations is
proportional to βz,j . Expected returns are also proportional to this factor loading.
   To summarize, a time-series factor in expected dividend growth can lead to a cross-
sectional factor if firms have different loadings. This will always produce a spread
in ratios of prices to dividends (or, in a richer model, prices-to-earnings or prices-to-
book value). Moreover, subsequent returns will go in the opposite direction, as the
(incorrectly) predicted aggregate dividend growth fails to materialize. Note that the
link to time-series variation in zt is important; it would not be sufficient to have, for
example, a model in which some investors are excessively optimistic about some stocks
and pessimistic about others. Such a static model would neither explain the association
with the value spread and the value return noted by Cohen et al. (2003), nor the ability
of the HML factor to account for the value premium, as shown by Fama and French


                                           27
(1993). Both of these facts are naturally accounted for in the dynamic model shown
above.


6.2      Violations of the expectations hypothesis of interest rates

We now apply these ideas to the pricing of Treasury bonds. Assume that investors
believe that the continuously-compounded short-term interest rate rt follows a first-
order autoregressive process, so that


                                 ∆rt+1 = (φ − 1)(rt − r̄) + vt+1                                  (47)

                                                                                         iid
where ∆rt+1 = rt+1 −rt , |φ| < 1, r̄ is the unconditional mean of rt , and vt+1 ∼ N (0, σv2 ).
Note that φ is the first-order autocorrelation of rt .21
      As with dividend growth, investors believe that changes in interest rates are more
forecastable than they are in reality. That is, while (47) represent beliefs, the true
process is governed by
                                 ∆rt+1 = (ζ − 1)(rt − r̄) + vt+1 ,                                (48)

with
                                         |ζ − 1| < |φ − 1|.                                       (49)

We focus on the case where ζ, φ ∈ [0, 1] so that (49) implies ζ > φ. In forecasting next
  21
    The analysis in this section takes the short-term interest rate rt as a given. Perhaps the simplest
way to micro-found variation in this rate is to consider a risk-neutral investor with discount rate δ
and an exogenous inflation process ∆πt+1 such that

                                       ∆πt+1 = π̄ + zt + ut+1

and
                                          zt+1 = φzt + vt+1 ,
with ut+1 and vt+1 distributed as in (3). The interest rate rt then solves

                                        Et δe−∆πt+1 +rt = 1.
                                                       


Under these assumptions, the analysis proceeds exactly as described.


                                                  28
period’s interest rate, (49) implies that investors put more weight on previous values
of the interest rate than they should. Alternatively stated, interest rates are closer
to a random walk (they mean revert more slowly) in the data than investors believe
(ζ > η).
    We consider risk-neutral pricing for bonds. The dynamics thus far define a discrete-
time Vasicek (1977) model.22 Let Bn (rt ) denote the price of the n-period bond as a
function of the riskfree rate between periods t and t + 1. Then bond prices satisfy the
recursion
                                 Bn (rt ) = Et∗ e−rt Bn−1 (rt+1 ) ,
                                                                
                                                                                                 (50)

with B0 (rt ) = 1 and B1 (rt ) = e−rt . It follows that


                                     log Bn (rt ) = −an − bn rt                                  (51)


with
                                                         1
                             an = an−1 + bn−1 (1 − φ)r̄ − b2n−1 σv2
                                                         2                                       (52)
                              bn = 1 + bn−1 φ

and a0 = b0 = 0. Note that a1 = 0 and b1 = 1, so that B1 (rt ) = e−rt . The solution for
bn is again
                                                  1 − φn
                                           bn =          .                                       (53)
                                                  1−φ

    Defining the continuously compounded yield on the n-period bond as

                                              1
                                       ynt = − log Bn (rt )
                                              n
  22
      A substantial literature on latent factor models strongly rejects a single-factor model in favor
of multi-factor alternatives (Dai and Singleton, 2002; Duffee, 2002). Piazzesi et al. (2015) show how
subjective expectations can be incorporated into a model with richer dynamics. For the purpose of
illustrating our mechanism, however, this simple model suffices.




                                                  29
It follows from (53) that the yield spread equals

                                                      1 1 − φn
                                                                 
                        ynt − y1t = constant +                 − 1 rt
                                                      n 1−φ

(recall that y1t = rt ). The (continuously compounded) holding period return on the
n-period bond is given by


                           rn,t+1 = log Bn−1 (rt+1 ) − log Bn (rt )


(note that r1,t+1 = rt ). Substituting in for (51), (53), and for the physical evolution of
rt , (48), we find the following equation for continuously-compounded excess returns:

                                                          bn−1
    rxn,t+1 = rn,t+1 − r1,t+1 = constant + (ζ − φ)                 (ynt − y1t ) + bn−1 vt+1 .
                                                       1 − (1/n)bn

When ζ = φ, we recover the equilibrium with correct beliefs in which excess returns
are unpredictable. However, when ζ > φ, the yield spread will predict excess returns
with a positive sign, as in the data.
   The economic intuition is similar to that of predictability in equity ratios. Yields
fluctuate based on forecasts of future interest rates. Relatively high values of long-term
yields indicate investor forecasts of rising short-term interest rates. Short-term rates
are not as predictable as investors think, and on average, when the yield spread is high,
interest rates fall relative to investor’s expectations. As a result, an above-average yield
spread forecasts positive excess returns on bonds.
   The ability of the yield spread to forecast excess bond returns was first noted in
the data by Campbell and Shiller (1991). According to the expectations hypothesis of
interest rates, yields on long-term bonds should reflect forecasts of future short-term




                                             30
interest rates.23 Indeed, the recursion (50) implies

                                           1     ∗
                                                   h Pn−1
                                                           rt+τ
                                                                i
                                  ynt   = − log Et e  τ =0        .
                                           n

If investors correctly anticipate yields, then bond returns will be unpredictable. How-
ever, Campbell and Shiller (1991), Fama and Bliss (1987) and a large subsequent
literature show that excess bond returns are strongly forecastable. We replicate this
finding in Table 10, which reports coefficients from regressing bond returns on yield
spreads using the Fama-Bliss data set for zero-coupon bonds.
    As an illustrative calculation, we calibrate σv and φ to jointly match the volatility
and first-order autocorrelations of yields. This implies σv = 1.5% per annum and an
annual autocorrelation ζ of (roughly) 0.90. Given these parameters, φ = 0.45 gives us
roughly the amount of predictability in the data.
    Table 10 shows results from historical data and from simulating 1000 samples of
length 70 years. We run the regression


                               rxn,t+1 = αn + βn (ynt − y1t ) + t+1


for zero-coupon bonds for maturities ranging from 2 to 5 years. Bond excess returns
are strongly predictable in both data and model.
    Though there are aspects of the data that this one factor model cannot match (for
example, yield spreads are less persistent then yields themselves), it offers a very simple
explanation for a difficult feature of the data: namely, why investors appear to require,
at some points in time, very different term premia for long-term bonds. In this model,
the answer is that they do not require such premia, but rather, they do not know the
correct process for interest rates.24 Given that this process has itself been a matter of
  23
     There are slight differences depending on whether this hypothesis is articulated in logs or levels
(Campbell, 1986).
  24
     Recent work has assembled direct evidence in favor for this hypothesis. Cieslak (2018) shows that

                                                  31
long debate in the finance profession, this seems like a relatively weak assumption.


6.3       Uncovered interest rate parity

While a full account of the behavior of currencies and international interest rates is far
outside the scope of this paper, we offer a simple extension of the previous ideas to the
forward premium anomaly, otherwise known as the failure of uncovered interest rate
parity.25
    Let St be the exchange rate in units of foreign currency per U.S. dollar. Let Rt+1 be
the nominal interest rate in the U.S. available between times t and t+1, and R̃t+1 be the
nominal interest rate in the foreign country, denominated in that country’s currency.
Let Ft be the forward price of the foreign currency. That is, at time t, one dollar can
be converted into Ft units of the foreign currency at time t + 1. We consider nominal
rates, and assume no risk of sovereign default, so that Rt+1 and R̃t+1 are known at
time t.
    Risk-neutral pricing for the U.S. investor requires that expected rates of return be
equal when computed with respect to the investor’s probability distribution:

                                                               
                                                St
                             Et∗    1 + Rt+1 −      (1 + R̃t+1 ) = 0.                               (54)
                                               St+1

That is, returns from investing risk-free in the U.S. should be equal, in expectation,
to investing in the foreign country’s riskfree rate. Of course, one first needs to convert
survey errors are forecastable, and that the forecastable component predicts excess return on bonds, in
the decreasing pattern shown in Table 10. Cieslak (2018) and Piazzesi et al. (2015) show that, over the
1980–2010 period, featuring a long decline in interest rates, survey expectations were systematically
above the expectations formed using a model estimated on the entire period. Consistent with (49), it
appears that investors kept expecting a reversion to higher interest rates (relatively speaking), despite
years of evidence that such a reversion failed to occur.
   25
      The potential for distorted beliefs to resolve exchange rate puzzles has also been noted by Gour-
inchas and Tornell (2004) and Burnside et al. (2011). The field of international finance offers a rich
array of puzzles in which mis-specified beliefs could play a role, as shown in Dumas et al. (2017).
Frankel and Froot (1987) offer survey evidence that is consistent with the explanation we propose
here.


                                                   32
U.S. dollars into the foreign currency, and then back again in the following period.26
Equation 54 can be rewritten as:

                                                        −1
                                  1 + R̃t+1        ∗  St
                                            =     Et           .                                   (55)
                                  1 + Rt+1           St+1

    Furthermore, no-arbitrage implies covered interest rate parity. That is, investing at
the U.S. interest rate must equal buying the foreign currency today, investing at the
foreign country’s interest rate, and then converting back via a forward contract:

                                                   St
                                    1 + Rt+1 =        (1 + R̃t+1 ).                                (56)
                                                   Ft

Combining (55) and (56) implies that the so-called forward discount Ft /St is related
to appreciation (or depreciation) in the exchange rate via the expectation:

                                                    −1
                                      Ft       ∗  St
                                         =    Et           .                                       (57)
                                      St         St+1

That is, high forward discounts indicate investors expect appreciation of the currency.
    Equations 55 and 57, each constituting uncovered interest rate parity, have been
extensively tested and found to fail in the time series and in the cross section of
currencies. For example, Lustig et al. (2011) sort currencies on the basis of the left-
hand-side of (57) and then compute subsequent changes in exchange rates. Contrary
to (57), they find no relation between a high forward discount and future appreciation
of the currency. Nor is there a relation between the interest rate differential (55) and
future appreciation. What they do find is a relation between the forward discount and
excess returns on the foreign currency.
  26
     The risk-neutral investor cares about expected returns being equated in real terms. Thus, if
∆πt+1 is log inflation between t and t + 1 in the U.S., (54) should have, inside the square brackets,
e∆−πt+1 . By using (54), we effectively assume (for simplicity) that U.S. inflation is uncorrelated with
innovations in the foreign exchange rate.



                                                  33
   Specifically, define the continuously-compounded excess return on the currency as

                                                      
                                       St
                    rxt+1 = log            (1 + R̃t+1 ) − log(1 + Rt+1 ).            (58)
                                      St+1

Lustig et al. (2011) show sorting on the forward discount produces a large spread in
excess currency returns in the next period. We show their results in the data row of
Table 11. The currencies with the lowest forward discount have a subsequent excess
currency return of -3%, while those with the highest have a return of 6%. However,
their volatilities are approximately the same. This result parallels a time-series finding
that high forward discounts (equivalently, high interest rate differentials), predict high
excess returns on the currency (Backus et al., 2001).
   To understand these results, we consider a very simple model for the exchange
rate. Consider a set of countries indexed by j, j = 1, . . . , n. Let sjt = log Sjt , and
∆sj,t+1 = sj,t+1 − sjt . Assume that


                                  ∆sj,t+1 = xjt + σj uj,t+1 ,                        (59)

                                               iid
for some random variable xjt , with uj,t+1 ∼ N (0, 1). It follows from (57) that the log
of the forward discount fjt − sjt = log(Fjt /Sjt ) equals

                                                    1
                                   fjt − sjt = xjt − σj2                             (60)
                                                    2

Define continuously-compounded returns r̃j,t+1 = log(1 + R̃j,t+1 ) and rt+1 = log(1 +




                                               34
Rt+1 ). Consider the excess return on the foreign currency, defined in (58).


                          rxj,t+1 = sjt − sj,t+1 + r̃j,t+1 − rj,t+1

                                    = −∆sj,t+1 + fjt − sjt                                    (61)
                                                              1
                                    = −xjt − σj uj,t+1 + xjt − σj2                            (62)
                                                              2
                                                   1 2
                                    = −σj uj,t+1 − σj ,                                       (63)
                                                   2

where (61) follows from (56), and (62) imposes equality between the subjective and
physical distribution, and uses (59). Thus continuously compounded excess returns are
unpredictable. In the cross-section, E[rxj,t+1 ] depend only σj2 , a Jensen’s inequality ef-
fect. On the other hand, exchange rates should be predictable by the forward discount,
as is clear from comparing (60) and (59). This predictability is absent in the data.
   Suppose instead that the true process for exchange rates is a random walk:


                                       ∆sj,t+1 = σj uj,t+1 .


In this case,


                               rxj,t+1 = −∆sj,t+1 + fjt − sjt                                 (64)

                                        = −σj uj,t+1 + fjt − sjt                              (65)


where uj,t+1 is an iid shock. Clearly excess returns on currencies will be forecastable,
both in the time series and the cross-section, by the forward discount. Table 11 shows
that indeed this is the case, and that the model replicates the magnitude of the cross-
sectional relation.27
  27
     The results of Lustig et al. (2011) indicate an HML-type factor in currency premia. To capture
this common factor, one could proceed as in Section 6.1 and model differential loadings on a common
forecast.



                                                35
    Note that, unlike previous results, the one-period nature of the forward-premium
regressions implies that we need not specify a process for xjt . Bringing in term structure
information, such as in Lustig et al. (2018), would help pin down such a process. We
leave such extensions to future work.



7     Conclusion

Like the pigeons in Skinner’s classic (1948) experiment, investors discover meaning in
randomness. In this paper, we have shown that this simple insight has far-reaching
consequences for asset pricing. An asset price is today’s forecast of the future outcome
of a random process, such as a company’s dividend, or a country’s exchange rate.
Any information investors think they have about this future outcome will be in today’s
price. And yet if the process in question is not in fact forecastable, the price will adjust
to meet reality, rather than reality adjusting to meet the price. We have shown, in
four distinct settings, that the former is what occurs. For the aggregate stock market,
prices have adjusted to meet dividends. For the cross-section of stocks, those with high
prices relative to earnings see their prices fall. Long-term bond prices adjust to meet
stable short-term interest rates, rather than the other way around. Forward prices of
currencies adjust to meet spot prices.
    A difficult and interesting question is how investors form their expectations. We
have shown that, regardless of the specifics of this process, a tendency to find structure
in randomness leaves a signature pattern in asset prices, one which we can observe in
a strikingly consistent way.




                                            36
Appendix

A     Bayesian analysis of predictive regressions

Consider the predictive system


                                yt+1 = β0 + βxt + ut+1                                   (A.1)

                                xt+1 = φ0 + φxt + vt+1                                   (A.2)


The agent observes x0 , . . . , xT and y1 , . . . , yT , perhaps because yt represents a return
or a growth rate (and so one observation is lost relative to xt ). We assume

                                             
                                         ut
                                              iid
                                                ∼ N (0, Σ)                               (A.3)
                                         vt

for a positive-semidefinite matrix Σ, representing the variance-covariance matrix.
    Define                                                
                                                  β 0 φ0
                                      B=                  
                                                  β    φ

and xt , yt , analogously to Section 5. Let L denote the joint likelihood of the data. The
agent forms the posterior


                        p(B, Σ | xT , yT ) ∝ L(xT , yT |B, Σ)p(B, Σ),                    (A.4)


where ∝ denotes up to a factor that does not depend on B and Σ.
    We make the following assumptions, to reduce the problem to the one considered
in Section 5.

Assumption 1. The matrix Σ is diagonal.

Assumption 2. The parameters β0 , β1 and σu are independent, under the prior, of

                                                  37
φ0 , φ1 and σv , where σu2 is the first, and σv2 the second, diagonal element of Σ.

   As shown below, these assumptions guarantee strict exogeneity of xt in relation to
yt . If these assumptions hold approximately, i.e. if the contemporaneous correlation
between yt+1 and xt+1 is small, then it is likely that inference will not be strongly
effected. See Wachter and Warusawitharana (2015) for the analysis when these don’t
hold, as is the case when yt represents stock returns.
   We now show the marginal posterior for β0 , β and σu reduces to (37). Define
l(xt+1 , yt+1 | xt , B, Σ) as the likelihood of the time-t observation. Note that (A.1–A.3)
imply
                     l(xt+1 , yt+1 | xt , B, Σ) = l(xt+1 , yt+1 | xt , yt B, Σ).

Conditional probability calculations imply

                                       T
                                       Y −1
                 L(xT , yT |B, Σ) =           l(xt+1 , yt+1 | xt , B, Σ)l(x0 | B, Σ),
                                       t=0


where we use l(x0 | B, Σ) to denote the likelihood of the initial observation.
   Assumption 1 implies that, conditional on xt and on the parameters, yt+1 is inde-
pendent of xt+1 . We can factor l as follows:


           l(xt+1 , yt+1 | xt , B, Σ) = l(yt+1 | xt , xt+1 , B, Σ)l(xt+1 | xt , B, Σ)

                                     = l(yt+1 | xt , B, Σ)l(xt+1 | xt , B, Σ)                   (A.5)

                                     = l(yt+1 | xt , β0 , β, σu )l(xt+1 | xt , φ0 , φ1 , σv )   (A.6)


Note that (A.5) does indeed require Assumption 1. If this assumption does not hold,
then realizations of xt+1 give additional information about the shocks ut+1 . Given
(A.5), (A.6) follows from the form of (A.1) and the definition of Σ.




                                                  38
   We apply Assumption 2 and (A.6) to find the following form of the posterior:

                         T
                         Y −1                                T
                                                             Y −1
  p(B, Σ | xT , yT ) ∝          l(yt+1 | xt , β0 , β, σu )          l(xt+1 | xt , φ0 , φ, σv )l(x0 | φ0 , φ1 , σv )
                         t=0                                  t=0

                                                                             × p(β0 , β, σu )p(φ0 , φ, σv ). (A.7)


Furthermore,


        p(B, Σ | xT , yT ) = p(β0 , β, σu | φ0 , φ, σv , xT , yT )p(φ0 , φ, σv | xT , yT ).                       (A.8)


The right hand side of (A.7) factors into two terms, one of which depends on (β0 , β, σu ),
and one of which depends on (φ0 , φ, σv ). Thus we can write:

                                       T
                                       Y −1
        p(φ0 , φ, σv | xT , yT ) ∝            l(xt+1 | xt , φ0 , φ, σv )l(x0 | φ0 , φ1 , σv )p(φ0 , φ, σv ),
                                       t=0


and, from (A.8),

                                                   T
                                                   Y −1
                 p(β0 , β, σu | xT , yT ) ∝               l(yt+1 | xt , β0 , β, σu )p(β0 , β, σu ).
                                                   t=0


This proves that (37) is the correct posterior.




                                                           39
References

Adam, K., Marcet, A., and Beutel, J. (2017). Stock price booms and expected capital
  gains. American Economic Review, 107(8):2352–2408.

Alti, A. and Tetlock, P. C. (2014). Biased beliefs, asset prices, and investment: A
  structural approach. The Journal of Finance, 69(1):325–361.

Backus, D., Chernov, M., and Zin, S. (2014). Sources of entropy in representative agent
  models. The Journal of Finance, 69(1):51–99.

Backus, D. K., Foresi, S., and Telmer, C. I. (2001). Affine term structure models and
  the forward premium anomaly. The Journal of Finance, 56(1):279–304.

Bansal, R. and Yaron, A. (2004). Risks for the long run: a potential resolution of asset
  pricing puzzles. Journal of Finance, 59(4):1481–1509.

Bar-Hillel, M. and Wagenaar, W. A. (1991). The perception of randomness. Advances
  in Applied Mathematics, 12(4):428–454.

Barberis, N., Greenwood, R., Jin, L., and Shleifer, A. (2015). X-CAPM: An extrap-
  olative capital asset pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics, 115(1):1–24.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. (1998). A model of investor sentiment.
  Journal of Financial Economics, page 37.

Barberis, N., Thaler, R., G. M. Constantinides, M. H., and Stulz, R. M. (2003). A
  survey of behavioral finance, volume Volume 1, Part B, chapter 18, pages 1053–1128.
  Elsevier.

Barro, R. J. (2006). Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 121(3):823–866.



                                          40
Barsky, R. B. and De Long, J. B. (1993). Why does the stock market fluctuate? The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(2):291–311.

Bidder, R. and Dew-Becker, I. (2016). Long-run risk is the worst-case scenario. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 106(9):2494–2527.

Binsbergen, J. H. v., Brandt, M. W., and Koijen, R. S. (2012). On the timing and
  pricing of dividends. American Economic Review, 102(4):1596–1618.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., and Shleifer, A. (2017). Memory, attention, and choice.
  NBER Working Paper No. 23256.

Burnside, C., Han, B., Hirshleifer, D., and Wang, T. Y. (2011). Investor overconfidence
  and the forward premium puzzle. Review of Economic Studies, 78(2):523–558.

Calvet, L. E. and Fisher, A. J. (2007). Multifrequency news and stock returns. Journal
  of Financial Economics, 86(1):178–212.

Campbell, J. Y. (1986). A defense of traditional hypotheses about the term structure
  of interest rates. Journal of Finance, 41:183–193.

Campbell, J. Y. and Cochrane, J. H. (1999). By force of habit: A consumption-
  based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy,
  107:205–251.

Campbell, J. Y. and Shiller, R. J. (1988). The dividend-price ratio and expectations
  of future dividends and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies, 1:195–228.

Campbell, J. Y. and Shiller, R. J. (1991). Yield spreads and interest rate movements:
  A bird’s eye view. Review of Economic Studies, 58:495–514.




                                          41
Cecchetti, S. G., Lam, P.-s., and Mark, N. C. (2000). Asset pricing with distorted
  beliefs: Are equity returns too good to be true?      American Economic Review,
  90(4):787–805.

Cieslak, A. (2018). Short-rate expectations and unexpected returns in treasury bonds.
  The Review of Financial Studies, 31(9):3265–3306.

Cochrane, J. H. (2008). The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability.
  Review of Financial Studies, 21(4):1533–1575.

Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. The Journal of Finance,
  66(4):1047–1108.

Cohen, R. B., Polk, C., and Vuolteenaho, T. (2003). The value spread. Journal of
  Finance, 58(2):609–641.

Collin-Dufresne, P., Johannes, M., and Lochstoer, L. A. (2016). Parameter learning
  in general equilibrium: The asset pricing implications. American Economic Review,
  106(3):664–698.

Dai, Q. and Singleton, K. (2002). Expectations puzzles, time-varying risk premia, and
  affine models of the term structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 63:415–442.

Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., and Subrahmanyam, A. (1998). Investor psychology and
  security market under- and overreactions. The Journal of Finance, 53(6):1839–1885.

Daniel, K. D., Hirshleifer, D., and Subrahmanyam, A. (2001). Overconfidence, arbi-
  trage, and equilibrium asset pricing. The Journal of Finance, 56(3):921–965.

de la O, R. and Myers, S. (2018). Subjective cash flow and discount rate expectations.
  Working paper, Stanford University.




                                         42
Dew-Becker, I., Giglio, S., Le, A., and Rodriguez, M. (2017). The price of variance
  risk. Journal of Financial Economics, 123(2):225–250.

Duffee, G. R. (2002). Term premia and interest rate forecasts in affine models. Journal
  of Finance, 57:369–443.

Duffee, G. R. (2005). Time-variation in the covariance between stock returns and
  consumption growth. Journal of Finance, 60(4):1673–1712.

Dumas, B., Kurshev, A., and Uppal, R. (2009). Equilibrium portfolio strategies in the
  presence of sentiment risk and excess volatility. Journal of Finance, 64(2):579 – 629.

Dumas, B., Lewis, K. K., and Osambela, E. (2017). Differences of opinion and inter-
  national equity markets. The Review of Financial Studies, 30(3):750–800.

Fama, E. F. and Bliss, R. R. (1987). The information in long-maturity forward rates.
  American Economic Review, 77:680–692.

Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. (1992). The cross-section of expected returns. Journal
  of Finance, 47:427–465.

Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on bonds
  and stocks. Journal of Financial Economics, 33:3–56.

Frankel, J. A. and Froot, K. A. (1987). Using survey data to test standard propositions
  regarding exchange rate expectations. The American Economic Review, 77(1):133.

Fuster, A., Laibson, D., and Mendel, B. (2010). Natural expectations and macroeco-
  nomic fluctuations. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(4):67–84.

Gabaix, X. (2012). An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in macro-finance.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2):645–700.



                                          43
Gourinchas, P.-O. and Tornell, A. (2004). Exchange rate puzzles and distorted beliefs.
  Journal of International Economics, 64(2):303 – 333.

Hansen, L. P. and Sargent, T. J. (2010). Fragile beliefs and the price of uncertainty.
  Quantitative Economics, 1(1):129–162.

Harrison, M. and Kreps, D. (1979). Martingales and multiperiod securities markets.
  Journal of Economic Theory, 20:381–408.

Hirshleifer, D. (2015). Behavioral finance. Annual Review of Financial Economics,
  7(1):133–159.

Hirshleifer, D., Li, J., and Yu, J. (2015). Asset pricing in production economies with
  extrapolative expectations. Journal of Monetary Economics, 76(C):87–106.

Hong, H. and Stein, J. C. (1999). A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading,
  and overreaction in asset markets. The Journal of Finance, 54(6):2143–2184.

Jin, L. J. and Sui, P. (2018). Asset pricing with return extrapolation. Working paper,
  California Institute of Technology.

Kaltenbrunner, G. and Lochstoer, L. A. (2010). Long-run risk through consumption
  smoothing. Review of Financial Studies, 23(8):3190–3224.

La Porta, R. (1996). Expectations and the cross-section of stock returns. The Journal
  of Finance, 51(5):1715–1742.

Larrain, B. and Yogo, M. (2008). Does firm value move too much to be justified by
  subsequent changes in cash flow? Journal of Financial Economics, 87(1):200–226.

Lettau, M. and Ludvigson, S. C. (2005). Expected returns and expected dividend
  growth. Journal of Financial Economics, 76:583–626.



                                          44
Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S. C., and Wachter, J. A. (2008). The declining equity premium:
  What role does macroeconomic risk play? Review of Financial Studies, 21:1653–
  1687.

Lettau, M. and Uhlig, H. (2000). Can habit formation be reconciled with business
  cycle facts? Review of Economic Dynamics, 3:79–99.

Lettau, M. and Wachter, J. A. (2007). Why is long-horizon equity less risky? a
  duration-based explanation of the value premium. Journal of Finance, 62:55–92.

Lettau, M. and Wachter, J. A. (2011). The term structures of equity and interest rates.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 101(1):90 – 113.

Lewellen, J. and Shanken, J. (2002). Learning, asset-pricing tests, and market efficiency.
  Journal of Finance, 57:1113–1145.

Li, Y. and Wang, C. (2018). Rediscover predictability: Information from the relative
  prices of long-term and short-term dividends. Working paper, Ohio State University.

Lustig, H., Roussanov, N., and Verdelhan, A. (2011). Common risk factors in currency
  markets. Review of Financial Studies, 24(11):3731–3777.

Lustig, H., Stathopoulos, A., and Verdelhan, A. (2018). The term structure of currency
  carry trade risk premia. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2340547 or
  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2340547.

Moreira, A. and Muir, T. (2017). Volatility-managed portfolios. The Journal of Fi-
  nance, 72(4):1611–1644.

Nagel, S. and Xu, Z. (2018). Asset pricing with fading memory. Working paper,
  University of Chicago and University of Michigan.




                                           45
Neuringer, A. (1986). Can people behave ”randomly?”: The role of feedback. Journal
  of Experimental Psychology, 115(1):62–75.

Piazzesi, M., Salomao, J., and Schneider, M. (2015). Trend and cycle in bond premia.
  Working Paper, Stanford University and University of Minnesota.

Rietz, T. A. (1988). The equity risk premium: A solution. Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 22:117–131.

Scheinkman, J. and Xiong, W. (2003). Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. Journal
  of Political Economy, 111(6):1183–1220.

Shiller, R. J. (1981). Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent
  changes in dividends? American Economic Review, 71:421–436.

Shiller, R. J. (2003). From efficient markets theory to behavioral finance. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 17(1):83–104.

Skinner, B. F. (1948). ’Superstition’ in the pigeon. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
  38(2):168.

Stambaugh, R. F. (1999). Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Economics,
  54:375–421.

Timmermann, A. G. (1993).        How learning in financial markets generates excess
  volatility and predictability in stock prices. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  108(4):1135–1145.

Tsai, J. and Wachter, J. A. (2016). Rare booms and disasters in a multisector endow-
  ment economy. Review of Financial Studies, 29(5):1113–1169.

van Binsbergen, J. H. and Koijen, R. S. J. (2010). Predictive regressions: A present-
  value approach. Journal of Finance, 65(4):1439–1471.

                                          46
Vasicek, O. (1977). An equilibrium characterization of the term structure. Journal of
  Financial Economics, 5:177–188.

Veronesi, P. (1999). Stock market overreaction to bad news in good times: A rational
  expectations equilibrium model. The Review of Financial Studies, 12(5):33.

Wachter, J. A. (2013). Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock
  market volatility? Journal of Finance, 68(3):987–1035.

Wachter, J. A. and Warusawitharana, M. (2015). What is the chance that the equity
  premium varies over time? Evidence from regressions on the dividend-price ratio.
  Journal of Econometrics, 186(1):74–93.

Zellner, A. (1996). An introduction to Bayesian inference in econometrics. John Wiley
  and Sons, Inc., New York, NY.




                                           47
                      Table 1: Parameters Used in Simulations

 Parameter                                                  Risk Neutral   Disaster
 Shock to realized log dividend growth σu                       0.11        0.11
 Shock to expected log dividend growth σv                       0.01        0.01
 Subjective persistence in expected log dividend growth φ       0.95        0.95
 Time-discount factorδ                                          0.97        0.95
 Expected dividend growth µ                                      0          0.02
 Relative risk aversion γ                                        0          3.00
 Disaster probability p                                          0          0.02
 Disaster size 1 − eξ                                             -         0.33

The table shows parameters used in the simulations. For the model with disasters, the
agent has constant relative risk aversion with parameter γ. The physical distribution
of aggregate consumption growth is the same as that of dividends growth and is not
subject to bias. The model is simulated at an annual frequency.




                                         48
 Table 2: Empirical and Simulated Moments for the Aggregate Market, Full Sample

                     Data           Model:   Risk Neutral           Model: Disaster
                   1927-2017         5         50      95         5        50      95
  σ(Rm )              0.20         0.20      0.23     0.26      0.17     0.19     0.22
  AC of Rm           -0.01        -0.19      -0.02    0.14      -0.18    -0.01    0.16
  σ(d − p)            0.45        0.30       0.46     0.71      0.21      0.33    0.52
  AC of d − p         0.88        0.80        0.91    0.96       0.80     0.91    0.96
  σ(∆d)               0.11         0.10       0.11    0.12      0.10      0.12    0.14
  AC of ∆d            0.19        -0.18      -0.01    0.16      -0.19    -0.01    0.16
  E[Rm ]              0.09        0.00       0.03     0.06       0.03     0.06    0.09
  E[Rf ]              0.01         0.03      0.03     0.03      0.01      0.01    0.01

We simulate 4000 samples each consisting of 91 years of data from the model with
risk-neutral investors, and the model with risk-averse investors and rare disasters. The
table reports moments from the 1927–2017 sample (second column), and medians, 5th
percentile values, and 95th percentile values (remaining columns). Rm denotes the net
return on the market, d − p the log dividend-price ratio,∆d log dividend growth, and
Rf the riskfree rate. AC refers to the first-order autocorrelation and σ(·) the standard
deviation. The model is simulated at an annual frequency.


  Table 3: Empirical and Simulated Moments for the Aggregate Market, Post-war

                              Data                Model: Disaster, No Realization
                            1948-2017               5           50           95
       σ(Rm )                  0.17               0.16         0.19         0.22
       AC of Rm               -0.07               -0.22       -0.02         0.17
       σ(d − p)                0.42               0.19         0.31         0.50
       AC of d − p             0.92                0.76        0.90         0.96
       σ(∆d)                   0.07                0.10        0.11         0.12
       AC of ∆d                0.24               -0.21       -0.01         0.18
       E[Rm ]                  0.09               0.04         0.07         0.10
       E[rf ]                  0.01                0.01        0.01         0.01

We simulate 4000 samples each consisting of 70 years of data from the model with rare
disasters. We remove samples that contain disaster realizations. The table reports
moments from the 1947–2017 sample (second column), and medians, 5th percentile
values, and 95th percentile values (remaining three columns). Rm denotes the net
return on the market, d − p the log dividend-price ratio,∆d log dividend growth, and
Rf the riskfree rate. AC refers to the first-order autocorrelation and σ(·) the standard
deviation. The model is simulated at an annual frequency.


                                             49
            Table 4: Predictability of Stock Market Excess Return, Full Sample

                                                 Horizon in Years
                            1             2         4          6            8        10
                                    Panel A: Data 1927-2017
   β                       0.07         0.16      0.26       0.36          0.49      0.59
   t-stat                 [1.39]       [1.95]    [2.72]     [2.71]        [2.86]    [2.75]
  R2                      0.02       0.06      0.10      0.16             0.25      0.28
                               Panel B: Risk Neutral Model
   β                      0.09       0.18      0.34      0.48             0.60      0.71
   5th percentile         0.02       0.05      0.09      0.12             0.15      0.17
   95th percentile        0.22       0.41      0.72      0.97             1.16      1.30
  R2                      0.04          0.07       0.14          0.20     0.25      0.29
                                     Panel C: Disaster Model
   β                      0.11          0.22       0.41          0.58     0.73      0.86
   5th percentile         0.03          0.07       0.12          0.16     0.20      0.21
   95th percentile        0.25          0.46       0.85          1.13     1.39      1.60
  R2                      0.04           0.08        0.15        0.21     0.26      0.30

This table reports predictive coefficients and R2 -statistics from regressions of the form
                         H
                         X
                                 m      f
                                rt+i − rt+i = β0 + β(dt − pt ) + t+H ,
                          i=1

        m                m
where rt+i  = log(1 + Rt+i  ) is the continuously-compounded aggregate market return
                                   f               f
between t + i − 1 and t + i, rt+i     = log(1 + Rt+i  ) is the continuously-compounded
Treasury Bill return between t + i − 1 and t + i, and dt − pt = log Dt /Pt is the aggregate
dividend-price ratio. Panel A reports results from the 1927–2017 sample. Panel B and
Panel C report medians and 5th and 95th percentile values from simulated data for
predictive regressions, and medians for R2 -statistics as described in Table 2. For the
data panel, t-statistics are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation.




                                                50
            Table 5: Predictability of Stock Market Excess Return, Post-war

                                                Horizon in Years
                           1             2         4          6            8         10
                                   Panel A: Data 1948-2017
   β                      0.10         0.20      0.28       0.40          0.51       0.59
   t-stat                [2.27]       [2.59]    [2.90]     [2.91]        [2.87]     [2.71]
  R2                     0.07       0.13      0.16       0.22            0.27       0.31
                         Panel B: Disaster Model No Realization
   β                     0.12       0.24      0.44       0.62            0.77       0.89
   5th percentile        0.03       0.06      0.11       0.13            0.16       0.16
   95th percentile       0.30       0.55      0.95       1.28            1.53       1.74
  R2                     0.05           0.09        0.18        0.24     0.30       0.34

This table reports predictive coefficients and R2 -statistics from regressions of the form
                        H
                        X
                                m      f
                               rt+i − rt+i = β0 + β(dt − pt ) + t+H ,
                        i=1

        m                m
where rt+i  = log(1 + Rt+i  ) is the continuously-compounded aggregate market return
                                   f               f
between t + i − 1 and t + i, rt+i     = log(1 + Rt+i  ) is the continuously-compounded
Treasury Bill return between t + i − 1 and t + i, and dt − pt = log Dt /Pt is the aggregate
dividend-price ratio. Panel A reports results from the 1947–2017 sample. Panel B and
Panel C report medians and 5th and 95th percentile values from simulated data for
predictive regressions, and medians for R2 -statistics as described in Table 3. For the
data panel, t-statistics are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation.




                                               51
            Table 6: Predictability of Aggregate Dividend Growth, Full Sample

                                                    Horizon in Years
                            1             2           4           6          8           10
                                      Panel A: Data 1927-2017
   β                      -0.07         -0.10       -0.12       -0.14      -0.14        -0.13
   t-stat                [-2.14]       [-1.54]     [-1.72]     [-1.85]    [-1.45]      [-1.18]
  R2                      0.09          0.07        0.06       0.07        0.08         0.07
                                    Panel B: Risk Neutral Model
   β                      0.00          0.00        0.00       0.00        -0.00        -0.00
   5th percentile         -0.04         -0.09      -0.17      -0.24        -0.31        -0.37
   95th percentile        0.05           0.09       0.17       0.24        0.32          0.39
  R2                      0.01           0.01        0.02         0.03     0.04         0.05
                                       Panel C: Disaster Model
   β                      -0.00          -0.00      -0.01         -0.00    -0.00        -0.00
   5th percentile         -0.07          -0.13      -0.26         -0.38    -0.48        -0.59
   95th percentile        0.07            0.14       0.26          0.38    0.49          0.59
  R2                      0.01           0.01         0.02        0.03     0.04         0.05

This table reports predictive coefficients and R2 -statistics from regressions of the form
                           H
                           X
                                  ∆dt+i = β0 + β(dt − pt ) + t+H ,
                           i=1

where ∆dt+i is the change in log aggregate dividends between t + i − 1 and t + i and
dt − pt = log Dt /Pt is the aggregate dividend-price ratio. Panel A reports results from
the 1927–2017 sample. Panel B and Panel C report medians and 5th and 95th percentile
values from simulated data for predictive regressions, and medians for R2 -statistics as
described in Table 2. For the data panel, t-statistics are adjusted for heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation.




                                                52
            Table 7: Predictability of Aggregate Dividend Growth, Post-war

                                                  Horizon in Years
                           1            2           4           6            8           10
                                    Panel A: Data 1948-2017
   β                     -0.01        -0.01       -0.04       -0.08        -0.09        -0.12
   t-stat               [-0.59]      [-0.29]     [-0.72]     [-1.00]      [-0.83]      [-0.86]
  R2                     0.01        0.00       0.01        0.04           0.05         0.06
                           Panel B: Disaster Model No Realization
   β                     -0.00      -0.00      -0.00        0.00           -0.01        -0.01
   5th percentile        -0.07      -0.15      -0.29       -0.41           -0.52        -0.61
   95th percentile       0.08        0.15       0.28        0.42           0.52          0.63
  R2                     0.01          0.01         0.03        0.04       0.05         0.06

This table reports predictive coefficients and R2 -statistics from regressions of the form
                          H
                          X
                                ∆dt+i = β0 + β(dt − pt ) + t+H ,
                          i=1

where ∆dt+i is the change in log aggregate dividends between t + i − 1 and t + i and
dt − pt = log Dt /Pt is the aggregate dividend-price ratio. Panel A reports results from
the 1947–2017 sample. Panel B and Panel C report medians and 5th and 95th percentile
values from simulated data for predictive regressions, and medians for R2 -statistics as
described in Table 3. For the data panel, t-statistics are adjusted for heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation.




                                              53
              Table 8: Return statistics for value and growth portfolios

              1 (Low)          2          3          4         5 (High)     5-1
                              Panel A: Data 1952-2017
   E[R]         6.46         7.61       8.96      11.34         13.65        7.19
   t-stat      [2.72]       [3.73]     [4.25]     [4.86]        [4.79]      [3.46]
   σ(R)        19.29        16.60      17.13      18.97         23.17       16.87
   α            -2.05        -0.05       1.20       2.96         3.77        5.82
   t-stat      [-1.99]      [-0.09]     [1.59]     [2.74]       [2.72]      [2.58]
   βmkt         1.03         0.93       0.94     1.01            1.19       0.17
                                  Panel B: Model
   E[R]        -0.14        -0.14       0.39     1.37            2.67        2.83
   σ(R)        21.63        17.65      16.19     17.00          19.51       25.18
   α            -1.01        -1.01      -0.42       0.57         1.89       2.93
   βmkt         1.07         1.02        0.99       0.97         0.95       -0.12

Each year we form portfolios based on the earnings-to-price ratio and compute value-
weighted portfolio returns over the subsequent year. Panel A reports the mean, stan-
dard deviation, CAPM alpha and beta with respect to the market in annual data
from 1952 to 2017. Panel B reports the 50th percentiles of these statistics over 1000
simulations of length designed to match the data, each with 1000 stocks in the cross
section.




                                         54
                  Table 9: Performance relative to a two-factor model

                     1 (Low)         2          3        4             5 (High)
                               Panel A: Data 1952-2017
         α             0.27        0.08       -0.05     0.95              0.27
         t-stat       [0.57]      [0.12]     [-0.09]   [1.47]            [0.57]
         βmkt          1.10         0.93         0.90       0.96          1.10
         βhml         -0.40         -0.02       0.22        0.35          0.60
                                     Panel B: Model
         α             0.49         -0.30      -0.48        -0.18         0.49
         βmkt          1.01         1.00         1.00       1.00          1.01
         βhml         -0.52         -0.24        0.02       0.26          0.48

Each year we form portfolios based on the earnings-to-price ratio and compute value-
weighted portfolio returns over the subsequent year. Panel A reports coefficients gen-
erated from the regression ri,t = α + βhml hmlt + βmkt mktt where ri,t is the portfolio
return in excess of the riskfree rate, hmlt is the return on the 5th quintile (high) minus
that of the 1st quintile (low), and mktt is the average excess return on all 5 portfolios.
Panel B reports the 50th percentiles of those coefficients over 1000 simulated samples
of length designed to match the data. Data are annual, from 1952 to 2017.




                                            55
                           Table 10: Moments of Bond Yields

                                              Maturity in Years
                               1          2          3          4             5
                                 Panel A: Data 1952-2017
          βn                            1.61       2.13        2.39          2.50
          t-stat                       [2.92]     [3.51]      [3.81]        [3.60]
         σ(yn )              3.10      3.05      2.97           2.92        2.85
         AC(yn )             0.88      0.90      0.90           0.91        0.91
         σ(yn − y1 )                   0.33      0.54           0.69        0.81
         AC(yn − y1 )                  0.40      0.46           0.52        0.55
                                     Panel B: Model
          βn                           1.45      1.29           1.17        1.08
         σ(yn )              2.80       2.03        1.54        1.22        1.00
         AC(yn )             0.85       0.85        0.85        0.85        0.85
         σ(yn − y1 )                    0.77        1.26        1.58        1.80
         AC(yn − y1 )                   0.85        0.85        0.85        0.85

Panel A of the table reports the volatility and the first-order autocorrelation of zero-
coupon bond yields and yields spread, as well as the regression coefficients βn as in
rxn,t+1 = αn + βn (ynt − y1t ) + t+1 , where rxn,t+1 is the return of n-year bond in excess
of y1 over period t + 1. The t-statistics adjust for heteroskedasticity. Panel B report
the percentiles of those moments computed over 1000 simulations, each with 66 years
of length. Data are from 1952 to 2017.




                                            56
              Table 11: Moments of Portfolios Sorted on Forward Discount

                   1 (Low)        2         3         4         5          6 (High)
                               Panel A: Data 1983-2008
   µ(rx)            -2.92       0.02      1.40      3.66       3.54          5.90
   σ(rx)             8.22       7.36      7.46      7.53       7.85          9.26
   µ(f − s)         -3.90       -1.30        -0.15     0.94    2.55          7.78
   σ(f − s)         1.57        0.49          0.48     0.53    0.59          2.09
                                    Panel   B: Model
   µ(rx)            -7.80       -4.66        -2.86     -1.15   0.71          3.80
   σ(rx)             8.24       8.22          8.19     8.20    8.20          8.23
   µ(f − s)         -7.82       -4.71       -2.84      -1.16   0.71          3.81
   σ(f − s)         1.07        0.85         0.79       0.79   0.85          1.07

Panel A of the table reports means and standard deviations of average log excess cur-
rency returns rx and log forward discount f − s within each of 6 currency portfolios
formed on the forward discount. Data, from Lustig et al. (2011), are monthly, from
1983–2018. Panel B reports the 50th percentiles of those moments over 1000 simula-
tions of the model, each with 293 monthly observations.




                                            57
Figure 1: Log Real Dividend and Log Real Price Level of the Aggregate Market, Full
Sample


         3


       2.5


         2


       1.5


         1


       0.5


         0
                                                          Log Real Price
                                                          Log Scaled Real Dividend
      -0.5
         1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980    1990    2000    2010      2020
                                            Year
This figure plots the annual frequency log price level and log dividend of the US stock
market in the post-1926 era. The log real dividend is multiplied by 27.43, the mean
P/D ratio post-1926. The dividend and the price are adjusted for inflation.




                                            58
Figure 2: Log Real Dividends and Log Real Price Level of the Aggregate market,
Post-War


         3



       2.5



         2



       1.5



         1



       0.5
                                                      Log Real Price
                                                      Log Scaled Real Dividend
         0
         1940    1950    1960     1970    1980     1990    2000      2010        2020
                                          Year
This figure plots the annual frequency log price level and log dividend of the US stock
market in the post-1948 era. The log real dividend is multiplied by 27.43, the mean
P/D ratio post-1948. The dividend and the price are adjusted for inflation.




                                          59
                               Figure 3: Predicting dividend growth using the dividend-price ratio



                               0



                             -0.1
    Regression Coefficient




                             -0.2



                             -0.3



                             -0.4



                             -0.5
                                                                                               g = 0.01
                                                                                               g = 0.1
                             -0.6
                                1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010       2020
                                                                   Year

This figure shows the posterior mean of the predictive coefficient in a regression of
one-year ahead dividend growth on the dividend-price ratio. The posterior mean is
calculated using Bayesian methods, assuming an informative prior, where g indexes
the degree of informativeness. For each year in the sample, the agent uses all available
data to form a posterior for the predictive coefficient. Data begin in 1927. A prior
parameter of g = 0.1 implies that the prior mean of the coefficient receives a weight
of 10% relative to the sample estimate, whereas a prior parameter of g = 0.01 implies
that the prior mean receives a weight of 1%.




                                                                   60
