NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JOB QUEUES AND WAGES: NEW EVIDENCE ON THE
MINIMUM WAGE AND INTER-INDUSTRY WAGE STRUCTURE

Harry J. Hoizer
Lawrence F. Katz
Alan B. Krueger

Working Paper No. 2561

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1988

We thank Joshua Angrist, John Bound, David Card, Kevin Lang, James Montgomery,
Kevin M. Murphy, Larry Sumers, Robert Topel, and seminar participants at the
University of Michigan, Princeton, NBER—West, CEPR and MIT for helpful coments.
We are responsible for all opinions stated and any remaining errors. The research
reported here is part of the NBERs research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #2561
1988

April

Jth ees axxl Wages: N Evider a the
nia
Sthre
Wage a Inter-Iedustxy

e

Ar
This paper uses

jc alictia- data to test the existe of r—

xITI,etitive, ex—ante rents in the labor market.

We

first examine whether

ly

of labor as
jds that pay the legal mininurn wage faos an eessive
maasured by the xu±er of jth a,licatict rivei for the nrst racent

j

j

jc

pcsiticz filled by the firs. The results irdicate that cçeriiixjs for
that pay the mininum wage attract significantly amre
alicaticz than
that pay either amre or less than the mininian wage. This spike in the
jth aplicatic* rate distrihxtiai irdicates that ex-ante rents generated for
th !xt at.cear to be
by an above market—level miniiTtni
(x2)letely dissipated by Tpl'er acticns.
The sex1 part of the paper uses a similar arproadi to examine whether
jths in high—wage inustries pay above market-clearix wage rates. We fin a

iloy

r
efft c

positive relaticrship between inter-iedustxy alicatios differentials
aed inter—lixiustry wage differentials. In acbiiticn,
results iiicate
that iployer size has a sizeable positive
the jdi alicatia rate
even after tro11is for the wage rate. The paper orriders several
for these findings.
possible
weak,

qlanati

Ilzer
of
1t.
)liddgen State University
Harry J.

Ecx*xinicm

East I.arisirg,

MI

48824

Lawrex F. Katz
Dept. of Enios

Harvard University
02138
Cantricbe,

Alan B. Kruer
Dept. of Ecriics air!

Woedr, Wilsai Sdiool

Priitcr University
Priitai, MI 08544

In

a

labor market where workers seek rents, employers that offer a

supra—competitive wage would face a long queue of qualified workers,
The presence of this job queue would encourage employers to reduce their
wage to the market-clearing level.

Interference in the wage setting

process from government regulation (e.g. an enforced minimum wage law)
or from union bargaining power could prevent the forces of labor market
competition from lowering wages to eliminate excessive job queues.

In

addition, efficiency wage, expense—preference, and insider—outsider
models suggest that some firms or managers may find it in their
interests to maintain above market—clearing wages.1

In this paper we

test for the presence of above market—clearing total compensation
packages by examining whether firms that pay the minimum wage or that
are in high—wage industries face an excessive supply of labor as
measured by their number of job applicants.2
A government—enforced minimum wage law provides a natural
experiment to examine the relationship between wage premia and job
'The efficiency wage literature is surveyed by Stiglitz (1986) and
Katz (1986). Insider-outsider models are surveyed by Lindbeck and
Snower (1986).
Jensen and Meckling (1976) discuss managerial agency
models.
2The approach of examining relative application rates to determine
whether earnings differentials among jobs are non—market clearing has a
venerable tradition in labor economics. In their classic study of the
relative wages of doctors and dentists, Friedman and Kuznets (1945) rely
heavily on a comparative analysis of application rates to medical and
dental schools. Given that the preliminary training required for the
two professions is virtually identical, Friedman and Kuznets (p. 124)
conclude that their finding that "more than four times as many persons
applied annually for admission to American medical schools as for
admission to American dental schools" is sufficient alone to establish
that "at existing levels of remuneration, prospective practitioners
consider medicine more attractive than dentistry.' And H.G. Lewis
(1963) uses a similar approach to examine the importance of entry
barriers into the medical profession as well as the relative earnings of
doctors and dentists.

queues.

Unless firms find it profitable to extract all rents from

workers that are generated by a binding minimum wage by cutting fringe
benefits, raising effort requirements, upgrading hiring standards, or
letting working conditions deteriorate, positions in which firms are
constrained to increase wages to meet the legal minimum wage will confer
rents to workers.

A

finding that jobs that offer the minimum wage tend

to face an excessive queue of job applicants would support the joint
hypothesis that firms do not extract all rents generated by the minimum
wage, and that there is a labor supply response to the presence of these
rents.
Our second application pertains to the inter-industry wage
structure.

Much research has documented the existence of large and

persistent inter-industry wage differentials for similar workers.3

In a

textbook competitive labor market model, persistent wage differentials
for observationa].lyequivalent workers must reflect either compensating
differentials for nonwage job attributes or unmeasured differences in
worker productive abilities.

Under this market—clearing scenario, one

does not necessarily expect any systematic relationship between wages

and the job application rate.4
On the other hand, labor market segmentation models (e.g.
efficiency wage, rent sharing and insider—outsider models) provide an
alternative explanation for inter—industry wage differentials in which
3For recent evidence see Dickens and Katz (l987a,b) and Krueger and
Summers (1987, 1988)
4unqualified workers may apply for high wage jobs and give the
misleading appearance of a job queue even in a market—clearing
situation. We return to this issue below,

3

workers in high—wage industries earn rents relative to their opportunity
cost.

Thus, these models predict that firms in high-wage industries

should attract longer queues of job applicants than firms in low—wage
industries.

Demonstrations of a comparatively lower quit rate in high—

wage industries by Pencavel (1970) and others provide some evidence of
the presence of rents in high—wage industries, although this
relationship may also be attributable to specific human capital and
omitted worker quality variables.

While quit rate differentials provide

evidence on the location of ex—oost rents, the relationship between the
number of job applicants per opening and wage differentials provides a
more direct test of the presence of ex—ante rents in high—wage jobs.
The prediction of segmented labor market models of the presence of
equilibrium ex—ante rents in some jobs has been severely criticized on
theoretical grounds.

The basic idea behind this critique is that if

there are queues for jobs because they pay ex—ante rents, workers will
be willing to pay to obtain these jobs (Carmichael, 1985). Murphy and
Topel (1987) argue that even if explicit job purchases are ruled out,
firms may have alternative mechanisms to extract the ex—ante rents that
arise from wage premia paid for efficiency wage reasons.5

These

arguments essentially deny the possibility of rents in almost any
situation.

In particular, this line of reasoning has been applied to

the case of a government—imposed minimum wage.

Wessels (1980a,b),

Mincer (1984) and others contend that firms constrained to pay the legal
minimum wage have an incentive to reduce fringe benefits and erode
5The fairness efficiency wage model (Akerlof and Yellen, 1987) and
models based on the bargaining power of insiders are less susceptible to
this bonding critique.

working conditions until all rents are completely dissipated.

On the

other hand, firms may choose not to extract all surplus from workers
because such actions may reduce morale and productivity, or because
employers may be utilitarian and the cost to workers of changing nonwage
compensation may greatly outweigh the reduction in costs to employers.
In the next section, we discuss the factors likely to determine
whether firms constrained to pay the minimum wage will fully dissipate
rents, and discuss theoretical issues concerning the relationship
between job application rates and wages.

We then examine whether firms

that are constrained to pay the minimum wage attract excessive queues of
job seekers as measured by the number of job applications they receive
per opening.

The micro—level employer—reported data on job applicants,

firm characteristics, and wages that we utilize is described in section
two.

Our empirical results concerning the minimum wage are presented in

section three.

The main finding is that firms that pay the minimum wage

receive substantially more applicants for their job openings than firms
that pay either more or less than the minimum wage.

This finding makes

plausible the idea that above market—clearing wage premiums can persist
in the labor market.
In section 4 we examine whether jobs in high—wage industries
attract more applicants than similar jobs in low-wage industries.
Although the evidence on the relationship between job queues and
inter—industry wage differentials is somewhat inconclusive, the results
suggest that firms in high—wage industries attract a larger number of
job applicants than other firms.

In addition, the empirical work shows

that the size of an establishment has a large, positive effect on then

5
number of applicants for a given job opening that cannot be explained by
the higher starting wages paid by larger establishments.

1.

Theoretical Considerations

A.

Minimum Wages. Job Queues, and Rent DissiDation
In the standard textbook analysis of an above market—level minimum

wage,

employers constrained to pay the minimum wage are assumed to not

offset the minimum wage by reducing other forms of compensation
(Stigler, 1946).

Workers remaining in minimum wage jobs are made

better—off since their total compensation rises by the mandated increase
in wages.

The minimum wage reduces the number of jobs in the covered

sector by increasing the relative cost of labor and creates rents for
workers employed in minimum wage jobs.

The model yields ambiguous

predictions concerning the impact of the minimum wage on the welfare of
workers in the uncovered sector and the workers displaced from the
covered sector (Mincer, 1976). However, the standard model
unambiguously predicts that jobs that are constrained to pay the minimum
wage should attract a relatively large queue of job applicants.
Wessels (l980a,b), Hashimoto (1981),

and Mincer (1984) have

analyzed an extended model of the minimum wage in Which firms attempt to
offset mandated wage increases by altering other unregulated
aspects of
the compensation package. Firms can lower labor costs
by reducing
expenditures on fringe benefits, reducing on—the—job training, and
worsening working conditions,

Firms will continue to attract employees

until total compensation is lowered to a market—clearing level.
presence of the minimum wage leads covered firms to provide an

The

6
inefficient compensation package,

This reduces labor demand at the

total compensation level prevailing before the minimum wage was imposed.
If the labor supply schedule to the low-wage sector of the labor market
is upward sloping, a minimum wage can actually reduce the total
compensation in both covered and uncovered jobs.6
Thus, if firms can completely dissipate the rents generated by a
minimum wage law, all workers —— including those holding minimum wage
jobs —— can be made worse—off by the minimum wage, and in this situation
minimum wage jobs would not face excessive queues of job applicants.
rents then the
If, on the other hand, firms do not fully dissipate
welfare of those obtaining minimum wage jobs is improved, and jobs that
offer the minimum wage should receive a relatively large number of job
applicants.
suggests three reasons why firms may not choose to,
or may not be able to, fully offset the increase in workers' total
the
compensation generated by the imposition of a minimum wage. First,
fixed costs of adjusting the compensation package may outweigh the
Wessels (l980b)

potential cost savings.

This is likely to be the case if the minimum

wage is set in nominal terms and is expected to be rapidly eroded away
by inflation.

Second, the amount of adjustments possible on unregulated

offset the minimum
aspects of compensation may not be large enough to
wage (e.g. fringe benefits are only a small part of the compensation
package in low-wage jobs).

Third, nonwage conditions of work (e.g.

6We note that as a practical matter it is unlikely that those who
hold minimum wage jobs are made much worse-off as a result of the
minimum wage because available econometric evidence surveyed in Brown,
Gilroy and Kohen (1983) suggests that the relevant demand schedule is
very

inelastic.

7
heating and work pace) may be public goods affecting workers above the
minimum wage as well as minimum wage workers, or legal requirements such
as pension regulations and equal rights laws may require that all
workers are treated equally and thus essentially turn some private goods
into public goods.
There are two further reasons why

firms

may not reduce nonwage

expenditures to fully eliminate the increased rents for covered
employees created by a binding minimum wage.

The first is related to

efficiency wage models of the labor market and depends on the additional
assumption of decreasing marginal utility of wages and fringe benefits.7
According to efficiency wage models, worker productivity is
function of compensation.

a

positive

This relationship is posited because higher

compensation may reduce turnover and absenteeism, increase effort, or
make it easier to recruit workers.

To see that a firm will not totally

offset the wage increase brought about by a minimum wage if productivity
depends on worker pay, suppose that an "efficiency wage" employer were
to fully offset the minimum wage by cutting fringe benefits to the point
where the worker's compensation equals the pre—minimum wage level. In
this situation, the compensation mix is not optimal and a dollar spent
on fringe benefits has more than a dollar's value to employees.

If the

firm increases fringe benefits above this level, the increase in net
worker productivity will more than pay for the additional cost of fringe
benefits.

is

When faced with a positive wage—productivity schedule, a firm
no longer a wage—taker —— the firm's effective labor supply is an

71n a similar vein, Wessels (l980b) notes that turnover costs may
induce firms to only partially offset a minimum wage increase.

8

this will
upward sloping function of its wage and fringe benefits, and
inhibit the firm's desire to fully offset the minimum wage. A similar
its workers.
argument could be made if the firm has monopsony power over
The final reason why firms might not fully offset a minimum wage
increase is related to agency problems which give firms non—profit
maximizing preferences.

According to this argument, because managers

are not perfectly monitored by shareholders, firms will maximize
objective functions that depend positively on their employees' utility
offset a
as well as profits. In this situation, a firm will not totally
to do so may exact a
wage increase generated by the minimum wage because
a small amount for
great toll from workers while only raising profits by
the firm. To take an extreme example, if after eliminating fringe
benefits workers who earn the minimum wage still receive some surplus,
it seems unlikely that managers will require workers to perform arduous
tasks if such activities only generate a trivial amount of additional
profit for the firm.
There is limited evidence that firms adjust some nonwage aspects of
their compensation package in response to binding increases in the
minimum wage. Wessels (1980a,b) reports the results of a survey of
offsets made by retail stores in response to the New York state minimum
Only a small minority of the stores reported
reductions in fringe benefits although many reduced the hours of work of
minimum wage workers. Alpert (1986) finds no evidence of more than
in response to large increases
quite minor reductions in fringe benefits
in the minimum wage in the restaurant industry in the 1970's. Lastly,
wage law of 1957.

Leighton and Mincer (1981) provide some evidence of reduced job training

9
and lower wage growth in response to increased minimum wages for workers
with less than high school education.
The number of job applicants for minimum wage jobs relative to the
number of applicants for other jobs provides a direct test of the
standard model of the minimum wage which assumes incomplete nonwage
offsets versus the full offset model.

The failure of firms to

completely of fset the compensation increase created by a minimum wage
clearly leads to the prediction of greater numbers of applicants to
firms paying the minimum wage than to uncovered or noncomplying firms
paying wages below the minimum wage.
Additionally, a spike in applications at minimum wage jobs relative
to

jobs that pay more than the minimum wage and jobs that pay less

than the minimum wage would provide even stronger evidence that rents
created by the minimum wage are not totally dissipated.

First, jobs

paying more than the minimum wage may have different entry requirements
than jobs paying the minimum wage or less. The job application rate may
vary with skill levels.

A

finding of a discontinuous jump in

applications at the minimum wage will suggest that the minimum wage is
not just picking up the general application-wage profile.

Second, and

perhaps more important, jobs that pay more than the minimum wage may be
equally desirable as jobs that pay the minimum wage or less, but may
offer a higher wage to compensate workers for some disamenable working
condition.

In this equalizing differences eguilibrium, a binding

minimum wage will increase the desirability of minimum wage jobs
relative to jobs that pay more than the minimum wage, and thus generate
a spike in applications at the minimum wage.

This latter argument is

10
more plausible for jobs that are only slightly above the minimum wage.
B,

Job Application Rates and Wages with Homogeneous Workers
We first consider a labor market with identical workers and with

firms that differ in their valuations of the benefits of filling a
vacant job.8

Finns attract applicants by announcing the existence of

the job opening and advertising its offered wage. Job seekers
costlessly obtain all relevant infonnation about job openings.
seeker is assumed to be able to apply to only a single firs.

Each job
If the job

seeker is the only applicant for the opening, he or she is hired and
the job,
paid the advertised wage. If more than one person applies for
the firs randomly selects from the applicant pool. If a worker is
unlucky and not selected for a job he is assumed to consume leisure
and/or work in home production, which provides a lower level of utility
than the forgone job.
The net expected benefit of applying to any job opening must be
be
equalized across openings in equilibrium. Job seekers will then
indifferent between applying for low wage positions Which have a high
probability of acceptance, and applying for high wage positions which
have a low probability of acceptance.

Workers pick higher probabilities

of applying to high wage jobs in equilibrium,9

Finns choose wages

section draws heavily from Montgomery's (1987) formal model
of the relationship between wages and job queues. See Lang (1987) and
Weitzman (1987) for related models.
The
9Montgoruery assumes each job seeker can apply to only one job.
basic equilibrium condition that the expected value of applying to a
applicants can make
opening is constant across openings even when not
able to apply to all
multiple applications as long as workers are
will
openings. If workers cannot apply to all openings, high wage jobs in
receive more applicants than low wage jobs. Lang (1987) analyzes
detail the issues that arise when workers can simultaneously apply to

11
knowing that job seekers respond in this manner.

Thus, firms with high

valuations of filling a job will offer high wages in order to attract a
larger expected number of applicants.

A

direct result of the

equilibrium condition in this model is that the expected number of
applicants for an opening will be positively related to the offered
wage.
C.

Heteroaeneous Labor with Nonrandom Selection
If individuals differ in their productive capacities, and if

employers make job offers to applicants on the basis of their
perceptions of workers' abilities, the analysis becomes more
complicated.

Our purpose here is only to present a heuristic discussion

of these effects.
It is probably reasonable to assume that individuals have a noisy
estimate of their ability relative to the labor force, and that
prospective employers have an imperfect but positively correlated
measure of each applicant's ability.

A final assumption is that there

is a positive correlation between the applicant's reservations wage and
ability.

An increase in total compensation in this situation potentially
has three distinct effects on the application rate.

First, a job

candidate's expectation of being rated the most highly qualified
applicant and therefore of being selected for the job is diminished.
This occurs because individuals with higher reservation wages and
therefore greater expected ability will apply for the job (Weiss, 1980;
Nalebuff and Stiglitz, 1982).

The average quality of the job queue

more than one firm and receive more than one offer.

12
increases.

In the extreme case, if employees know with certainty who

the most qualified applicant for the job will be, only that individual
will apply for the job.
The second effect occurs because an increase in a job's wage,
holding all else constant, makes it

a

more attractive alternative than

other jobs and is therefore worth applying for even though the chance of
ultimately being selected is reduced.

This is the result that is

discussed in the model above in the case of homogeneous labor.
Finally, some workers may find it in their best interest to apply
for high—wage jobs for which they lack the required training and skills
to perform the job adequately.

Since employers only have an inaccurate

measure of job seekers' abilities, there is a nonzero probability that
unqualified workers will succeed in being selected for high-wage jobs.
As a result, high wages may attract relatively many unqualified
If this is quantitatively and important effect, it will be
impossible to distinguish between the segmented labor market
applicants.

interpretation and the human capital interpretation of inter-industry
wage differentials on the basis of inter-industry differences in
application rates without further knowledge of the abilities of job
applicants.

2.

Data
The data we use are from an evaluation survey of the Employment

Opportunity Pilot Project (EOPP) sponsored by the National Institute of
Education and the National Center for Research in Vocational Education.
Although the survey is longitudinal, we focus on the 1982 follow-up

13
cross—section because it contains specific information on the
demographic characteristics and starting salary of the selected job
applicant, as well as information on the vacant position.
3,400 firms were surveyed.

A

total of

The surveyed firms are located in 28

geographic sites, with a disproportionate number
in southern and midwestern states.

of

sites concentrated

Twelve of the sites are SNSA's.

Employers were contacted by phone between February and June of 1982, and
the person who "handles the hiring activity" for the company for the
area contained within the geographic site was asked to directly answer
the questionnaire.

The survey deliberately over—sampled low—wage firms.

The survey contains information on the recent hiring activities of
firms,

specifically, the person responsible for hiring was asked

several questions concerning the last position filled by a "new
employee" prior to August 1981,

including the number of applicants for

the position, the Occupational category of the position, the starting
salary, and the new worker's demographic characteristics (age, sex,
training, work experience and education))'0

The designers of the survey

intended that the question concerning the number of persons who applied
for the last position filled should measure the number of individuals
formally applying for the position.11
would require

a

formal application typically

worker to submit a written application form;

1'0Three—quarters

in

A

casual

of the firms in the survey hired their most recent

their

in

15% hired
most recent employee
1980; 7% hired
most recent employee in 1979; and 3% hired their most recent
employee in 1978. The survey also contains a small number of firms
whose most recent outside hire was prior to 1978, but these observations
are dropped from the sample because the accuracy of the retrospective
information is likely to become less accurate with time.

employee

their

1981;

11Persona]. communication from John Bishop of Cornell University.

14
inquiries over the phone or personal visits that do not involve a
written application were not intended to be counted as job
applications.12

In situations where multiple employees are hired for

the last position filled, we divide the number of applicants by the
number of workers hired.
In addition to questions on recruitment and employee
characteristics, the survey contains information on several aspects of
the employer, including firm and establishment size, industry,
proportion of workers covered by a union contract, and geographic
location.

Unfortunately, the establishment size variables is defined in

a nonstandard way.

Instead of asking for the size of an individual

establishment, the establishment size question solicits the combined
size (number of employees) of all the establishments of a particular
firm that are located within the geographic site,

As a result,

establishment size in this data set is a conglomeration of typically
defined establishment size and firm size measures.
Aeplication Rates and Unemoloyment
In order to crudely gauge the validity of the application variable
as

a

measure of labor market conditions, we regress the average

application rate in a city on the local unemployment rate for a sample
of 28 cities,

Results of estimating this regression (with standard

errors in parentheses) are presented below.

12Thjs interpretation of the application measure seems especially
plausible since earlier in the survey respondents were asked questions
that treated phone inquiries from people seeking work, visits to the
company of individuals seeking work, written job applications, and
formal job interviews as distinct categories.

15
in (Applications per
Last opening)

(1)

=

3.954 + .710
(.850)

ln(UR)
(.329)

R2=.15

The relationship between the site level job application rate and
the unemployment rate is positive and statistically significant.'3
While we do not put a structural interpretation on this equation, it
suggests that the application rate is correlated with the
characteristics of the local labor market.

As the fraction of the labor

force that is unemployed increases, more applications are received by
firms in the area.

Later we compare this estimate of the responsiveness

of the application rate with respect to a change in the unemployment
rate to the responsiveness of the application rate with respect to a
change in the wage rate.

3.

Emtirical Evidence on Queues for Minimum Wage Jobs

A

legally enforced and binding minimum wage provides a clear

opportunity to examine the relationship between job applications and
wage premia.

Under a wide variety of assumptions, economic models

predict that imposing an above market-level minimum wage will result in
an excess supply of labor to those firms.

Unless firms can extract all

rents by cutting fringe benefits or making work more burdensome, firms
that are constrained by the minimum wage should receive more job
applications than firms that are in labor markets where the minimum wage

:L)since other characteristics of firms and the labor force might
affect the relationship between applications and unemployment, we also
estimate equations that include average firm size and a dummy variable
for being in an SMSA. The results are not significantly changed by
including these variables.

16
is not constraining.

The existence of a queue for minimum

would support a conclusion that employers do

wage

jobs

fully offset the

effects of a minimum wage by altering some other form of compensation or
working conditions.
Table 1 reports means and standard deviations for several
variables disaggregated by whether the starting wage for the job was
less than, equal to, or greater than the legal minimum wage that was in
effect in the year the position was filled)4

Fortunately, the survey

provides a disproportionally large sample of low—wage jobs —— 197 (14%)
job openings in the sample paid newly hired workers the prevailing legal
minimum wage, and 65 (5%) job openings paid
prevailing legal minimum wage.

a

starting wage below the

Jobs that pay less than the minimum wage

are either not covered by the minimum wage provisions of the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) or are in violation of the Act,
the minimum wage six times in the 1970's.

Congress raised

The 1977 amendments to the

FLSA scheduled increases in the minimum wage for each year from 1978 to
1981,15

As a result, in years covered by our sample (1978-1981),

increases in the minimum wage were expected and scheduled in advance,
which should have facilitated any possible nonwage offsets by employers.
Looking at Table 1, workers who are hired into minimum wage jobs
are on average less educated, younger, less experienced and more likely
14We have eliminated from the sample 40 restaurant jobs that offer
a subminimum wage because workers in these jobs are likely to receive
unreported tips, and as a consequence the hourly wage will not
adequately reflect the total compensation of these workers.
15The minimum wage rate was $2.65 in 1978, $2.90 in 1979, $3.10 in
1980 and $3.35 in 1981. Increases in the minimum wage over this time
period roughly kept pace with inflation.

Table 1
Maans

(Staraxd

rviati) by Startirg W*irly

Less than

Variable

Mininun

1o Applications

We

.

Subsa1e
Miithum
Waqe

than
)re
Mthinnn 1e

Per 0penir

1.34
(1.15)

(1.19)

licatia
Per Cpenin

8.76
(19.96)

11.40

9.62

(25.77)

(21.67)

.38
(.49)

.43

.59

(.50)

(.49)

Male

24.70
(10.82)
High

Sdo1

Graduate
Collee
Graduate

of Relevant
Experiere
Years

Hairs of
Jcb

On

The

Weekly
> 35

Hairs

Weekly Hairs
Betw. 20 aril 35

Tiporary Jth
Seasaal Jcb

Estab1isnt
Size

White Onilar

tys Betwaen
of Searth
8eginnir

ar Start of Work
Sazçle

size

24.06
(8.54)

1.42
(1.18)

27.64
(8.98>

.66

.72

.77

(.48)

(.45)

(.42)

.06

.05

.15

(.24)

(.21)

(.36)

(1.70)

.85
(1.75)

2.82
(4.83)

43.22
(62.57)

39.20
(81.40)

58.31
(93.69)

.62

Trainir

1.59

Wage Rate

.31

.53

.78

(.47)

(.50)

(.41>

.45

.32

.12

(.50)

(.47)

(.32)

.15
(.36)

.13

.09

(.34)

(.29)

.11

.06

(.31)

.05

(.23>

(.21>

24.15
(66.10)

44.73
(85.29)

68.86
(228.12)

.55

.41

.52

(.50)

(.49)

(.50)

7.75
(8.26)

12.18
(21.69)

17.95
(33.02)

65

197

nre

1,102

Iir.
The sex,
for the

Note: Sasple iixthes all workers who earn
than $1.00 per
age, anS ucation
pertain to the worker who was hired

qj.esti

jcb.

17

to be female than workers who are hired into jobs that pay more than the
minimum wage; while workers whose starting wage is less than the minimum
wage have similar personal characteristics and training to workers whose
starting wage equals the minimum wage.

In addition, as others have

found using different data sets, this sample shows that jobs that pay
either the minimum wage or a subniinimum wage are more likely to offer
part-time work compared to jobs that pay more than the minimum wage.
These summary statistics suggest that workers whose starting wage is
less than the minimum wage may be fairly close substitutes for workers
whose starting wage exactly equals the minimum wage, but workers who
earn more than the minimum wage have different skills and qualifications
than workers who earn the minimum wage or less.
Most importantly for our purposes,

the table indicates that the

number of applicants per job opening is greater for positions that pay
exactly the minimum wage to start than for positions that initially pay
either more or less than the legal minimum wage. The pairwise
comparisons of the difference in the mean log application rate between
the subsample of workers whose starting wage rate equals the minimum
wage and each of the other two groups are both statistically significant
at the 10% level.

These differences in application rates are not driven

largely by a few outliers.

The median number of applicants per job

opening for jobs that paid exactly the minimum wage was 5 as compared to
4 both for jobs that paid less than the minimum wage and for jobs that

paid more than the minimum wage.
In addition, we find that an apparent "spike" in application rates
at the minimum wage exists when we limit our sample to the narrow band

18
of jobs that pay within 25 cents of the minimum wage.

On average, 10.02

applicants applied per job opening that paid within 25 cents less than
the minimum wage; 11.40 applicants applied per job opening that paid
exactly the minimum wage; and 10.92 applicants applied per job opening
that paid within 25 cents more than the minimum wage)6 These findings
suggest that there is a discrete jump

in

applications at the minimum

wage.
If a job offers an above market-clearing wage and therefore
attracts a queue of qualified applicants, the duration of time required
to fill a vacancy for this job will be short relative to other jobs that
do not offer an above market—clearing wage rate.

It follows that a

complementary test of the existence of rents in minimum wage jobs would
be that vacancies in jobs that offer the minimum wage will require less
time to fill than vacancies in other jobs, all else equal.
Unfortunately, the EOPP survey only allows us to address this issue
indirectly.

The survey asks a question on the length of time elapsed

"between [when the employer) started looking for someone to fill the
opening and the time the new employee started work."

However, one

serious shortcoming of this question is that the length of time between
when a new employee is hired and he or she actually begins work may
increase with the skill requirements of the position (i.e. the academic
job market ends in February or March but new assistant professors do not
officially begin work until September). As a result, this question may
16The findings are similar when the sample includes all jobs that
pay within 50 cents of the minimum wage. On average, 10.25 applicants
applied per job opening that paid within 50 cents less than the minimum
wage and 9.47 applicants applied per job opening that paid within 50
cents more than the minimum wage.

19
not adequately represent the duration of employer search time necessary
to recruit a new employee for a vacancy.
In the EOPP sample the average time elapsed between the initiation
of a job search and the actual date an employee begins work is shorter
among jobs that pay the minimum wage than among jobs that pay more than
the minimum wage, but is shorter still in jobs where the starting wage
is less than the minimum wage (see Table 1).

This pattern suggests that

responses to this particular vacancy duration question may reflect the
lag between the date a job offer is accepted and the date the new
employee eventually assumes his job instead of the comparative
difficulty of filling a job vacancy.
In Table 2 we estimate OLS regressions to examine whether the

"spike in applications for

minimuii wage jobs holds-up after controlling

for a variety of alternative sets of independent variables.

The

dependent variable in the regressions is the natural log of the number
of applicants for the last position filled by an outside hire.

We

include a dummy variable that equals one if the job pays the minimum
wage and zero otherwise, and another dummy variable that equals one if
the job pays a subminimum wage and zero otherwise,

The reported

coefficients should be interpreted as the proportionate excess supply of
job applicants relative to firms that pay more than the minimum wage.
Because workers who earn substantially more than the minimum wage may
very well be in different labor markets than workers who earn the
minimum wage or less, we eliminate from the sample workers whose wage
rate exceeds $5.00 an hour.

However, we note that our results are

qualitatively unchanged when we examine the full sample, and we report

Table 2

for Minirr.mi Wage ard Sulxiinintnn Wage
plicaticzi Differentials
of Workers with
Rate Less Than $5.00 Per Hair
SuIanple

Wage

ninin

Other
Wage

Il-deperdent

Variables

1. Ocxpation Elms. (8),
Hairs of Formal Trainir,
Hairs of Informal Thainiri,
ge, Sex, Experiere, High
Sdiool ann., llage aim.,
FUll-Tine aim., Seasonal
Elnn., Terporary Jc ann.,
Year D.ins. (4)

J

2.

P

3.

Rc 2

1 Plus
27 Site time.
Plus Prcortion

Union
4.

5.

Efftb

Effert

.226
(.099)

(.154)

.225
(.101)

.032
(.158)

.125

.243

.049
(.158)

.128

.124
(.157)

.150

.145
(.119)

.175

(.101)

Pi 3

Plus 4 Firm
Size Euns. ard
Plant Size

Lr

Pi 4

Plus 35
Irdustry Elms.

.228
(.100)

.260
(.103)

.027

2

R

.080

Notes:

is ln(Alicati per last jcb fill). Sale size
Stariard errors are in parentheses. Pressions also irlm.ie a

a. tierdent variable

is 967.
constant.

coefficient for a dnituy variable that equals 1 if the worker's
in the year the
startirgwage equallei the mnininun wage that was in
worker was hir1, ard 0 otherwise.
c. Estisated coefficient for a duniriy variable that equals 1 if the worker's
starting wage was less than the inininvm wage that was In effert In the year
b.

F.stimatei

efft

the worker was hir1, ard 0 otherwise.

20
estimates of the same equations using the full sample in Appendix Table

Al)7
The regressions show a statistically significant, sizeable and
positive differential in the application rate between jobs that pay the
minimum wage and jobs that pay more than the minimum wage, while jobs
that are above or below the minimum wage do not have a statistically
significant difference in applications.

According to the point

estimates, jobs offering the minimum wage attract between 22.5% and 26%
more applications than jobs that offer a starting wage that exceeds the
minimum wage, and between 20% and 10% more applications than jobs that
pay starting wages that are less than the minimum wage.

The application

differentials fall when employer size variables are added to the
regression,

but are not very much influenced by the other independent

variables such as industry affiliation or union coverage.

Employer size

has an important effect on these results because workers who earn a
subminimum wage tend to work in relatively small establishments, and
results discussed more fully below show that the application rate is
lower in small firms, all else equal.
These results take on added significance since it is unlikely that
workers who apply for jobs for which they are unqualified in the hope of
deceiving their employer will apply for minimum wage jobs.

Such

beguiling behavior will have a higher payoff in jobs that pay more than
the minimum wage. Moreover, the finding that more workers apply for

17We also note that the spike in the application rate for minimum
wage jobs becomes larger and more statistically significant when we
narrow the sample to the group of workers who are age twenty—one or
younger.

21
minimum wage jobs than for jobs paying a greater wage than the minimum
wage suggests that the excess supply of applicants for minimum wage jobs
relative to jobs below the minimum wage does not merely reflect an
upward sloping applicant—wage relationship.
This spike in applications for firms paying the minimum wage
strongly suggests that workers queue for minimum wage jobs, which in
turn implies that employers do not fully offset the effects of the
minimum wage by reducing fringe benefits or eroding working conditions.
Since employers constrained to pay the minimum wage may be able to cut
back on direct recruiting activities (e.g. advertising job openings)

and

still attract applicants, our estimate of the minimum wage application
differential may even understate the effect of the rents generated by
the minimum wage on application rates.

4.

The Inter-Industry Wage Structure and Job Aoplications
This section examines the relationship between two—digit industry

affiliation and application rates.

It is well known that industry

status exerts a powerful influence on workers' wages, and that the
industry wage structure is extremely stable over time,
interpretation of these facts is not clear.

However, the

If inter—industry wage

differentials are equalizing differentials for nonwage aspects of work,
then we would not expect to find a systematic relationship between
application rates and wages at the industry level.

On the other hand,

if differences in wages across industries are rents to workers there
should be a positive relationship between inter-industry application
rates and wages.

22
To test whether jobs in high—wage industries offer wages above
market—clearing rates, we assume that when occupation, education,
geographic location, and other variables are held constant,

a firm's

industry does not directly influence the number of applications the firm

receives

for its available job openings;

instead, industry operates

indirectly on applications through its effect on wages.

Under this

exclusion restriction, a test of the market—clearing hypothesis boils
down to whether using industry dummy variables as instnments for the
wage rate in an application equation gives a positive estimate of the
wage-application relationship. Moreover, the industry exclusion
restriction ia testable because there are many industry dummies to
estimate only one parameter.
To fix ideas, consider the following structural model of the log
of job applications per opening, A, and the log of the starting wage
rate, W:
(2)

AWSW+Xax+LA

(3)

W=APA+ZflE+X$x+cW

where

is the elasticity of job applicants with respect to the wage

rate, Z is an

variables,
is an
The

N

N x

W is a

K

K x 1

q matrix
c, ic{A,W}, are
x

matrix of K mutually exclusive industry dummy
vector of industry wage differentials, and X

of control variables that includes a constant.18
N x 1

vectors of i.i.d. errors.

There are N

observations. We assume that 8 is a valid instrument for W, so
plim Z'W s 0

and plim Z'LA

=

0.

Equation

(2)

that

is over-identified

18There are a total of K + 1 mutually exclusive and exhaustive
industry dummies, but because the equations include constant tens, only
K industry dummies are included in 8.

23
because there are more than one industry dummy

that may

be used as

instruments for W.
A simultaneous system is posited because in a standard demand and
supply framework the wage rate offered affects the number of applicants
received, while the number of applicants simultaneously affects the
offered wage.

Even if the starting wage is predetermined and

unresponsive to the number of job applicants, another reason for
instrumenting for the wage rate in the application equation is that
unobserved, omitted variables in the application equation will affect
the starting wage rate, which will lead to spurious correlation between
W and
For example, a university bookstore may attract more

£A

applicants at any given wage than a remote bookstore and may therefore
is consistent with
choose a low wage policy. A positive estimate of
the view that inter—industry wage differentials represent ex—ante rents
to workers.
Results
Results of estimating equation
reported in Table 3.

(2)

by two-stage least squares are

The table reports estimates of three different

specifications using alternate sets of included regressors (the X
matrix). Each specification uses 34 industry dummy variables as
instruments for the wage rate.

The results indicate that the job

application rate tends to increase with the starting wage rate, however,
this relationship becomes statistically insignificant once employer size
and union coverage are held constant. The point estimates of the
elasticity of applications with respect to wages range from .27 to .51.
Comparing the latter estimate of the application—wage relationship to

2SLS Es

Table 3
mates of the Determinants
IXminy Variables as

Irepenient

Mean
[SD]

Variable

of

JCb

1

t

PçpliCatiCzIs

Instr.utnts for

Usiz 34 Irustry

Patea b

Wage

Euation
2

3

Intercept

1.00

—1.747

—1.635

—.758

[.00]

(1.503)

(1,752)

(1.747)

Lt(Wage)

6.19

.512
(.268)

.489
(.315)

.271
(.317)

[.40]

Prcportion Union
Lcq (Estab.

Size)

.12

.167
(.154)

[.30]

—

2.80

[1.53]

—. 049

(.153)
.157
(.027)

Firm Size
50—99

.08

.139
(.130)

100—499

[.26]
.03

(.205)

500—1,999

[.17]
.07

(.138)

2,000

[.26]
.03
[.17]

(.209)

.242
.249
.106

Dxramthic

Male (1=yes)

.58

[.49]
27.48

periene
High Sdiool Grad

(11e Grad

[9.11]
2.69
[4.76]
.77

[.42]
.14

[.35]

—.104

—.102

(.105)

(.109)

—.002

—.002

(.005)

(.005)

—. 009

—. 009

(.010)

—.043

(.130)

(.011)

—.033

(.134)

—.066

(.108)

—.000

(.005)

—.004

(.011)
—.048

(.131)

—.114

—.102

—.124

(.167)

(.174)

(.170)

.mpatia'i

Prof/T.

Managnt
Sales

Clerical

craft
cerative

.

Laborer

Un)cn

.05

.022

.032

.177

[.22]

(.214)

(.225)

(.223)

.05

-.313

—.311

—.268

[.22]
.15

(.229)

(.235)

[.36]

(.131)

(.239)
.152
(.131)

.23

.422
(.129)
.585
(.425)
.576
(.278)

.424

.442
(.128)
.720
(.414)
.612
(.271)

[.42]
.01
[.08]
.02

[.13]
.01
[.07]
.36
[.48]

.150

(.131)
.597
(.424)
.572

(.278)

.240
(.129)

—1.223

—1.199

—1.094

(1.207)

(1.208)

(1.179)

—.123

—.134

—.044

(.130)

(.130)

(.129)

Table 3

— Continue

2SIS E.stInates of the tterminants of Jth
Irxlustry aminy Variables as Iristnnnents

Using 34

an

Irxepenient

Variable

[SD]

for the Wage Rete

Ecuation
3.

2

3

Hairs Thainin
10.46

Formal

[44.87)

57.47

Informal

[92.27]

cr2

for
(4 statistic
Specification

.0025
(.0008)
.0003
(.0003)

.0024
(.0008)
.0003
(.0004)

.0023
(.0007)
.0004
(.0004)

1.315

1.312

1.248

55.73

57.80

49.31

Test of Iniustry
cclusion Restrictions
(DF = 33)

for
of
Sinultaneity Between
Startir Wage ani
Prth. Value

Haunan Test

.102

.119

.288

1ications

Notes
a. AsyzTptotic stardard errors in parentheses. Saxtple size is 1,167. Mean of
1og(p1ications) is 1.423 [1.174].
b. Eqations also iodide 27 site duxry variables ard 4 year duxraiy variables.
Cnitt ocipation is servica workers.

24
the estimate of the application-unemployment relationship reported
earlier in equation (1), a 10% increase in the starting wage rate has
about as much of an enhancing effect on the application rate as a half
of a percentage point increase in the unemployment rate.
The specification tests reported in the bottom of Table

3

test the

assumption of the orthogonality of the industry dummies and the error
term in the application equation, and also summarize results of Hausman
tests of simultaneity between the starting wage and application rate.
The Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) error-orthogonality test
involves regressing the two—stage least squares residuals on the
industry dummy variables and included regressors; N times the

from

this regression asymptotically follows a chi-squared distribution (see
Newey, 1985).

A

weak relationship between the residuals and instruments

would indicate that the equation is properly specified. The reported
chi-squared test of the null hypothesis that industry is properly
excluded from equation (2) accepts at the .01 level and rejects at the
.05 level for each of the specifications in Table 3.

Given the large
the
sample size, however,
industry exclusion assumption may not be too
bad an approximation.19
In addition, the Hausman tests for endogeneity of the wage in the
application equation (Which are based on the assumption that industry
dummy variables are valid instruments for the wage) are suggestive of a
simultaneous relationship between applications and starting wages. We
note, however, that even though the probability values for the Hausman
19The exclusion restriction would not be rejected using the
Schwartz criterion ((K-i) x ln(N) = 233), which allows the probability
of making a type I error to shrink as the sample size grows.

25
tests are greater than .10, there is a qualitative difference in the
estimated application-wage elasticity when equation

(2)

is estimated by

OLS and when it is estimated by two—stage least squares using industry
dummy variables to identify the wage.

For instance,

the OLS estimate of

the application—wage elasticity and standard error using the control
variables in column

(2)

is .03 (.11).

To look more deeply into the relationship between the inter—
industry wage structure and applications, Figure 1 presents a plot of
industry application differentials against industry wage differentials
with the OLS line drawn through the points.20

Each set of differentials

is obtained from a reduced form regression of applications or wages on
industry dummy variables and the included variables used in column

(3)

of Table 3 (i.e. including employer size, union coverage, and other X—
variables).21

Extreme points are identified in the plot.

The plot reveals a linear relationship between application
differentials and wage differentials. Some high—wage industries such as
public utilities and petroleum have extremely high application rates,
while low—wage industries such as apparel have relatively low
application rates.

While too much should not be made about individual

points in the plot because of sampling error in estimating the wage and
application differentials, it is interesting that the mining industry
20The OLS regression through these points can be shown to give a
consistent estimate of the elasticity of applicants with respect to
wages. This estimator, which we denote visual instrumental variables,
is an instrumental variables estimator although it differs from 2SLS.
21The omitted industry in each of these regressions is given a
value of zero.

cc ICSSIRY APPttCATi 0I1[R[NTIALS

vs. leUsist WAGE

DIEFEREATIALS

APPLICATICM
DIFFERENTIAL

4

PU8LIC--

i.e +

UTILITIES

.9 +

-P5T9OLE UN

0.9

+

0.6

+

OLS

Line
0.9

+

0.0 +
i1INI9G-—
—0.3

—0.6
ENTERTAINAAENT--$
& RECREAT

-0.9

—1.2

—1.5

0.0

—0.5
CASE DIFFERENTIAL

0.1

0.2

26
lies far below the fitted line.

In spite of the high wages paid to

miners, relatively few applicants apply for each job opening in the
mining industry.

This finding is consistent with the obvious

interpretation that a significant element of the high average wage in
the mining industry is a compensating differential for disagreeable
work.
Turning next to the other variables in the application equation,
it is interesting to note that personal characteristics such as age,
education and sex have an insignificant effect on the application rate.
Jobs with more formal and informal on—the-job training,

however, tend to

receive more applicants than other jobs, and there is substantial
dispersion in job application rates across occupations.
The size of an employer has a tremendous effect on the application
rate.

The number of applications per job opening rises sharply with

establishment and firm size, all else equal.22

In addition,

controlling

for employer size greatly reduces the effect of wages and union coverage

on the application rate.

Moreover, a GMM specification test that adds

employer size variables to the list of excluded variables

(Z)

fails,

which suggests that employer size enters directly into the application
equation rather than indirectly through its effect on wages.
There are at least four plausible explanations for the significant
establishment size—application relationship that exists even after wages

22This finding is consistent with results reported in Barron and
Bishop (1985). In addition, Brown and Medoff (1987) find that looking
at only a sample of minimum wage jobs, large employers report more
applicants per job opening than small employers.

27
are held constant.23 First, large firms are more visible and better
known by job seekers compared to small employers. As a result, there
may be better information about job openings at larger firms. Second,
if there are fixed costs in applying to firms it may be advantageous for
job seekers to apply to large firms because the same application may be
used for multiple openings. Third, our application measure is a stock,
not a flow, and large firms may maintain a greater inventory of
is some
applications in their files compared to small firms. There
indirect evidence for this explanation in the EOPP survey because we
find that large employers are more likely than small employers to report
that they interviewed applicants who had previously applied for
positions in their firm.

Finally, there may be nonwage aspects of work

such as fringe benefits and favorable working conditions that make large
firms more attractive employers than small employers. The last
explanation, it should be noted, runs counter to explanations of the
positive employer-size wage effect that are based on equalizing
differences.

5.

Conclusion

Our empirical examination of application rates for job openings
that pay the minimum wage finds that positions that offer the minimum

23yurthermore, this finding could be, at least partially, an
artifact related to the particular application measure utilized. Large
firms tend to make greater use of formal application procedures than
small firms. Casual inquiries concerning job openings are more likely
to lead to the completion of a written application form in large
employers. The greater use of written application forms by large firms
may mean that casual applications are more likely to be picked up in our
application measure for large firms than for small firms.

28
wage attract substantially more applicants than jobs that pay either
more than the minimum wage or less than the minimum wage.

This spike in

applications for minimum wage jobs supports the view that the minimum
wage confers rents to low—wage workers. This result suggests that
worker who obtain minimum wage jobs are made better—off than they
otherwise would have been in the absence of a minimum wage law.

In

addition, if true this finding casts doubt on models of the minimum wage
which predict that employers will fully offset the effects of a minimum
wage by reducing fringe benefits, on-the-job training and eroding
working conditions. Since employers do not appear to extract all rents
created by the minimum wage, there is reason to believe that employers
might not extract rents in other contexts in the labor market.
In the second half of the paper we examine the relationship
between inter—industry wage differentials and application rates.

There

appears to be a weak, positive relationship between inter—industry job
application differentials and inter—industry wage differentials. This
finding complements the work of Pencavel (1970) and others who document
a negative effect of industry wage differentials on turnover. The
apparent low quit rate and relatively long queue of job applicants in
high—wage industries suggests that differences in earnings across
industries do not entirely reflect equilibrium compensating
differentials for nonwage work attributes.

However, it is not clear

from these results whether the effects of industry wage premia on
turnover and application rates stem from unobserved worker abilities or
from a labor supply response to ex—ante rents.
There are three reasons to believe that the observed positive

29
relationship between wages and job applications at the industry level
represents a queuing response by workers to ex—ante rents and not a
hoard of unqualified workers attempting to obtain high—skilled jobs.
First, the results of the analysis of queues for minimum wage jobs
suggests that the application rate successfully measure job queues in a
situation where there is a strong presumption that ex—ante rents exist.
Second, the industry dummy variables pass a specification test for
orthogonality with the error, which suggests that industry is not
correlated with omitted quality variables. And finally, evidence
presented in Krueger (1988) finds that the fraction of applicants for
federal jobs who pass

qualifying standards increases with

the relative

wage of federal workers.
This paper suggests several important directions for future
research to further examine the existence of ex—ante rents in the labor
market.

First, the reasons why employers seem to only partially extract

rents created by the minimum wage need to be identified and explored
directly. Second, data on the average quality of job seekers across
industries can be brought to bear on the issue of whether inter—industry
job application differentials represent queues of qualified workers.
Finally, an examination of the relationship between appropriately
measured vacancy duration and wage premia would provide an alternative
approach to measuring job queues.

30
REFERENCES

Akerlof, George and Janet Yellen, "The Fair Wage/Ef fort Hypothesis and
Unemployment," Mimeo., U.C. Berkeley 1987.
Alpert, William, The Minimum Wage in the Restaurant Industry (New York:
Praeger Publishers, 1986).
John and John Bishop, "Extensive Search, Intensive Search, and
Hiring Costs: New Evidence on Employer Hiring Activity,"
Economic Inauirv 22, No. 3, 1985, 363—382.
Barron,

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy and Andrew Kohen, "Time—Series Evidence of
the Effect of the Minimum Wage on Youth Employment and Unemployment,"
Journal of Human Resources, Winter 1983, pp. 3-29.
Brown, Charles and James Medoff, "The Employer Size Effect," Mimec.,
Harvard University, 1987.

Carmichael, H. Lorne, "Can Unemployment Be Involuntary?: Comment,"
American Economic Review 75, December 1985, pp. 1213-14.
Dickens, William and Lawrence Katz, "Inter—Industry Wage Differences and
Industry Characteristics," in K. Lang arid J. Leonard (eds.),
Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets (New York: Basil
Blackwell, Inc., 1987a) 48—89.
Dickens, William and Lawrence Katz, "Inter—Industry Wage Differences and
Theories of Wage Determination," NBER WP 2271, June l987b.
Friedman, Milton and Simon Kuznets, Income from Independent Professional
Practice (New York: NBER, 1945).
Hashimoto, Masanori, Minimum Wages and On—the—Job Training (Washington:
American Enterprise Institute, 1981).
Jensen, Michael and William Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial
Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal of Financial
Economics, 1976, pp. 305—360.
Katz, Lawrence, "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation," in S
Fischer (ed.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986 (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1986).

Krueger, Alan, "The Determinants of Queues for Federal Jobs,"
forthcoming in Industrial and Labor Relations Review 42, No. 1, October
1988.

Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers, "Reflections on the Inter-Industry
Wage Structure," in K. Lang and J. Leonard (eds.), Unemployment and the

31

ructure

of Labor Markets (New York: Basil Blackwell, Inc.,

1987)

17-

47.

Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers, "Efficiency Wages and the Inter—
Industry Wage Structure," Econometrica 56, January 1988.
Lang, Kevin, "Persistent Wage Dispersion and Involuntary Unemployment,"
Mimeo, Boston University, December 1987.
Leighton,

Linda and Jacob Mincer, "The Effects of Minimum Wages on Human

Capital

Formation." In Simon Rottenberg, ed., The Economics of Legal
Minimum Wages (Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1981).
Lewis, E.G. Unionism and Relative Wages in the U.S. (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1963) esp. pp. 114—135.
Lindbeck, Assar and Dennis Snower, "Wage Setting, Unemployment, and
Insider—Outsider Relations," American Economic Review 76, May 1986.
Mincer, Jacob, "Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wages," Journal of
Political Economy 84, 1976, pp. S87-S104.
Mincer, Jacob, "The Economics of Wage Floors," in Ronald Ehrenberg
(ed.), Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 6 (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press,
Inc., 1984) pp. 311—334.
Montgomery, James, "Equilibrium Wage Dispersion and Inter—Industry Wage
Differentials," Mimeo, MIT, December 1987.
Murphy, Kevin N. and Robert Topel, "Efficiency Wages Reconsidered:
Theory and Evidence," Mimeo, University of Chicago, May 1987.
Nalebuff, Barry and Joseph Stiglitz, "Prices and Quality," Mimeo.,
Princeton University Econometric Research Program, Paper No. 297, 1982.
Newey, Whitney, "Generalized Method of Moments Specification Testing,"
Journal of Econometrics 29, 1985, pp. 229—256.
Pencavel,

John, An Analysis of the Quit Rate in American Manufacturing
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Industrial Relations

Instries

Section, 1970).
Stigler, George, "The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation," American
Economics Review, June 1946, pp. 358—367.
Stiglitz, Joseph, "Theories of Wage Rigidities," in J. Butkiewicz, et.
al. (ecis.) Keynes Economic Legacy: Contemorarv Economic Theories (New
York: Praeger Publishers, 1986) 153—206.

Weiss, Andrew, "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible
Wages," Journal of Political Economy 88, 1980, 529—538.

32
Weitzman, Martin,
August 1987.

"A Model of Job Market Segmentation," Mimeo, MIT,

Wessels, Walter J., "The Effect of Minimum Wages in the Presence of
Fringe Benefits: An Expanded Model," Economic Inquiry 18 (April 1980):
293—313 (a).
Wessels, Walter J., Minimum Wages. Fringe Benefits, and Working
Conditions (Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute, 1980b).

Table Al

Alicaticri Differentials for Mthia.zn
wage ari Subzi.niixuzn
Full

Wage

Sazple

Int

JcI

Other

Variables

Efftb

Eff&±c

.180
(.097)

—.001

R2

1. Oapation DinE. (8),
Hairs of Fornal Trainir,
Hairs of InfomaJ. Trainir,

e,

Sex, Experience, High
Sdiool ann., Cblleqe ann.,
Fill-Tii Dan., Seasonal Jth
Dun., TEtporaxy
Dan.,
Year D.mLs. (4)

J

2. Rq 1 Plus
27

3.

Site Duts.

Pi
2 Plus Prortion
Union

4. Pa 3 Plus
Size Dunn.
Plant Size
5.

arFinitIg
4

Ra 4 Plus 35

Irdustry D.nnn.

.073

(.154)

.191

.008

(.098)

(.157)

.107

.224
(.098)

.034
(.156)

.113

.216
(.097)

.112
(.155)

.142

.255
(.098)

.127
(.159)

.172

Notes:

a.

Depeixientvariable

is 1,364.

Staixiaxd

is ln(?1icationa per last jcb fi1).

Sanpie

size

errors are in parentheses. Regressions also irlixie a

constant.

b. Estimatei coefficient for a dtmiuy variable that equals 1 if the worker's
startirq wage eapall&1 the ndnhiuxn wage that was in effect in the year the
worker was

hir, ard 0 otherwise.

c. Estimated coefficient for a dummy variable that equals 1 if the worker's
starting wage was less than the ndniiium wage that was in effect in the year
the worker was hired, and 0 otherwise.

