NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC DEBT AND LOW INTEREST RATES
Olivier J. Blanchard
Working Paper 25621
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25621

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019

No research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Olivier J. Blanchard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Public Debt and Low Interest Rates
Olivier J. Blanchard
NBER Working Paper No. 25621
February 2019
JEL No. E62
ABSTRACT
This lecture focuses on the costs of public debt when safe interest rates are low. I develop four
arguments.
First, I show that the current U.S. situation in which safe interest rates are expected to remain
below growth rates for a long time, is more the historical norm than the exception. If the future is
like the past, this implies that debt rollovers, that is the issuance of debt without a later increase in
taxes may well be feasible. Put bluntly, public debt may have no fiscal cost.
Second, even in the absence of fiscal costs, public debt reduces capital accumulation, and may
therefore have welfare costs. I show that welfare costs may be smaller than typically assumed.
The reason is that the safe rate is the risk-adjusted rate of return to capital. If it is lower than the
growth rate, it indicates that the risk-adjusted rate of return to capital is in fact low. The average
risky rate however also plays a role. I show how both the average risky rate and the average safe
rate determine welfare outcomes.
Third, I look at the evidence on the average risky rate, i.e. the average marginal product of
capital. While the measured rate of earnings has been and is still quite high, the evidence from
asset markets suggests that the marginal product of capital may be lower, with the difference
reflecting either mismeasurement of capital or rents. This matters for debt: The lower the
marginal product, the lower the welfare cost of debt.
Fourth, I discuss a number of arguments against high public debt, and in particular the existence
of multiple equilibria where investors believe debt to be risky and, by requiring a risk premium,
increase the fiscal burden and make debt effectively more risky. This is a very relevant
argument, but it does not have straightforward implications for the appropriate level of debt.
My purpose in the lecture is not to argue for more public debt. It is to have a richer discussion of
the costs of debt and of fiscal policy than is currently the case.

Olivier J. Blanchard
Peterson Institute for International Economics
1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
oblanchard@piie.com
Appendices, programs, data are available at
https://piie.com/publications/working-papers/public-debt-and-low-interest-rates

Public Debt and Low Interest Rates
Olivier Blanchard ∗
February 25, 2019

1.

Introduction

Since 1980, interest rates on U.S. government bonds have steadily decreased.
They are now lower than the nominal growth rate, and according to current forecasts, this is expected to remain the case for the foreseeable future. 10-year U.S. nominal rates hover around 3%, while forecasts of nominal
growth are around 4% (2% real growth, 2% inflation). The inequality holds
even more strongly in the other major advanced economies: The 10-year
UK nominal rate is 1.3%, compared to forecasts of 10-year nominal growth
around 3.6% (1.6% real, 2% inflation). The 10-year Euro nominal rate is 1.2%,
compared to forecasts of 10-year nominal growth around 3.2% (1.5% real,
∗

Peterson Institute for International Economics and MIT (oblanchard@piie.com) AEA
Presidential Lecture, given in January 2019. Special thanks to Larry Summers for many
discussions and many insights. Thanks for comments, suggestions, and data to Laurence Ball, Simcha Barkai, Charles Bean, Philipp Barrett, Ricardo Caballero, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Carlo Cottarelli, Peter Diamond, Stanley Fischer, Francesco Giavazzi, Robert Hall, Patrick Honohan, Anton Korinek, Larry Kotlikoff, Lorenz Kueng,
Neil Mehrotra, Jonathan Parker, Thomas Philippon, Jim Poterba, Ricardo Reis, Dmitriy
Sergeyev, Jay Shambaugh, Robert Solow, Jaume Ventura, Robert Waldmann, Philippe
Weil, Ivan Werning, Jeromin Zettelmeyer, and many of my PIIE colleagues. Thanks
for outstanding research assistance to Thomas Pellet, Colombe Ladreit, and Gonzalo
Huertas. Appendixes, programs and data are available at https://piie.com/publications/
working-papers/public-debt-and-low-interest-rates

2

3
1.7% inflation).1 The 10-year Japanese nominal rate is 0.1%, compared to
forecasts of 10-year nominal growth around 1.4% (1.0% real, 0.4% inflation).
The question I ask in this lecture is what the implications of such low
rates should be for government debt policy. It is an important question for at
least two reasons. From a policy viewpoint, whether or not countries should
reduce their debt, and by how much, is a central policy issue. From a theory
viewpoint, one of pillars of macroeconomics is the assumption that people,
firms, and governments are subject to intertemporal budget constraints. If
the interest rate paid by the government is less than the growth rate, then
the intertemporal budget constraint facing the government no longer binds.
What the government can and should do in this case is definitely worth exploring.
The paper reaches strong, and, I expect, surprising, conclusions. Put
(too) simply, the signal sent by low rates is not only that debt may not have a
substantial fiscal cost, but also that it may have limited welfare costs.
Given that these conclusions are at odds with the widespread notion that
government debt levels are much too high and must urgently be decreased,
I consider several counterarguments, ranging from distortions, to the possibility that the future may be very different from the past, to multiple equilibria. All these arguments have merit, but they imply a different discussion
from that dominating current discussions of fiscal policy.
The lecture is organized as follows.
Section 1 looks at the past behavior of U.S. interest rates and growth rates.
It concludes that the current situation is actually not unusual. While interest
rates on public debt vary a lot, they have on average, and in most decades,
been lower than growth rates. If the future is like the past, the probability
1

Different Euro countries have different government bond rates. The 10-year Euro nominal rate is a composite rate (with changing composition) constructed by the ECB.http:
//sdw.ecb.europa.eu/quickview.do?SERIES KEY=143.FM.M.U2.EUR.4F.BB.U2 10Y.YLD

4
that the U.S. government can do a debt rollover—that it can issue debt and
achieve a decreasing debt to GDP ratio without ever having to raise taxes
later—is high.
That debt rollovers may be feasible does not imply however that they are
desirable. Even if higher debt does not give rise later to a higher tax burden,
it still has effects on capital accumulation, and thus on welfare. Whether
and when higher debt increases or decreases welfare is taken up in Sections
2 and 3.
Section 2 looks at the effects of an intergenerational transfer (a conceptually simpler policy than a debt rollover, but a policy that shows most clearly
the relevant effects at work) in an overlapping generation model with uncertainty. In the certainty context analyzed by Diamond (1965), whether such
an intergenerational transfer from young to old is welfare improving depends on “the” interest rate, which in that model is simply the net marginal
product of capital. If the interest rate is less than the growth rate, then the
transfer is welfare improving. Put simply, in that case, a larger intergenerational transfer, or equivalently an increase in public debt, and thus less capital, is good.
When uncertainty is introduced however, the question becomes what interest rate we should look at to assess the welfare effects of such a transfer.
Should it be the average safe rate, i.e. the rate on sovereign bonds (assuming
no default risk), or should it be the average marginal product of capital? The
answer turns out to be: Both.
As in the Diamond model, a transfer has two effects on welfare: an effect
through reduced capital accumulation, and an indirect effect, through the
induced change in the returns to labor and capital.
The welfare effect through lower capital accumulation depends on the
safe rate. It is positive if, on average, the safe rate is less than the growth
rate. The intuitive reason is that, in effect, the safe rate is the relevant risk-

5
adjusted rate of return on capital, thus it is the rate that must be compared
to the growth rate.
The welfare effect through the induced change in returns to labor and
capital depends instead on the average (risky) marginal product of capital. It
is negative if, on average, the marginal product of capital exceeds the growth
rate.
Thus, in the current situation where it indeed appears that the safe rate
is less than the growth rate, but the average marginal product of capital exceeds the growth rate, the two effects have opposite signs, and the effect of
the transfer on welfare is ambiguous. The section ends with an approximation that shows most clearly the relative role of the two rates. The net effect
may be positive, if the safe rate is sufficiently low and the average marginal
product is not too high.
With these results in mind, Section 3 turns to numerical simulations.
People live for two periods, working in the first, and retiring in the second.
They have separate preferences vis-a-vis intertemporal substitution and risk.
This allows to look at different combinations of risky and safe rates, depending on the degree of uncertainty and the degree of risk aversion. Production
is CES in labor and capital, and subject to technological shocks: Being able
to vary the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor turns out to
be important as this elasticity determines the strength of the second effect
on welfare. There is no technological progress, nor population growth, so
the average growth rate is equal to zero.
I show how the welfare effects of a transfer can be positive or negative,
and how they depend in particular on the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor. In the case of a linear technology (equivalently, an infinite elasticity of substitution between labor and capital), the rates of return,
while random, are independent of capital accumulation, so that only the
first effect is at work, and the safe rate is the only relevant rate in determin-

6
ing the effect of the transfer on welfare. I then show how a lower elasticity
of substitution implies a negative second effect, leading to an ambiguous
welfare outcome.
I then turn to debt and show that a debt rollover differs in two ways from
a transfer scheme. First, with respect to feasibility: So long as the safe rate
remains less than the growth rate, the ratio of debt to GDP decreases over
time; a sequence of adverse shocks may however increase the safe rate sufficiently so as to lead to explosive dynamics, with higher debt increasing the
safe rate, and the higher safe rate in turn increasing debt over time. Second,
with respect to desirability: A successful debt rollover can yield positive welfare effects, but less so than the transfer scheme. The reason is that a debt
rollover pays people a lower rate of return than the implicit rate in the transfer scheme.
The conclusion of Section 3 is that the welfare effects of debt depend not
only how on low the average safe rate is, but also on how high the average
marginal product is. With this in mind, Section 4 returns to the empirical
evidence on the marginal product of capital, focusing on two facts. The first
fact is that the ratio of the earnings of U.S. corporations to their capital at
replacement cost has remained high and relatively stable over time. This
suggests a high marginal product, and thus, other things equal, a higher welfare cost of debt. The second fact, however, is that the ratio of the earnings
of U.S. corporations to their market value has substantially decreased since
the early 1980s. Put another way, Tobin’s q, which is the ratio of the market
value of capital to the value of capital at replacement cost, has substantially
increased. There are two potential interpretations of this fact. First, that
capital at replacement cost is poorly measured and does not fully capture
intangible capital. Second, that an increasing proportion of earnings comes
from rents. Both explanations (which are the subject of much current research) imply a lower marginal product for a given measured earnings rate,

7
and thus a smaller welfare cost of debt.
Section 5 goes beyond the formal model and places the results in a broader
but informal discussion of the costs and benefits of public debt.
On the benefit side, the model above has looked at debt issuance used to
finance transfers in a full employment economy; this does not do justice to
current policy discussions, which have focused on the role of debt finance
to increase demand and output if the economy is in recession, and on the
use of debt to finance public investment. This research has concluded that,
if the neutral rate of interest is low and the effective lower bound on interest
rates is binding, then there is a strong argument for using fiscal policy to
sustain demand. The analysis above suggests that, in that very situation, the
fiscal and welfare costs of higher debt may be lower than has been assumed,
reinforcing the case for a fiscal expansion.
On the cost side, (at least) three arguments can be raised against the
model above and its implications. The first is that the risk premium, and by
implication the low safe rate relative to the marginal product of capital, may
not reflect risk preferences but rather distortions, such as financial repression. Traditional financial repression, i.e. forcing banks to hold government
bonds, is gone in the United States, but one may argue that agency issues
within financial institutions or some forms of financial regulation such as
liquidity ratios have similar effects. The second argument is that the future
may be very different from the present, and the safe rate may turn out much
higher than in the past. The third argument is the possibility of multiple
equilibria, that if investors expect the government to be unable to fully repay the debt, they may require a risk premium which makes debt harder to
pay back and makes their expectations self-fulfilling. I discuss all three arguments but focus mostly on the third. It is relevant and correct as far as it
goes, but it is not clear what it implies for the level of public debt: Multiple
equilibria typically hold for a large range of debt, and a realistic reduction in

8
debt while debt remains in the range does not rule out the bad equilibrium.
Section 6 concludes. To be clear: The purpose of the lecture is not to
advocate for higher public debt, but to assess its costs. The hope is that this
lecture leads to a richer discussion of fiscal policy than is currently the case.

2.

Interest rates, growth rates, and debt rollovers

Interest rates on U.S. bonds have been and are still unusually low, reflecting
in part the after-effects of the 2008 financial crisis and quantitative easing.
The current (December 2018) 1-year T-bill nominal rate is 2.6%, substantially below the most recent nominal growth rate, 4.8% (from the second to
the third quarter of 2018, at annual rates)
The gap between the two is expected to narrow, but most forecasts and
market signals have interest rates remaining below growth rates for a long
time to come. Despite a strong fiscal expansion putting pressure on rates
in an economy close to potential, the current 10-year nominal rate remains
around 3%, while forecasts of nominal growth over the same period are around
4%. Looking at real rates instead, the current 10-year inflation-indexed rate
is around 1%, while most forecasts of real growth over the same period range
from 1.5% to 2.5%.2
These forecasts come with substantial uncertainty.
Some argue that these low rates reflect “secular stagnation” forces that
are likely to remain relevant for the foreseeable future. They point to structurally high saving and low investment, leading to a low equilibrium marginal
product of capital for a long time to come (for example, Summers (2015),
Rachel and Summers (2018). Others point to an increased demand for safe
assets, leading to a lower safe rate for a given marginal product (for example,
2

Since 1800, 10-year rolling sample averages of U.S. real growth have always been positive, except for one 10-year period, centered in 1930.

9
Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017a). An interesting attempt to identify
the respective roles of marginal products, rents, and risk premia is given by
Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2017b).
Others point instead to factors such as aging in advanced economies,
better social insurance or lower reserve accumulation in emerging markets,
which may lead instead to higher rates in the future (for a discussion of the
role of different factors, see for example Lukasz and Smith 2015, Lunsford
and West (2018)) 3 .
Interestingly and importantly however, historically, interest rates lower
than growth rates have been more the rule than the exception, making the
issue of what debt policy should be under this configuration of more than
temporary interest. I shall limit myself here to looking at the United States
since 1950, but the conclusion holds for a large number of countries, over
long periods of time.4
Figure 1 shows the evolution of the nominal GDP growth rate and the
1-year Treasury bill rate. Figure 2 shows the evolution of the nominal GDP
growth rate and the 10-year Treasury bond rate. Together, they have two
3

Some have pointed to demographics as a factor likely to decrease the growth rate and
increase the safe rate. Theory and evidence however suggest a more complex answer. A
decrease in fertility implies a decrease in both the growth rate and the interest rate. An increase in longevity, unless accompanied by a proportional increase in the retirement age,
may have no effect on the growth rate but lead to a decrease in the interest rate. Mehrotra and Sergeyev (2018), using a calibrated OLG model, derive and discuss the effects of
population growth and productivity growth on the interest-growth rate differential. In current unpublished work, Carvalho et al, extending Carvalho et al (2016) and also using a
calibrated OLG model, conclude thatdemographic evolutions are likely to lead to a lower
neutral interest rate in the future.
4
Two major data sets are those put together by Shiller (1992 and updates) for the United
States since 1871, and by Jorda et al (2017) for 16 countries since 1870. Based on these
data, Mehrotra (2017) and Barrett (2017) show that the safe rate has been typically lower on
average than the growth rate. Mauro et al (2015) look at the evidence from 55 countries since
1800. Their results, summarized in their Table 2, show that the safe interest rate has been on
average lower than the growth rate, both for the group of advanced countries, and for the
group of non-advanced economies. (For those who want to go back even further in time,
data on the safe rate going back to the 14th century have been put together by Schmelzing
(2018) and show a steady decrease in the rate over six centuries.)

10
basic features:
Figure 1: Nominal GDP growth rate and 1-year T-bill rate, 1950-2018
Nominal growth rate and 1‐year T‐bill rate
1‐year T‐bill rate

nominal growth rate

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
‐2
‐4

Figure 2: Nominal GDP growth rate and 10-year bond rate, 1950-2018

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
‐2
‐4

Nominal growth rate and 10‐year bond rate
nominal 10‐year rate

nominal growth rate

11
• On average, over the period, nominal interest rates have been lower
than the nominal growth rate.5 The 1-year rate has averaged 4.7%, the
10-year rate has averaged 5.6%, while nominal GDP growth has averaged 6.3%.6
• Both the 1-year rate and the 10-year rate were consistently below the
growth rate until the disinflation of the early 1980s, Since then, both
nominal interest rates and nominal growth rates have declined, with
rates declining faster than growth, even before the financial crisis. Overall, while nominal rates vary substantially from year to year, the 1-year
rate has been lower than the growth rate for all decades except for the
1980s. The 10-year rate has been lower than the growth rate for 4 out
of 7 decades.
Given that my focus is on the implications of the joint evolution of interest rates and growth rates for debt dynamics, the next step is to construct a
series for the relevant interest rate paid on public debt held by domestic private and foreign investors. I proceed in three steps (1) taking into account
the maturity composition of the debt, (2) taking into account the tax payments on the interest received by the holders of public debt, and (3), taking
into account Jensen’s inequality. (Details of construction are given in appendix A.)7
To take into account maturity, I use information on the average maturity
of the debt held by private investors (that is excluding public institutions
5

Equivalently, if one uses the same deflator, real interest rates have been lower than real
growth rates. Real interest rates are however often computed using CPI inflation rather than
the GDP deflator.
6
Using Shiller’s numbers for interest rates and historical BEA series for GDP, over the
longer period 1871 to 2018, the 1-year rate has averaged 4.6%, the 10-year rate 4.6% and
nominal GDP growth 5.3%.
7
A more detailed construction of the maturity of the debt held by both private domestic
and foreign investors is given in Hilscher et al (2018).

12
and the Fed.) This average maturity went down from 8 years and 4 months
in 1950 to 3 years and 4 months in 1974, with a mild increase since then to 5
years today.8 Given this series, I construct a maturity-weighted interest rate
as a weighted average of the 1-year and the 10-year rates using it = αt ∗ i1,t +
(1 − αt ) ∗ i10,t with αt = (10 − average maturity in years)/9.
Many, but not all, holders of government bonds pay taxes on the interest
paid, so the interest cost of debt is actually lower than the interest rate itself.
There is no direct measure of those taxes, and thus I proceed as follows:910
I measure the tax rate of the marginal holder by looking at the difference
between the yield on AAA municipal bonds (which are exempt from federal
taxes) and the yield on a corresponding maturity Treasury bond, for both 1year and 10-year bonds, denoted imt1 and imt10 respectively. Assuming that
the marginal investor is indifferent between holding the two, the implicit tax
rate on 1-year Treasuries is given by τ1t = 1 − imt1 /i1t , and the implicit tax
rate on 10-year Treasuries is given by τ10t = 1 − imt10 /i10t .11 The tax rate on
1-year bonds peaks at about 50% in the late 1970s (as inflation and nominal
rates are high, leading to high effective tax rates), then goes down close to
zero until the financial crisis, and has increased slightly since 2017. The tax
rate on 10-year bonds follows a similar pattern, down from about 40% in the
early 1980s to close to zero until the financial crisis, with a small increase
8

Fed holdings used to be small, and limited to short maturity T-bills. As a result of quantitative easing, they have become larger and skewed towards long maturity bonds, implying
a lower maturity of debt held by private investors than of total debt.
9
For a parallel study, see Feenberg et al (2018).
10
This is clearly only a partial equilibrium computation. To the extent that debt leads to
lower capital accumulation and thus lower output, other tax revenues may decrease. To
the extent however that consumption decreases less or even increases (as discussed in the
next section), the effects depend on how much of taxation is output based or consumption
based.
11
This is an approximation. On the one hand, the average tax rate is likely to exceed this
marginal rate. On the other hand, to the extent that municipal bonds are also partially exempt from state taxes, the marginal tax rate may reflect in part the state tax rate in addition
to the Federal tax rate.

13
since 2016.12 Taking into account the maturity structure of the debt, I then
construct an average tax rate in the same way as I constructed the interest
rate above, by constructing τt = αt ∗ τ1,t + (1 − αt ) ∗ τ10,t
Not all holders of Treasuries pay taxes however. Foreign holders, private
and public (such as central banks), Federal retirement programs and Fed
holdings are not subject to tax. The proportion of such holders has steadily
increased over time, reflecting the increase in emerging markets’ reserves (in
particular China’s), the growth of the Social Security Trust Fund, and more
recently, the increased holdings of the Fed, among other factors. From 15%
in 1950, it now accounts for 64% today.
Using the maturity adjusted interest rate from above, it , the implicit tax
rate, τt , and the proportion of holders likely subject to tax, βt , I construct an
“adjusted interest rate” series according to:
iadj,t = it (1 − τt ∗ βt )
Its characteristics are shown in Figures 3 and 4. Figure 3 plots the adjusted rate against the 1-year and the 10-year rates. Figure 4 plots the adjusted tax rate against the nominal growth rate. They yield two conclusions:
• First, over the period, the average adjusted rate has been lower than
either the 1-year or the 10-year rates, averaging 3.8% since 1950. This
however largely reflects the non neutrality of taxation to inflation in the
1970s and 1980s, which is much less of a factor today. In 2018, the rate
was around 2.4%.
• Second, over the period, the average adjusted rate has been substantially lower than the average nominal growth rate, 3.8% versus 6.3%.
12

The computed tax rates are actually negative during some of the years of the Great Recession, presumably reflecting the effects of Quantitative Easing. I put them equal to zero
for those years

14

Figure 3: 1-year rate, 10-year rate, and adjusted rate, 1950-2018
1‐year rate, 10‐year rate, adjusted rate
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

10‐year rate

1‐year rate

adjusted rate

Figure 4: Nominal GDP growth rate and adjusted rate, 1950-2018
Nominal GDP growth and adjusted interest rate
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
‐2
‐4
Adjusted rate

Nominal GDP growth

The last potential issue is Jensen’s inequality. The dynamics of the ratio
of debt to GDP are given by:
dt =

1 + radj,t
dt−1 + xt
1 + gt

15
where dt is the ratio of debt to GDP (with both variables either in nominal
or in real terms if both are deflated by the same deflator), and xt is the ratio
of the primary deficit to GDP (again, with both variables either in nominal
or in real terms). The evolution of the ratio depends on the relevant product
of interest rates and growth rates (nominal or real) over time.
Given the focus on debt rollovers—that is the issuance of debt without a
later increase in taxes or reduction in spending— suppose we want to trace
debt dynamics under the assumption that xt remains equal to zero.13 Suppose that ln[(1 + radj,t )/(1 + gt )] is distributed normally with mean µ and variance σ 2 . Then, the evolution of the ratio will depend not on exp µ but on
exp(µ + (1/2)σ 2 ). We have seen that, historically, µ was between -1% and 2%. The standard deviation of the log ratio over the same sample is equal to
2.8%, implying a variance of 0.08%, thus too small to affect the conclusions
substantially. Jensen’s inequality is thus not an issue here.14
In short, if we assume that the future will be like the past (admittedly a
big if), debt rollovers appear feasible. While the debt ratio may increase for
some time due to adverse shocks to growth or positive shocks to the interest
rate, it will eventually decrease over time. In other words, higher debt may
not imply a higher fiscal cost.
In this light, it is interesting to do the following counterfactual exercise.15
Assume that the debt ratio in year t was what it actually was, but that the
primary balance was equal to zero from then on, so that debt in year t + n
was given by:

13

Given that we subtract taxes on interest from interest payments, the primary balance
must also be computed subtracting those tax payments.
14
The conclusion is the same if we do not assume log normality, but rather bootstrap from
the actual distribution, which has slightly fatter tails.
15
For related computations and related conclusions, see Mehrotra and Sergeyev (2018).

16

40

60

80

index

100

120

140

Figure 5: Debt dynamics, with zero primary balance, starting in year t, using
the non-tax adjusted rate

1950

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

2020

20

40

index
60

80

100

Figure 6: Debt dynamics, with zero primary balance, starting in year t, using
the tax-adjusted rate

1950

1960

1970

dt+n

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

2020

i=n
Y
1 + radj,t+i
=(
) dt
1
+
g
t+i
i=1

Figures 5 and 6 show what the evolution of the debt ratio would have

17
been, starting at different dates in the past. For convenience, the ratio is
normalized to 100 at each starting date. Figure 5 uses the non-tax adjusted
rate, and Figure 6 uses the tax-adjusted interest rate.
Figure 5 shows that, for each starting date, the debt ratio would eventually have decreased, even in the absence of a primary surplus. The decrease,
if starting in the 1950s, 1960s, or 1970s, is quite dramatic. But the figure also
shows that a series of bad shocks, such as happened in the 1980s, can increase the debt ratio to higher levels for a while.
Figure 6, which I believe is the more appropriate one, gives an even more
optimistic picture, where the debt ratio rarely would have increased, even in
the 1980s—the reason being the higher tax revenues associated with inflation during that period.
What these figures show is that, historically, debt rollovers would have
been feasible. Put another way, it shows that the fiscal cost of higher debt
would have been small, if not zero. This is at striking variance with the current discussions of fiscal space, which all start from the premise that the interest rate is higher than the growth rate, implying a tax burden of the debt.
The fact that debt rollovers may be feasible (i.e. that they may not have
a fiscal cost) does not imply however that they are desirable (that they have
no welfare cost). This is the topic taken up in the next two sections.

3.

Intergenerational transfers and welfare

Debt rollovers are, by their nature, non-steady-state phenomena, and have
potentially complex dynamics and welfare effects. It is useful to start by
looking at a simpler policy, namely a transfer from the young to the old
(equivalent to pay-as-you-go social security), and then to return to debt and
debt rollovers in the next section.
The natural set-up to explore the issues is an overlapping generation model

18
under uncertainty. The overlapping generation structure implies a real effect of intergenerational transfers or debt, and the presence of uncertainty
allows to distinguish between the safe rate and the risky marginal product of
capital.16
I proceed in two steps, first briefly reviewing the effects of a transfer under certainty, following Diamond (1965), then extending it to allow for uncertainty. (Derivations are given in Appendix B)17 18
Assume that the economy is populated by people who live for two periods, working in the first period, and consuming in both periods. Their utility
is given by:
U = (1 − β)U (C1 ) + βU (C2 )
where C1 and C2 are consumption in the first and the second period of
life respectively. (As I limit myself for the moment to looking at the effects
of the transfer on utility in steady state, there is no need for now for a time
index.) Their first and second period budget constraints are given by

16

In this framework, the main general equilibrium effect of intergenerational transfers or
debt is to decrease capital accumulation. A number of recent papers have explored the effects of public debt when public debt also provides liquidity services. Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998) for example explore the effects of public debt in an economy in which agents
cannot borrow and thus engage in precautionary saving; in that framework, debt relaxes
the borrowing constraint and decreases capital accumulation. Angeletos, Collard and Dellas (2016) develop a model where public debt provides liquidity. In that model, debt can
either crowd out capital, for the same reasons as in Aiyagari and McGrattan, or crowd in
capital by increasing the available collateral required for investment. These models are obviously very different from the model presented here, but they share a focus on the low safe
rate as a signal about the desirability of public debt. Finally, to the extent that it focuses on
economies where the safe rate may be less than the growth rate, it is related to the literature
on rational bubbles in dynamically efficient economies with financial frictions, for example
Martin and Ventura (2016), or Farhi and Tirole (2012).
17
For a nice introduction to the logic and implications of the overlapping generation
model, see Weil (2008).
18
After the lecture was delivered, I was made aware of unpublished notes by Waldman
(2016), which explore a closely related model under different forms of uncertainty and also
show that the welfare effects of debt depend in general on both the safe and the risky rate.

19

C1 = W − K − D ; C2 = R K + D
where W is the wage, K is saving (equivalently, next period capital), D is
the transfer from young to old, and R is the rate of return on capital.
I ignore population growth and technological progress, so the growth rate
is equal to zero. Production is given by a constant returns production function:
Y = F (K, N )
It is convenient to normalize labor to 1, so Y = F (K, 1). Both factors are
paid their marginal product.
The first order condition for utility maximisation is given by:
(1 − β) U 0 (C1 ) = βR U 0 (C2 )
The effect of a small increase in the transfer D on utility is given by:

dU = [−(1 − β)U 0 (C1 ) + βU 0 (C2 )] dD + [(1 − β)U 0 (C1 ) dW + βKU 0 (C2 ) dR]
The first term in brackets, call it dUa , represents the partial equilibrium,
direct, effect of the transfer; the second term, call it dUb , represents the general equilibrium effect of the transfer through the induced change in wages
and rates of return.
Consider the first term, the effect of debt on utility given labor and capital prices. Using the first-order condition gives:

20

dUa = [β(−R U 0 (C2 ) + U 0 (C2 ))] dD = β(1 − R)U 0 (C2 ) dD

(1)

So, if R < 1 (the case known as “dynamic inefficiency”), then, ignoring
the other term, a small increase in the transfer increases welfare. The explanation is straightforward: If R < 1, the transfer gives a higher rate of return
to savers than does capital.
Take the second term, the effect of debt on utility through the changes in
W and R. An increase in debt decreases capital and thus decreases the wage
and increases the rate of return on capital. What is the effect on welfare?
Using the factor price frontier relation dW/dR = −K/N ,or equivalently
dW = −KdR (given that N = 1), rewrite this second term as:
dUb = −[(1 − β)U 0 (C1 ) − βU 0 (C2 )]K dR
Using the first order condition for utility maximization gives:
dUb = −[β(R − 1)U 0 (C2 )]K dR
So, if R < 1 then, just like the first term, a small increase in the transfer increases welfare (as the lower capital stock leads to an increase in the interest
rate). The explanation is again straightforward: Given the factor price frontier relation, the decrease in the capital leads to an equal decrease in income
in the first period and increase in income in the second period. If R < 1, this
is more attractive than what capital provides, and thus increases welfare.
Using the definition of the elasticity of substitution η ≡ (FK FN )/FKN F ,
the definition of the share of labor, α = FN /F , and the relation between
second derivatives of the production function, FN K = −KFKK , this second
term can be rewritten as:

21

dUb = [β(1/η)α][(R − 1)U 0 (C2 )]R dK

(2)

Note the following two implications of equations (1) and (2):
• The sign of the two effects depends on R − 1. If R < 1, then a decrease in capital accumulation increases utility. In other words, if the
marginal product is less than the growth rate (which here is equal to
zero), an intergenerational transfer has a positive effect on welfare in
steady state.
• The strength of the second effect depends on the elasticity of substitution η. If for example η = ∞ so the production function is linear and
capital accumulation has no effect on either wages or rates of return to
capital, this second effect is equal to zero.
So far, I just replicated the analysis in Diamond.19 Now I introduce uncertainty in production, so the marginal product of capital is uncertain. If people are risk averse, the average safe rate will be less than the average marginal
product of capital. The basic question becomes:
What is the relevant rate we should look at for welfare purposes? Put
loosely, is it the average marginal product of capital ER, or is it the average
safe rate ERf , or is it some other rate altogether?
The model is the same as before, except for the introduction of uncertainty:
People born at time t have expected utility given by (I now need time
subscripts as the steady state is stochastic):
Ut ≡ (1 − β)U (C1,t ) + βEU (C2,t+1 )
19

Formally, Diamond looks at the effects of a change in debt rather than a transfer. But,
under certainty and in steady state, the two are equivalent.

22
Their budget constraints are given by
C1t = Wt − Kt − D ; C2t+1 = Rt+1 Kt + D
Production is given by a constant returns production function
Yt = At F (Kt−1 , N )
where N = 1 and At is stochastic. (The capital at time t reflects the saving
of the young at time t − 1, thus the timing convention).
At time t, the first order condition for utility maximization is given by:
(1 − β) U 0 (C1,t ) = βE[Rt+1 U 0 (C2,t+1 )]
f
We can now define a shadow safe rate Rt+1
, which must satisfy:

f
Rt+1
E[U 0 (C2,t+1 ] = E[Rt+1 U 0 (C2,t+1 )]

Now consider a small increase in D on utility at time t:

dUt = [−(1−β)U 0 (C1,t )+βEU 0 (C2,t+1 )] dD+[(1−β)U 0 (C1,t ) dWt +βKt E[U 0 (C2,t+1 ) dRt+1 ]]
As before, the first term in brackets, call it dUat , reflects the partial equilibrium, direct, effect of the transfer, the second term, call it dUbt , reflects the
general equilibrium effect of the transfer through the change in wages and
rates of return to capital.
Take the first term, the effect of debt on utility given prices. Using the
first order condition gives:

23

dUat = [−βE[Rt+1 U 0 (C2,t+1 )] + βE[U 0 (C2,t+1 )]] dD
So, using the definition of the safe rate:
f
dUat = β(1 − Rt+1
)EU 0 (C2,t+1 ) dD

(3)

So, to determine the sign effect of the transfer on welfare through this first
f
channel, the relevant rate is indeed the safe rate. In any period in which Rt+1

is less than one, the transfer is welfare improving.
The reason why the safe rate is what matters is straightforward and important: The safe rate is, in effect, the risk-adjusted rate of return on capital.20 The intergenerational transfer gives people a higher rate of return to
people than the risk-adjusted rate of return on capital.
Take the second term, the effect of the transfer on utility through prices:
dUbt = (1 − β)U 0 (C1,t ) dWt + βE[U 0 (C2,t+1 ) Kt dRt+1 ]
Or using the factor price frontier relation:
dUbt = −(1 − β)U 0 (C1,t ) Kt−1 dRt + βE[U 0 (C2,t+1 ) Kt dRt+1 ]
In general, this term will depend both on dKt−1 (which affects dWt ) and
on dKt (which affects dRt+1 ). If we evaluate it at Kt = Kt−1 = K and dKt =
dKt+1 = dK, it can be rewritten, using the same steps as in the certainty case,
as:
dUbt = [β (1/η) α] E[(Rt+1 −
20

Rt+1 0
)U (C2,t+1 )]Rt dK
Rt

(4)

The relevance of the safe rate in assessing the return to capital accumulation was one
of the themes in Summers (1990).

24
Or:
dUbt = [β (1/η) α] E[(Rt+1 U 0 (C2,t+1 )](Rt − 1)dK

(5)

Thus the relevant rate in assessing the sign of the welfare effect of the
transfer through this second term is the risky rate, the marginal product
of capital. If Rt is less than one, the implicit transfer due to the change in
input prices increases utility. If Rt is greater than one, the implicit transfer
decreases utility.
The reason why it is the risky rate that matters is simple. Capital yields
a rate of return Rt+1 . The change in prices due to the decrease in capital
represents an implicit transfer with rate of return Rt+1 /Rt . Thus, whether
the implicit transfer increases or decreases utility depends on whether Rt is
less or greater than one.
Putting the two sets of results together: If the safe rate is less than one,
and the risky rate is greater than one—the configuration that appears to be
relevant today—the two terms now work in opposite directions: The first
term implies that an increase in debt increases welfare. The second term
implies that an increase in debt instead decreases welfare. Both rates are
thus relevant.
To get a sense of relative magnitudes of the two effects, and therefore
which one is likely to dominate, the following approximation is useful: Evaluate the two terms at the average values of the safe and the risky rates, to
get:

dU /dD = [(1 − ER f ) − (1 /η) α ER f (ER − 1 )(−dK /dD)] βE [U 0 (C2 )]
so that:

25

sign dU ≡ sign [(1 − ERf ) − (1/η)αERf (−dK/dD)(ER − 1)]

(6)

where, from the accumulation equation, we have the following approximation:21
dK/dD ≈ −

1
1 − βα(1/η)ER

Note that, if the production is linear, and so η = ∞, the second term in
equation (6) is equal to zero, and the only rate that matters is ERf . Thus,
if ERf is less than one, a higher transfer increases welfare. As the elasticity of substitution becomes smaller, the price effect becomes stronger, and,
eventually, the welfare effect changes sign and becomes negative.
In the Cobb-Douglas case, using the fact that ER ≈ (1 − α)/(αβ), (the approximation comes from ignoring Jensen’s inequality) the equation reduces
to the simpler formula:
sign dU ≡ sign [(1 − ERf ER)]

(7)

Suppose that the average annual safe rate is 2% lower than the growth
rate, so that ERf , the gross rate of return over a unit period—say 25 years—is
0.9825 = 0.6, then the welfare effect of a small increase in the transfer is positive if ER is less than 1.66, or equivalently, if the average annual marginal
product is less than 2% above the growth rate.22
21

This is an approximation in two ways. It ignores uncertainty and assumes that the direct
effect of the transfer on saving is 1 for 1, which is an approximation.
22
Note that the economy we are looking at may be dynamically efficient in the sense of
Zilcha (1991). Zilcha defined dynamic efficiency as the condition that there is no reallocation such that consumption of either the young or the old can be increased in at least one
state of nature and one period, and not decreased in any other; the motivation for the definition is that it makes the condition independent of preferences. He then showed that in
a stationary economy, a necessary and sufficient condition for dynamic inefficiency is that
E ln R > 0. What the argument in the text has shown is that an intergenerational transfer

26
Short of a much richer model, it is difficult to know how reliable these
rough computations are as a guide to reality. The model surely overstates
the degree of non-Ricardian equivalence: Debt in this economy is (nearly
fully) net wealth, even if Rf is greater than one and the government must
levy taxes to pay the interest to keep the debt constant. The assumption
that capital and labor are equally risky may not be right: Holding claims to
capital (i.e. shares) involves price risk, which is absent from the model as
capital fully depreciates within a period; on the other hand, labor income,
in the absence of insurance against unemployment, can also be very risky.
Another restrictive assumption of the model is that the economy is closed:
In an open economy, the effect on capital is likely to be smaller, with changes
in public debt being partly reflected in increases in external debt. I return to
the issue when discussing debt (rather than intertemporal transfers) later.
Be this as it may, the analysis suggests that the welfare effects of a transfer
may not necessarily be adverse, or, if adverse, may not be very large.

4.

Simulations. Transfers, debt, and debt
rollovers

To get a more concrete picture, and turn to the effects of debt and debt
rollovers requires going to simulations.23 Within the structure of the model
above, I make the following specific assumptions: (derivations and details of
can be welfare improving even if the Zilcha condition holds: As we saw, expected utility can
increase even if the average risky rate is large, so long as the safe rate is low enough. The
reallocation is such that consumption indeed decreases in some states, yet expected utility
is increased.
23
One can make some progress analytically, and, in Blanchard and Weil (2001), we did
characterize the behavior of debt at the margin (that is, taking the no-debt prices as given),
for a number of different utility and production functions and different incomplete market
structures. We only focused on debt dynamics however, and not on the normative implications.

27
simulations are given in Appendix C.)
I think of each of the two periods of life as equal to 25 years. Given the
role of risk aversion in determining the gap between the average safe and
risky rates, I want to separate the elasticity of substitution across the two
periods of life and the degree of risk aversion. Thus I assume that utility has
an Epstein-Zin-Weil representation of the form (Epstein and Zin(2013), Weil
(1990)):
(1 − β) ln C1,t + β

1
1−γ
ln E(C2,t+1
)
1−γ

The log-log specification implies that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is equal to 1. The coefficient of relative risk aversion is given by γ.
As the strength of the second effect above depends on the elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor, I assume that production is characterized by a constant elasticity of substitution production function, with
multiplicative uncertainty:
ρ
ρ
Yt = At (bKt−1
+ (1 − b)N ρ )1/ρ = At (bKt−1
+ (1 − b))1/ρ

where At is white noise and is distributed log normally, with ln At ∼ N (µ; σ 2 )
and ρ = (η−1)/η, where η is the elasticity of substitution. When η = ∞, ρ = 1
and the production function is linear.
Finally, I assume that, in addition to the wage, the young receive a nonstochastic endowment, X. Given that the wage follows a log normal distribution and thus can be arbitrarily small, such an endowment is needed to
make sure that the deterministic transfer from the young to the old is always
feasible, no matter what the realization of W .24 I assume that the endowment is equal to 100% of the average wage absent the transfer.
24

Alternatively, a lower bound on the wage distribution will work as well. But this would
imply choosing an other distribution than the log normal.

28
Given the results in the previous section, I calibrate the model so as to
fit a set of values for the average safe rate and the average risky rate. I consider average net annual risky rates (marginal products of capital) minus the
growth rate (here equal to zero) between 0% and 4%. These imply values of
the average 25-year gross risky rate, ER, between 1.00 and 2.66. I consider
average net annual safe rates minus the growth rate between -2% and 1%;
these imply values of the average 25-year gross safe rate, ERf , between 0.60
and 1.28.
I choose some of the coefficients a priori. I choose b (which is equal to
the capital share in the Cobb-Douglas case) to be 1/3. For reasons explained
below, I choose the annual value of σa to be a high 4% a year, which implies
√
a value of σ of 25 ∗ 4% = 0.20.
Because the strength of the second effect above depends on the elasticity of substitution, I consider two different values of η, η = ∞ which corresponds to the linear production function case, and in which the price effects
of lower capital accumulation are equal to zero, and η = 1, the Cobb-Douglas
case, which is generally seen as a good description of the production function in the medium run.
The central parameters are, on the one hand, β and µ, and on the other,
γ.
The parameters β and µ determine (together with σ, which plays a minor
role) the average level of capital accumulation and thus the average marginal
product of capital, i.e. the average risky rate. In general, both parameters
matter. In the linear production case however, the marginal product of capital is independent of the level of capital, and thus depends only on µ; thus,
I choose µ to fit the average value of the marginal product ER. In the CobbDouglas case, the marginal product of capital is instead independent of µ
and depends only on β; thus I choose β to fit the average value of the marginal
product ER.

29
The parameter γ determines, together with σ, the spread between the
risky rate and the safe rate. In the absence of transfers, the following relation
holds between the two rates:
f
ln Rt+1
− ln ERt+1 = −γσ 2

This relation implies however that the model suffers from a strong case
of the equity premium puzzle (see for example Kocherlakota (1996)). If we
think of σ as the standard deviation of TFP growth, and assume that, in the
data, TFP growth is a random walk (with drift), this implies an annual value
of σa of about 2%, equivalently a value of σ over the 25-year period of 10%,
and thus a value of σ 2 of 1%. Thus, if we think of the annual risk premium
as equal to, say, 5%, which implies a value of the right hand side of 1.22, this
implies a value of γ, the coefficient of relative risk aversion of 122, which is
clearly implausible. One of the reasons why the model fails so badly is the
symmetry in the degree of uncertainty facing labor and capital, and the absence of price risk associated with holding shares (as capital fully depreciates
within the 25-year period). If we take instead σ to reflect the standard deviation of annual rates of stock returns, say 15% a year (its historical mean),
and assume stock returns to be uncorrelated over time, then σ over the 25year period is equal to 75%, implying values of γ around 2.5. There is no
satisfactory way to deal with the issue within the model, so as an uneasy
compromise, I choose σ = 20%. Given σ, γ is determined for each pair of
average risky and safe rates.25
I then consider the effects on steady state welfare of an intergenerational
transfer. The basic results are summarized in Figures 7 to 10 below.
25

Extending the model to allow uncertainty to differ for capital and labor is difficult to do
(except for the case where production is linear and one can easily capture capital or labor
augmenting technology shocks. )

30
Figure 7 shows the effects of a small transfer (5% of (pre-transfer) average
saving) on welfare for the different combinations of the safe and the risky
rates (reported, for convenience, as net rates at annual values, rather than
as gross rates at 25-year values), in the case where η = ∞ and, thus, production is linear. In this case, the derivation above showed that, to a first order,
only the safe rate mattered. This is confirmed visually in the figure. Welfare
increases if the safe rate is negative (more precisely, if it is below the growth
rate, here equal to zero), no matter what the average risky rate.

Figure 7: Welfare effects of a transfer of 5% of saving(linear production function)

Figure 8 looks at a larger transfer (20% of saving), again in the linear pro-

31

Figure 8: Welfare effects of a transfer of 20% of saving (linear production
function)

32
duction case. For a given ERf , a larger ER leads to a smaller welfare increase
if welfare increases, and to a larger welfare decrease if welfare decreases. The
reason is as follows: As the size of the transfer increases, second period income becomes less risky, so the risk premium decreases, increasing ERf for
given average ER. In the limit, a transfer that led people to save nothing
in the form of capital would eliminate uncertainty about second period income, and thus would lead to ERf = ER. The larger ER, the faster ERf
increases with a large transfer; for ER high enough , and for D large enough,
ERf becomes larger than one, and the transfer becomes welfare decreasing.
In other words, even if the transfer has no effect on the average rate of
return to capital, it reduces the risk premium, and thus increases the safe
rate. At some point, the safe rate becomes positive, and the transfer has a
negative effect on welfare.

Figure 9: Welfare effects of a transfer of 5% of saving. Cobb-Douglas

33

Figure 10: Welfare effects of a transfer of 20% of saving. Cobb Douglas

Figures 9 and 10 do the same, but now for the Cobb-Douglas case. They
yield the following conclusions: Both effects are now at work, and both rates
matter: A lower safe rate makes it more likely that the transfer will increase
welfare; a higher risky rate makes it less likely. For a small transfer (5% of
saving), a safe rate 2% lower than the growth rate leads to an increase in
welfare so long as the risky rate is less than 2% above the growth rate. A safe
rate 1% lower than the growth rate leads to an increase in welfare so long as
the risky rate is less than 1% above the growth rate. For a larger transfer, (20%
of saving), which increases the average Rf closer to 1, the trade-off becomes
less attractive. For welfare to increase, a safe rate 2% lower than the growth
rate requires that the risky rate be less than 1.5% above the growth rate; a
safe rate of 1% below the growth rate requires that the risky rate be less than
0.7% above the growth rate.

34
I have so far focused on intergenerational transfers, such as we might
observe in a pay-as-you-go system. Building on this analysis, I now turn to
debt, and proceed in two steps, looking first at the effects of a permanent
increase in debt, then looking at debt rollovers.
Suppose the government increases the level of debt and maintains it at
this higher level forever. Depending on the value of the safe rate every period, this may require either issuing new debt when Rtf < 1 and distributing the proceeds as benefits, or retiring debt, when Rtf > 1 and financing
it through taxes. Following Diamond, assume that benefits and taxes are
paid to, or levied on, the young. In this case, the budget constraints faced by
somebody born at time t are given by:

C1t = (Wt + X + (1 − Rtf )D) − (Kt + D) = Wt + X − Kt − DRtf

f
C2t+1 = Rt+1 Kt + DRt+1

So, a constant level of debt can be thought of as an intergenerational
transfer, with a small difference relative to the case developed earlier. The
difference is that a generation born at time t makes a net transfer of DRtf
f
when young, and receives, when old, a net transfer of DRt+1
, as opposed to

the one-for-one transfer studied earlier. Under certainty, in steady state, Rf
is constant and the two are equal. Under uncertainty, the variation about
the terms of the intertemporal transfer implies a smaller increase in welfare
than in the transfer case. Otherwise, the conclusions are very similar.
This is a good place to discuss informally a possible extension of the
closed economy model, and allow the economy to be open. Start by thinking
of a small open economy that takes Rf as given and unaffected by its actions.
In this case, if Rf is less than one, an increase in debt unambiguously in-

35
creases welfare. The reason is that capital accumulation is unaffected, with
the increase in debt fully reflected in an increase in external debt, so the second effect characterized above is absent. In the case of a large economy such
as the United States, an increase in debt will lead to both an increase in external debt and a decrease in capital accumulation. While the decrease in
capital accumulation is the same as above for the world as a whole, the decrease in U.S. capital accumulation is smaller than in the closed economy.
Thus, the second effect is smaller; if it was adverse, it is less adverse. This
may not be the end of the story however: Other countries suffer from the
decrease in capital accumulation, leading possibly to a change in their own
debt policy. I leave this extension to another paper, but, in the current context in which the difference between the interest rate and the growth rate
varies across countries, it is clearly of relevance today.
Let me finally turn to the effects of a debt rollover, where the government,
after having issued debt and distributed the proceeds as transfers, does not
raise taxes thereafter, and lets debt dynamics play out.
The government issues debt D0 . Unless the debt rollover fails, there are
neither taxes nor subsidies after the initial issuance and associated transfer.
The budget constraints faced by somebody born at time t are thus given by:
C1t = Wt + X − (Kt + Dt )

f
C2t+1 = Rt+1 Kt + Dt Rt+1

And debt follows:
Dt = Rtf Dt−1

36
First, consider sustainability. Even if debt decreases in expected value
over time, a debt rollover may fail with positive probability. A sequence of realizations of Rtf > 1 may increase debt to the level where Rf becomes larger
than one and then remains so, leading to a debt explosion. At some point,
an adjustment will have to take place, either through default, or through an
increase in taxes. The probability of such a sequence over a long but finite
period of time is however likely to be small if Rf starts far below 1.26
This is shown in Figure 11, which plots 1000 stochastic paths of debt evolutions, under the assumption that the production function is linear, and
Figure 12, under the assumption that the production function is Cobb-Douglas.
In both cases, the initial increase in debt is equal to 15% of saving.27 The underlying parameters in both cases are calibrated so as to fit values of ER and
ERf absent debt corresponding to -1% for the annual safe rate, and 2% for
the annual risky rate.
Failure is defined as the point where the safe rate becomes sufficiently
large and positive (so that the probability that debt does not explode becomes very small—depending on the unlikely realisation of successive large
positive shocks which would take the safe rate back below the growth rate);
rather arbitrarily, I choose the threshold to be 1% at an annual rate. If the
debt rollover fails, I assume, again arbitrarily and too strongly, that all debt is
26

In my paper with Philippe Weil (Blanchard and Weil 2001), we characterized debt dynamics, based on an epsilon increase in debt, under different assumptions about technology and preferences. We showed in particular that, under the assumptions in the text, debt
would follow a random walk with negative drift. We did not however look at welfare implications.
27
This may seem small relative to actual debt-to-income ratios. But note two things. The
first is that, in the United States, the riskless rate is lower than the growth rate despite an
existing debt-to-GDP ratio around 80%, and large net social security liabilities. If there were
no public debt nor social security system at all, presumably all interest rates, including the
riskless rate would be substantially lower (a point made by Lukasz Rachel and Lawrence
Summers (2018)). Thus, the simulation is in effect looking at additional increases in debt,
starting from current levels. The second point is that, under a debt rollover, current debt
is not offset by future taxes, and thus is fully net wealth. This in turn implies that it has a
strong effect on capital accumulation, and in turn on both the risky and the safe rate.

37
paid back through a tax on the young. This exaggerates the effect of failure
on the young in that period, but is simplest to capture.28
In the linear case, the higher debt and lower capital accumulation have
no effect on the risky rate, and a limited effect on the safe rate, and all paths
show declining debt. Four periods out (100 years), all of them have lower
debt than at the start.
Figure 11: Linear production function. Debt evolutions under a debt rollover
D0 = 15% of saving

In the Cobb-Douglas case, with the same values of ER and ERf absent
28

An alternative assumption would be that taxes are raised so as to stabilize debt at this
level. Yet another alternative would be default on the debt. This assumption however would
make public debt risky throughout, and lead to a much harder analytical problem to solve.

38

Figure 12: Cobb-Douglas production function. Debt evolutions under a debt
rollover D0 = 15% of saving

39
debt, bad shocks, which lead to higher debt and lower capital accumulation,
lead to increases in the risky rate, and by implication, larger increases in the
safe rate. The result is that, for the same sequence of shocks, now 5% of
paths, fail over the first four periods—100 years, if we take a period to be 25
years. The failing paths are represented in red.
Second, consider welfare effects: Relative to a pay-as-you-go scheme,
debt rollovers are much less attractive. Remember the two effects of an intergenerational transfer. The first comes from the fact that people receive a
rate of return of 1 on the transfer, a rate which is typically higher than Rf .
In a debt rollover, they receive a rate of return of only Rf , which is typically
less than one. At the margin, they are indifferent to holding debt or capital.
There is still an inframarginal effect, a consumer surplus (taking the form of
a less risky portfolio, and thus less risky second period consumption), but
the positive effect on welfare is smaller than in the straight transfer scheme.
The second effect, due to the change in wages and rate of return on capital, is still present, so the net effect on welfare, while less persistent as debt
decreases over time, is more likely to be negative.
These effects are shown in Figures 13 and 14, which show the average
welfare effects of successful and unsuccessful debt rollovers, for the linear
and Cobb-Douglas cases.
In the linear case, debt rollovers typically do not fail and welfare is increased throughout. For the generation receiving the initial transfer associated with debt issuance, the effect is clearly positive and large. For later
generations, while they are, at the margin, indifferent between holding safe
debt or risky capital, the inframarginal gains (from a less risky portfolio)
imply slightly larger utility. But the welfare gain is small (equal initially to
about 0.18% and decreasing over time), compared to the initial welfare effect on the old from the initial transfer, denoted by the dot on the vertical

40

Figure 13: Linear production function. Welfare effects of a debt rollover D0 =
15% of saving

41

Figure 14: Cobb-Douglas production function. Welfare effects of a debt
rollover D0 = 15% of saving

42
axis(8.75%).
In the Cobb-Douglas case however, this positive effect is more than offset
by the price effect, and while welfare still goes up for the first generation (by
about 2%), it is typically negative thereafter. (The initial effect of the transfer on the utility of the old, denoted by a dot in the figure, is equal to 8.75%)
In the case of successful debt rollovers, the average adverse welfare cost decreases as debt decreases over time. In the case of unsuccessful rollovers,
the adjustment implies a larger welfare loss when it happens.29
If we take the Cobb-Douglas example to be more representative, are these
Ponzi gambles—as Ball, Elmendorf and Mankiw (1998) have called them—
worth it from a welfare viewpoint? This clearly depends on the relative weight
the policy maker puts on the utility of different generations. If the social discount factor it uses is close to one, then debt rollovers under the conditions
underlying the Cobb Douglas simulation are likely to be unappealing, and
lead to a social welfare loss. If it is less than one, the large initial increase in
utility may well dominate the average utility loss later.30

5.

Earnings versus marginal products

The argument developed in the previous two sections showed that the welfare effects of an intergenerational transfer—or an increase in debt, or a debt
rollover—depend both on how low the average safe rate and how high the av29

Note that, in figure 14, the cost of adjustment when a rollover is unsuccessful increases
over time. This is because the average value of debt, conditional on exceeding the threshold,
increases for some time. Initially, only a few paths reach the threshold, and the value of debt,
conditional on exceeding the threshold, is very close to the threshold. As the distribution
becomes wider, the value of debt, conditional on crossing the threshold increases. As the
distribution eventually stabilizes, the welfare cost also stabilizes. In the simulation, this
happens after approximately 6 periods, or 150 years.
30
The idea that a government wants to embark on a path that may fail may feel unacceptable. But this is in fact the case for many policy decisions, such as for example the choice of
minimum capital ratios for banks.

43
erage marginal product of capital are relative to the growth rate. The higher
the average marginal product of capital, for a given safe rate, the more adverse the effects of the transfer. In the simulations above (reiterating the
caveats about how seriously one should take the quantitative implications
of that model), the welfare effects of an average marginal product far above
the growth rate typically dominated the effects of an average safe rate slightly
below the growth rate, implying a negative effect of the transfer (or of debt)
on welfare.
Such a configuration would seem to be the empirically relevant one. Look
at Figure 15. The red line gives the evolution of the ratio of pre-tax earnings
of U.S. non-financial corporations, defined as their net operating surplus,
to their capital stock measured at replacement cost, since 1950. Note that,
while this earnings rate declined from 1950 to the late 1970s, it has been
rather stable since then, around a high 10%, so 6 to 8% above the growth
rate. (see Appendix D for details of construction and sources)
Look at the blue line however. It shows the evolution of the ratio of the
same earnings series, now to the market value of the same firms, constructed
as the sum of the market value of equity plus other liabilities minus financial assets. Note how it has declined since the early 1980s, going down from
roughly 10% then to about 5% today. Put another way, the ratio of the market value of firms to their measured capital at replacement cost, known as
Tobin’s q, has roughly doubled since the early 1980s, going roughly from 1 to
2.
There are two ways of explaining this diverging evolution; both have implications for the average marginal product of capital, and, as result, for the
welfare effects of debt.31 Both have been and are the subject of much research, triggered by an apparent increase in markups and concentration in
31

There is actually a third way, which is that stock prices do not reflect fundamentals.
While this is surely relevant at times, it is unlikely to be true over a 40 year period.

44
many sectors of the U.S. economy (e.g. DeLoecker and Eeckhout (2017),
Gutièrrez and Philippon (2017), Philippon (2018), Barkai (2018), Farhi and
Gouriou (2018).)
18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

1950

1953

1956

1959

1962

1965

1968

1971

1974

1977

1980

1983

Profit over capital at replacement cost

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

2004

2007

2010

2013

2016

Profit over market value

Figure 15: Earnings over replacement cost, Earnings over market value since
1950

The first explanation is unmeasured capital, reflecting in particular intangible capital. To the extent that the true capital stock is larger than the
measured capital stock, this implies that the measured earnings rate overstates the true rate, and by implication overstates the marginal product of
capital. A number of researchers have explored this hypothesis, and their
conclusion is that, even if the adjustment already made by the Bureau of
Economic Analysis is insufficient, intangible capital would have to be implausibly large to reconcile the evolution of the two series: Measured intangible capital as a share of capital has increased from 6% in 1980 to 15% today.
Suppose it had in fact increased to 25%. This would only lead only to a 10%
increase in measured capital, far from enough to explain the divergent evolutions of the two series.32
32

Further discussion can be found in Barkai 2018.

45
The second explanation is increasing rents, reflecting in particular the
increasing relevance of increasing returns to scale and increased concentration.33 . If so, the earnings rate reflects not only the marginal product of
capital, but also rents. By implication, the market value of firms reflects not
only the value of capital but also the present value of rents. If we take all of
the increase in the ratio of the market value of firms to capital at replacement cost to reflect an increase in rents, the doubling of the ratio implies
that rents account for roughly half of earnings.34

35

As with many of the issues raised in this lecture, many caveats are in order, and they are being taken on by current research. Movements in Tobin’s
q, the ratio of market value to capital, are often difficult to explain.36 Yet, the
evidence is fairly consistent with a decrease in the average marginal product
of capital, and by implication, a smaller welfare cost of debt.

33

For a parallel discussion, and similar conclusions, see Hall (2018)
A rough arithmetic exercise: Suppose V = qK + P DV (R), where V is the value of firms,
q is the shadow price of capital, R is rents. The shadow price of capital is in turn given
by q = P DV (M P K)/K. Look at the medium run where adjustment costs have worked
themselves out, so q = 1. Then V /K − 1 = P DV (R)/P DV (M P K). If V /K doubles from
1 to 2, then this implies that P DV (R) = P DV (M P K), so rents account for half of total
earnings.
35
An interesting and provocative paper by Geerolf (2017) extends this exercise to a number of advanced economies. Instead of comparing the earnings rate and the growth rate as
I do here, he follows Abel et al (1989) in comparing capital income and investment. He concludes that, assuming that there are no rents so V /K = 1, Korea had capital income lower
than investment in all years since 1970, and that, if one allows for rents and assumes for example V /K = 1.5, the same is true for 9 out of 12 countries in his sample. If his conclusions
are correct, they deliver a result stronger than the one in the text, namely that public debt is
unambiguously welfare improving in Korea, and, under the assumption that V /K = 1.5, it
is likely to be welfare improving in a number of other advanced economies.
36
In particular, what makes me uncomfortable with the argument is the behavior of Tobin’s q from 1950 to 1980, which roughly halved. Was it because of decreasing rents then?
34

46

6.

A broader view. Arguments and
counterarguments

So far, I have considered the effects of debt when debt was used to finance
intergenerational transfers in a full employment economy. This was in order
to focus on the basic mechanisms at work. But it clearly did not do justice
to the potential benefits of debt finance, nor does it address other potential
costs of debt left out of the model. The purpose of this last section is to discuss potential benefits and potential costs. As this touches on many aspects
of the economy and many lines of research, it is informal, more in the way
of remarks and research leads than definitive answers about optimal debt
policy.
Start with potential benefits.
Even within the strict framework above, the focus on steady state utility (in the case of intergenerational transfers, or of a permanent increase in
debt) ignored the transition to the steady state, and in particular, the effect
on the initial (“old”) generation of the initial transfer (in the case of intergenerational transfers), or the initial spending financed by debt (in the case of
constant debt). Steady state utility is indeed the correct variable to focus if
the policy maker values the current and all future generations equally. To the
extent however that the social welfare discount rate is less than one, a negative effect on steady state welfare may be more than offset by the increase in
utility of the initial generation. As argued above, the same argument applies
to debt rollovers: The initial increase in utility may more than offset negative
utility effects later on.37
37

A positive initial effect, and a negative steady state effect, imply that there is a social
welfare discount factor such that the effect on social welfare, defined as the present value
of current and future expected utility becomes positive. While I have computed it for the
intergenerational transfers, constant debt, and debt rollover cases presented earlier, I do

47
Going beyond the framework above, a standard argument for deficit finance in a country like the United States is its potential role in increasing
demand and reducing the output gap when the economy is in recession.
The financial crisis, and the role of both the initial fiscal expansion and the
later turn to fiscal austerity, have led to a resurgence of research on the topic.
Research has been active on four fronts:
The first has revisited the size of fiscal multipliers. Larger multipliers
imply a smaller increase in debt for a given increase in output. Looking at
the Great Recession, two arguments have been made that multipliers were
higher during that time. First, the lower ability to borrow by both households
and firms implied a stronger effect of current income on spending, and thus
a stronger multiplier. Second, at the effective lower bound, monetary authorities did not feel they should increase interest rates in response to the
fiscal expansion.38
The second front, explored by DeLong and Summers (2012) has revisited
the effect of fiscal expansions on output and debt in the presence of hysteresis. They have shown that even a small hysteretic effect of a recession
on later output might lead a fiscal expansion to actually reduce rather than
increase debt in the long run, with the effect being stronger, the stronger the
multipliers and the lower the safe interest rate.39 Note that this is a different argument from the argument developed in this paper: The proposition
is that a fiscal expansion may not increase debt, while I argue that an increase in debt may have small fiscal and welfare costs. The two arguments

not present the results here The model above is too crude to allow for credible quantitative
estimates.
38
For a review of the empirical evidence up to 2010 see Ramey (2011). For more recent
contributions, see, for example, Mertens (2018) on tax multipliers, Miyamoto et al (2018) on
the multipliers under the zero lower bound in Japan, and the debate between Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko (2012) and Ramey and Zubairy (2018)
39
I examined the evidence for or against hysteresis in Blanchard (2018). I concluded that
the evidence was not strong enough to move priors, for or against, very much.

48
are clearly complementary however.
The third front has been that public investment has been too low, often
being the main victim of fiscal consolidation, and that the marginal product
of public capital is high. The relevant point here is that what should be compared is the risk-adjusted social rate of return on public investment to the
risk-adjusted rate of return on private capital, i.e. the safe rate.
The fourth front has explored the role of deficits and debt if we have indeed entered a long-lasting period of secular stagnation, in which large negative safe interest rates would be needed for demand to equal potential output but monetary policy is constrained by the effective lower bound. In that
case, budget deficits may be needed on a sustained basis to achieve sufficient demand and output growth. Some argue that this is already the case
for Japan, and may become the case for other advanced economies. Here,
the results of this paper directly reinforce this argument. In this case, not
only are budget deficits needed to eliminate output gaps, but, because safe
rates are likely to be far below potential growth rates, the welfare costs of
debt may be small or even altogether absent.
Let me however concentrate on the potential costs of debt, and on some
counterarguments to the earlier conclusions that debt may have low fiscal
or welfare costs. I can think of three main counterarguments:
The first is that the safe rate may be artificially low, so the welfare implications above do not hold. It is generally agreed that U.S. government
bonds benefit not only from low risk, but also from a liquidity discount,
leading to a lower safe rate than would otherwise be the case. The issue
however is whether this discount reflects technology and preferences or, instead, distortions in the financial system. If it reflects liquidity services valued by households and firms, then the logic of the earlier model applies:
The safe rate is now the liquidity-adjusted and risk-adjusted equivalent of

49
the marginal product of capital and is thus what must be compared to the
growth rate. If however, the liquidity discount reflects distortions—for example financial repression forcing financial institutions to hold a certain
proportion of their portfolios in government bonds—then indeed the safe
rate is no longer the appropriate rate to compare to the growth rate. It may
be welfare improving in this case to reduce financial repression even if this
leads to a higher safe rate, and a higher cost of public debt.40 Straight financial repression is no longer relevant for the United States, but various agency
issues internal to financial institutions as well as financial regulations such
as minimum liquidity ratios, may have some of the same effects.
The second counterargument is that the future may be different from the
past, and that, despite the long historical record, the safe interest rate may
become consistently higher than the growth rate. History may indeed not
be a reliable guide to the future. As the debate on secular stagnation and
the level of the long run Wicksellian rate (the safe rate consistent with unemployment remaining at the natural rate) indicate, the future is indeed uncertain. It may be that some of the factors underlying low rates will fade
over time. Or it may be because public debt increases to the point where the
equilibrium safe rate actually exceeds the growth rate. In the formal model
above, a high enough level of debt, and the associated decline in capital accumulation, eventually leads to an increase in the safe rate above the growth
rate, leading to positive fiscal costs and higher welfare costs. Indeed, the trajectory of deficits under current fiscal plans is indeed worrisome. Estimates
by Sheiner (2018) for example suggest, that even under the assumption that
the safe rate remains below the growth rate, we may see an increase in the ratio of debt to GDP of close to 60% of GDP between now and 2043. If so, using
a standard (but admittedly rather uncertain as well) back-of-the-envelope
40

This trade-off is also present in Angeletos et al (2016).

50
number that an increase in debt of 1% of GDP increases the safe rate by 2-3
basis points, this would lead to an increase in the safe rate of 1.2% to 1.8%,
enough to reverse the inequality between the safe rate and the growth rate.
The evidence on indexed bonds suggests however two reasons to be relatively optimistic about the sign of the inequality. The first is that, to the
extent that the U.S. government can finance itself through inflation-indexed
bonds, it can actually lock in a real rate of 1.1% over the next 30 years, a rate
below even pessimistic forecasts of growth over the same period. The second
is that investors seem to give a small probability to a major increase in rates.
Looking at 10-year inflation-indexed bonds, and using realized volatility as
a proxy for implied volatility (option markets are not deep enough to derive
implied volatility directly), suggests that the market puts the probability that
the rate will be higher than 200 bp in five years around 5-15%.41
In short, one can surely not exclude the possibility that debt will indeed
be more costly in the future, and the safe rate may exceed the growth rate.
The welfare implications however are continuous, and for reasonably small
positive differences between the interest rate and the growth rate, the welfare costs will remain small. The basic intuition remains the same: The safe
rate is the risk-adjusted rate of return on capital. If it is higher but not much
higher than the growth rate, lower capital accumulation may not have major
adverse welfare effects.
The third counterargument relies on the existence of multiple equilibria
and may be the most difficult to counter.42 Suppose that the model above
is right, and that investors believe debt to be safe and are willing to hold it
41

The daily standard deviation is around 2-3 basis points, implying a 5-year standard deviation of 70-105 basis points. This implies that the probability that the rate, which today is
90 basis points, is larger than 200 basis points is 5-15%.
42
It feels less relevant for the United States than for other countries, in particular emerging
markets. But, as the U.S. debt to GDP ratio increases, it may become part of the discussion
even in the United States.

51
at the safe rate. In this case, the fiscal cost of debt may indeed be zero, and
the welfare cost may be small. If however, investors believe that debt is risky
and ask for a risk premium to compensate for that risk, debt payments will
be larger, and debt will indeed be risky, and investors’ expectations may be
self-fulfilling.
The mechanics of such fiscal multiple equilibria were first characterized
by Calvo (1988), later on by Giavazzi and Pagano (1990), and more recently
by Lorenzoni and Werning (2018). In this case, over a wide range of debt,
there may be two equilibria, with the good one being the one where the rate
is low, and the bad one characterized by a high risk premium on public debt,
and a higher rate.43
The question is what practical implications this has for debt levels.
The first question is whether there is a debt level sufficiently low as to
eliminate the multiplicity. If we ignore strategic default, there must be some
debt level low enough that the debt is effectively safe and there is only one
equilibrium. The proof is by contradiction: Suppose investors worry about
risk and increase the required rate. As the required rate increases, the state
may indeed default. But suppose that, even if it defaults, debt is low enough
that, while it cannot pay the stated rate, it can pay the safe rate. This in
turn implies that investors, if they are rational, should not and will not worry
about risk.
This argument however raises two issues. First, it may be difficult to assess what such a safe level of debt is: it is likely to depend on the nature of
the government, its ability to increase and maintain a primary surplus. Second, the safe level of debt may be very low, much lower than current levels of
debt in the United States or in Europe. If multiple equilibria are present at,
43

Under either formal or informal dynamics, the good equilibrium is stable, while the bad
equilibrium is unstable. However, what may happen in this case, is that the economy moves
to a position worse than the bad equilibrium, with interest rates and risk premia increasing
over time from then on.

52
say 100% of GDP, they are likely to still be present at 90% as well; going however from 100% of GDP to 90% requires a major fiscal consolidation and,
if the fiscal consolidation cannot be fully offset by expansionary monetary
policy, an economic contraction. As Giavazzi and Pagano, and Lorenzoni
and Werning, have shown, other dimensions of debt and fiscal policy, such
as the maturity of debt or the aggressiveness of the fiscal rule in response to
higher interest rates, are likely to be more important than the level of debt itself, and help eliminate the bad equilibrium. To be more concrete, it may be
that, rather than embarking on fiscal austerity if it cannot be fully offset by
looser monetary policy, it is better to rely on an aggressive contingent fiscal
rule to eliminate the bad equilibrium.

7.

Conclusions

In this lecture, I have looked at the fiscal and welfare costs of higher debt
in an economy where the safe interest rate is less than the growth rate. I
have argued that this is a relevant empirical configuration, and indeed has
been the norm rather than the exception in the United States in the past. I
have argued that both the fiscal and welfare costs of debt may then be small,
smaller than is generally taken as given in current policy discussions. I have
considered a number of counterarguments, which are indeed valid, and may
imply larger fiscal and welfare costs. The purpose of this lecture is most definitely not to argue for higher debt per se, but to allow for a richer discussion
of debt policy and appropriate debt rules than is currently the case.

53

References
[1] Andrew Abel, N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence Summers, and Richard
Zeckhauser. Assessing dynamic inefficiency: Theory and evidence. Review of Economic Studies, 56:1–20, 1989.
[2] S. Rao Aiyagari and Ellen McGrattan. The optimum quantity of debt.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 42(3):447–469, October 1998.
[3] George Marios Angeletos, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. Public
debt as private liquidity; Optimal policy. October 2016. Manuscript,
MIT.
[4] Alan Auerbach and Yury Gorodnichenko. Measuring the output responses to fiscal policy. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
4(2):1–27, 2012.
[5] Laurence Ball, Douglas Emendorf, and N. Gregory Mankiw. The deficit
gamble. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 30(4):699–720, November 1998.
[6] Simcha Barkai.

Declining labor and capital shares.

October 2018.

Manuscript, LSE.
[7] Philip Barrett. Interest-growth differentials and debt limits in advanced
economies. April 2018. IMF Working Paper.
[8] Olivier Blanchard. Should we reject the natural rate hypothesis? Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 32(1):97–120, Winter 2018.
[9] Olivier Blanchard and Philippe Weil. Dynamic efficiency, the riskless
rate, and debt Ponzi games under uncertainty. Advances in Macroeconomics, pages 1–23, November 2001.

54
[10] Ricardo Caballero, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas.
Rents, technical change, and risk premia. Accounting for secular trends
in interest rates, returns on capital, earning yields, and factor shares.
American Economic Review, 107(5):614–620, May 2017. a.
[11] Ricardo Caballero, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas.
The safe assets shortage conundrum. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
31(3):29–46, Summer 2017. b.
[12] Guillermo Calvo. Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations.
American Economic Review, 78(4):647–661, September 1988.
[13] Carlos Carvalho, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. Demographics
and real interest rates: Inspecting the mechanism. European Economic
Review, 88:208–226, September 2016.
[14] Jan De Loecker and Jan Eeckhout. The rise of market power and the
macroeconomic implications. August 2017. Manuscript, Princeton.
[15] Bradford DeLong and Lawrence Summers. Fiscal policy in a depressed
economy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2012:233–297, Spring
2012.
[16] Peter Diamond. National debt in a neoclassical growth model. American Economic Review, 55(5-1):1126–1150, December 1965.
[17] Larry Epstein and Stanley Zin. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of consumption and asset returns. A theoretical framework. Handbook of the Fundamentals of Financial Decision Making,
pages 207–239, 2013.
[18] Emmanuel Farhi and Francois Gouriou. Accounting for macro finance

55
trends. Market power, intangibles, and risk premia. November 2018.
NBER working paper 25282.
[19] Emmanuel Farhi and Jean Tirole. Bubbly liquidity. Review of Economic
Studies, 79:678–706, 2012.
[20] Daniel Feenberg, Clinton Tepper, and Ivo Welch. Are interest rates really
low? January 2018. NBER working paper 24258.
[21] Francois Geerolf.

Reassessing dynamic efficiency.

July 2017.

Manuscript, UCLA.
[22] Francesco Giavazzi and Marco Pagano. Confidence crisis and public debt management.

1990.

Capital Markets and Debt Manage-

ment. Mario Draghi and Rudiger Dornbusch (eds.) Cambridge University Press.
[23] German Gutierrez and Thomas Philippon. Declining competition and
investment in the u.s. November 2017. Manuscript, New York University.
[24] Robert Hall. New evidence on market power, profit, concentration,
and the role of mega-firms in the U.S. economy.

September 2018.

Manuscript, Stanford University.
[25] Jens Hilscher, Alon Ravv, and Ricardo Reis. Inflating away the public
debt? An empirical assessment. July 2018. Manuscript,LSE.
[26] Oscar Jordá, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and
Alan Taylor. The rate of return on everything, 1870-2015. December
2017. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2017-25.
[27] Narayana Kocherlakota. The equity premium: It’s still a puzzle. Journal
of Economic Literature, 34(1):42–71, March 1996.

56
[28] Guido Lorenzoni and Ivan Werning. Slow moving debt crises. July 2018.
Manuscript, MIT.
[29] Kurt Lunsford and Kenneth West. Some evidence on secular drivers of
U.S. safe real rates. November 2018. NBER working paper 25288.
[30] Alberto Martin and Jaume Ventura. Managing credit bubbles. Journal
of the European Economic Association, 14(3):753–789, March 2016.
[31] Paolo Mauro, Rafael Romeu, Ariel Binder, and Asad Zaman. A modern history of fiscal prudence and profligacy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 76:55–70, 2015.
[32] Neil Mehrotra. Implications of low productivity growth for debt sustainability. 1(2), November 2017. Manuscript, Brown University.
[33] Neil Mehrotra and Dmitriy Sergeyev. Debt sustainability in a low interest world. 1(2), December 2018. Manuscript, Brookings Institution.
[34] Karel Mertens. The near term growth impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act. March 2018. FRB Dallas.
[35] Wataru Miyamoto, Thuy Lan Nguyen, and Dmitry Sergeyev. Government spending multipliers under the zero lower bound: Evidence from
Japan. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(3):247–277,
2018.
[36] Thomas Philippon.

A primer on concentration, investment, and

growth. August 2017. Prepared for the Jackson Hole Economic Policy
Symposium.
[37] Lukasz Rachel and Thomas Smith. Secular drivers of the global real interest rate. 1(2), December 2015. Staff Working Paper, Bank of England.

57
[38] Lukasz Rachel and Lawrence Summers. The equilibrium real interest
rate in advanced economies: The role of of government policies and
current account imbalances. July 2018. Manuscript, Harvard and LSE.
[39] Valerie Ramey. Can government purchases stimulate the economy?
Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3):673–685, September 2011.
[40] Valerie Ramey and Sarah Zubairy. Government spending multipliers
in good times and in bad: Evidence from U.S. historical data. 2018.
Manuscript, forthcoming, JPE.
[41] Paul Schmelzing. Eight centuries of global real rates and the suprasecular decline, 1311-2018. November 2019. Manuscript, Harvard University.
[42] Louise Sheiner. Effects of low productivity growth on fiscal sustainability in the united states. May 2018. Manuscript, Peterson Institute for
International Economics.
[43] Robert Shiller. Market Volatility. MIT Press, 1992.
[44] Lawrence Summers. What is the social return to capital investment?
pages 113–141, 1990. in “Growth, Productivity, and Unemployment,
Essays in honor of Robert Solow”, Peter Diamond editor, MIT Press.
[45] Lawrence Summers. Demand side secular stagnation. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 105:60–65, May 2015.
[46] Robert Waldman.

Dynamic inefficiency when the expected return

on capital is greater than the growth rate. 2016. www.scribd.com/
document/397505245.
[47] Philippe Weil. Nonexpected utility in macroeconomics. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(1):29–42, February 1990.

58
[48] Philippe Weil. Overlapping generations: The first Jubilee. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 22(4):115–134, 2008.
[49] Itzhak Zilcha. Characterizing efficiency in stochastic overlapping generations models. Journal of Economic Theory, 55:1–16, 1991.

