NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING:
EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Working Paper 25622
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25622

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019, Revised September 2019

Thanks to Ipsos MMI for providing access to the survey data. Thanks to Ottar Hellevik for all his
help with this study. Thanks to Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Johanna Mollerstrom for providing
excellent discussions. Thanks to the editor and reviewers for their invaluable input. I also
benefited from the feedback from several colleagues as well as seminar discussants at Harvard,
Princeton, Yale, Universidad de San Andres, LMU Munich, ITAM, CIDE, Universidad Catolica
de Chile, Universidad de la Republica, RAND, the BESH Research Symposium, the AEA Annual
Meetings, the USC Happiness Conference and the NBER Summer Institute. Diego Marino Fages
provided outstanding research assistance. The first draft of this paper circulated in August 2015
under the title “Measuring the Value of Self- and Social-Image.” The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Ricardo Perez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Income Transparency on Well-Being: Evidence from a Natural Experiment
Ricardo Perez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 25622
February 2019, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D03,D31,D60,D83,I31,Z10
ABSTRACT
In 2001, Norwegian tax records became easily accessible online, allowing everyone in the
country to observe the incomes of everyone else. According to the income comparisons model,
this change in transparency can widen the gap in well-being between richer and poorer
individuals. We test this hypothesis using survey data from 1985–2013. Using multiple
identification strategies, we show that the higher transparency increased the gap in happiness
between richer and poorer individuals by 29%, and it increased the life satisfaction gap by 21%.
We provide suggestive evidence that some, although probably not all, of this effect relates to
changes in self-perceptions of relative income. We provide back-of-the-envelope estimates of the
importance of income comparisons, and discuss implications for the ongoing debate on
transparency policies.

Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ricardo.truglia@anderson.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

The income comparisons model proposes that individual well-being largely depends on how that
individual’s income compares to the incomes of others (Luttmer, 2005). This is a fundamental aspect of individual preferences, yet no consensus exists about the importance of income
comparisons.1 In this study, we offer novel evidence based on a unique natural experiment: in
2001, Norwegian tax records became easily accessible online, allowing everyone in the country
to observe the incomes of everyone else quickly and easily. We test the hypothesis that, consistent with the model of income comparisons, increased income transparency widens the gap in
well-being between richer and poorer individuals.
Tax records have been public in Norway since the nineteenth century, but they have not
always been easily accessible. Before 2001, one had to make a formal request in person at the
tax agency to see someone else’s income. In the fall of 2001, the Norwegian media digitized tax
records and created websites that allowed any individual with Internet access to search anyone’s
tax records. Every Norwegian was one click away from finding out the incomes of everyone else
in the country.
We use various data sources to show the massive popularity of these online tax lists. During
the busiest week of the year, these websites were more popular than YouTube. We also show
that, rather than using the tax lists for legitimate goals (e.g., uncovering corruption or tax
evasion), most used the websites to snoop on friends, relatives, and social contacts. For example,
users could create leaderboards showing the highest and lowest earners among their Facebook
friends or maps showing the incomes of everyone living around a specific location. This behavior
became so pervasive that the Norwegian media dubbed it “tax porn.”
Because income transparency facilitates income comparisons, it can widen the gap in wellbeing between richer and poorer individuals. Poorer individuals often lose this game of income
comparisons. For example, if they learn that they are poorer than they thought (Cruces, PerezTruglia, and Tetaz, 2013), it can lower their self-esteem. If their social contacts learn how poor
they are, it can reduce their social-esteem. In contrast, richer individuals often benefit from
this game. Learning that they are richer than they thought can boost their self-esteem. And
being looked up by their social contacts can boost their social-esteem.2
To test this hypothesis, we measure the effect of the increase in transparency on the gradient between subjective well-being and individual income rank (hereinafter referred to as the
1

This question is important to understand preferences more deeply, and also due to its implications for
income taxation and other policies. For example, income comparisons can create positional externalities that
reduce social welfare and could be corrected with taxes (e.g., Boskin and Sheshinski, 1978; Frank, 1985).
2
Different individuals may react differently to the increased transparency. For example, while some rich
individuals may feel happy that their neighbors caught a glimpse of their income, others may feel uneasy about
the same situation (e.g., if they do not feel deserving of their high income). In this study, we can only measure
which of these different mechanisms dominates on average.

2

happiness-income gradient). We use survey data from Norway from 1985–2013 that includes
the two most widely used measures of subjective well-being: happiness and life satisfaction. Despite some limitations of these subjective measures, evidence suggests that they contain useful
information about well-being. For example, life satisfaction and happiness have been shown to
be significantly correlated with objective measures of well-being and with decision utility (Di
Tella, MacCulloch, and Oswald, 2003; Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and Rees-Jones, 2012).
Consistent with the hypothesis of income comparisons, we show that the 2001 income transparency change led to a 29% increase in the happiness-income gradient (p-value=0.005) and a
21% increase in the life satisfaction-income gradient (p-value=0.026).
We use multiple strategies to identify the causal effect of the transparency change of 2001.
First, we conduct an event-study analysis and find that the happiness-income gradient stayed
constant in the years before the change, increased in 2001, and persisted at the higher level
during the subsequent twelve years of higher transparency.
Second, we identify individuals who were most likely to be exposed to the effects of online tax
lists, based on observable characteristics that predict Internet access. We show that, between
1985 and 2000, the happiness-income gradient remained stable for individuals with low and high
Internet access. After 2001, the happiness-income gradient remained at the pre-2001 level for
individuals with lower Internet access but increased substantially and persisted at the higher
level for individuals with higher Internet access.
Our third identification strategy reproduces the analysis using similar survey data from Germany, a country that was not affected by the Norwegian change in income transparency. Similar
results for Germany would indicate that another factor, such as the dot-com bubble, caused
the change in the happiness-income gradient in Norway. In sharp contrast to the Norwegian
findings, however, the life satisfaction-income gradient did not change around 2001 in Germany.
The event-study analysis shows that this gradient remained stable in Germany from 1985 to
2013, both in the population at large and in the sub-populations of individuals with higher and
lower Internet access.
Anecdotal evidence supports our finding that higher income transparency increased the
well-being gap between richer and poorer households. For example, the media reported that the
online tax lists led to bullying of kids from poorer households and that adults from poorer households felt that they disappointed themselves and others (Aftenposten, 2008; New York Times,
2009). Our findings also align with survey data indicating that, relative to richer households,
poorer households were more likely to oppose the income transparency policy (Aftenposten,
2011).
The effects of income transparency may operate through multiple mechanisms. We provide
suggestive evidence for one specific mechanism: self-perceptions. According to this channel,
richer individuals may be happier because they learn that they are richer than they thought,
3

and poorer individuals may be unhappier because they learn that they are poorer than they
thought. We show that, indeed, transparency increased the gradient between perceived income
rank and actual income rank by 8.5% (p-value<0.001) and the gradient between the perceived
adequacy of one’s income and income rank by 4.7% (p-value=0.083). This evidence cannot prove
or rule out the self-perceptions channel, but it does serve as suggestive evidence. Moreover, the
perceived rank and income adequacy gradients (8.5% and 4.7%) are smaller than the changes
in the happiness and life satisfaction gradients (29% and 21%), which suggests the presence of
other mediating factors besides self-perceptions.
We use the estimated effects of transparency to quantify the importance of income comparisons. Our back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that, as a conservative lower bound, income
comparisons accounted for 22% of the happiness that individuals in Norway derived from their
incomes during the period of higher transparency. Moreover, we show that this lower bound is
consistent with the effect of relative income on happiness, as reported in related studies.
Our evidence also relates to the ongoing debate on transparency. Technological advances
have made it possible for everyone to know potentially everything about everyone else, sparking
debates on whether the government should disclose its data, such as tax records. Some arguments that favor or oppose transparency are rooted in philosophical grounds.3 However, most
arguments seem to be based on the potential effects of transparency. In particular, detractors
of income transparency argued that the tax lists were used in despicable ways to harm the wellbeing of poorer individuals.4 This argument, however, was based on qualitative and anecdotal
evidence. This study provides the first quantitative evidence on this matter.
Beyond the Norwegian experience, information disclosure may directly affect well-being in
other contexts. In the 2000s, Sweden, Iceland, and Finland had to decide whether to make their
tax records as easily accessible as in Norway. Outside of Scandinavia, governments disclose all
sorts of sensitive information, such as the salaries of public employees (Card, Mas, Moretti,
and Saez, 2012; Mas, 2017), individual contributions to political campaigns (Perez-Truglia and
Cruces, 2018), and identities of criminals and tax delinquents (Linden and Rockoff, 2008; PerezTruglia and Troiano, 2018). Our findings suggest that it is important to measure the well-being
effects of disclosing sensitive data and to account for them in the cost-benefit analysis.
This paper relates to various strands of literature. Most important, it relates to a literature
on the effect of relative income on well-being. In a seminal contribution, Easterlin (1974) showed
evidence that happiness and income are positively correlated across individuals within a country
3

For example, some of the supporters of income transparency in Norway see it as a fundamental principle
of democracy, while some opponents see it as a violation of privacy rights.
4
This was by no means the only negative consequence from income transparency that was debated. For
example, some detractors of open disclosure argued that the tax records could be used by criminals to target rich
individuals. However, in a letter to the Ministry of Justice, the Norwegian police noted that their investigations
ruled this out as a significant source for concern (Dagens Næringsliv, 2010).

4

but that average happiness in a country does not seem to rise over time as average income rises.
One standard explanation for the paradox is that happiness depends on relative income. Within
a given country, richer individuals have higher relative income, so they are happier. However,
as every individual in the country becomes richer, the average relative income stays constant,
and thus average happiness also remains constant. Consistent with this interpretation, several
studies have shown that, holding own income constant, subjective well-being decreases with the
mean income of neighbors (Luttmer, 2004; Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2005).5
However, this evidence is subject to concerns about causal identification. For example,
the Balassa–Samuelson model (Balassa, 1964; Samuelson, 1964) predicts that consumer prices
should be higher in areas where nominal incomes are higher. Thus, even in the absence of income
comparisons, happiness should be negatively correlated to the average income of neighbors,
reflecting a higher cost of living. More generally, the average income in an area could be
correlated with other unobservable attributes of the location that also affect well-being, thus
generating omitted-variable biases. We contribute to this literature by presenting novel evidence
on the effects of relative income on happiness that relies on a new identification approach, based
on quasi-experimental variation in income transparency.
This study also relates to Bø, Slemrod, and Thoresen (2015), who measured the effect of the
Norwegian disclosure of tax records on tax evasion. Disclosing tax records may deter tax evasion
by encouraging others with relevant information about true tax liability to come forward and
by threatening evaders with social sanctions (see also Perez-Truglia and Troiano, 2018). Bø,
Slemrod, and Thoresen (2015) found that the change in income disclosure increased reported
income among business owners by 2.7%, resulting in a total gain of 0.2% in income tax revenues.
This evidence confirms a benefit of disclosure, as alleged by its supporters. We present evidence
on an unintended effect, income comparisons, as alleged by detractors of income transparency.
This work also relates to the study by Card, Mas, Moretti, and Saez (2012) of the effects
of income transparency on job satisfaction. The researchers sent emails to a random sample of
university employees with information on how to access a website that listed the wages of all
employees working in the same university. In a follow-up survey, they found that, for workers
with below-median salaries within their unit and position, having access to the website decreased
satisfaction with their wages and their jobs. Consistent with this finding, Rege and Solli (2015)
show evidence that the disclosure of tax records in Norway increased the probability of quitting
among workers with lower salaries. Their findings suggest that some poor individuals may
benefit from income transparency, because they can find out if they are under-paid and look for
a better job. On the contrary, our evidence suggests that income transparency increased the
5

There are some conflicting accounts about the evidence. See for instance Hagerty and Veenhoven (2003),
Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), Easterlin et al. (2010) and Easterlin (2017) on the effect of income growth on
happiness, and Senik (2004), Clark, Westergård-Nielsen and Kristensen (2009) and Deaton and Stone (2013) on
the effect of relative income on happiness.

5

well-being of richer individuals at the expense of the well-being of poorer individuals.
Last, this study relates to a literature documenting how individuals misperceive their positions in the income distribution and how providing objective information can correct these misperceptions (Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz, 2013; Karadja, Mollerstrom, and Seim, 2017).
These studies are based on artificial contexts in which researchers provide information through
a survey. We contribute to this literature by exploiting the variation in information access in
a natural, large-scale setting and by showing that correcting these misperceptions may affect
well-being.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes relevant details about the
disclosure policy. Section 3 presents the econometric specification and the survey data. Section
4 presents the results. The last section concludes.

2

Relevant Institutional Details

2.1

Origin of the Online Tax Lists

Although tax records have been publicly available in Norway since the middle of the nineteenth
century, they were not easily accessible before 2001. Individuals who wanted to learn about
someone else’s income had to visit the local tax office or city hall during a three-week period
and search through a book with records for thousands of taxpayers from the same municipality.6
In the fall of 2001, a Norwegian newspaper made these tax records searchable online for the
first time so that any Norwegian with Internet access could view them easily and at any time
(see Figure 1 for a screenshot of this website). All major newspapers soon created their own
websites, which remained popular in the country for the following decade.7 These websites
listed full names and net incomes (see Figure 2 for a sample search result), and could also list
additional information such as taxes, net worth, birth years, cities and postal codes. These
websites allowed visitors to search by multiple fields. For example, visitors could search for
their own last name to find relatives. Or they could search by postal code to find neighbors.
Although all other Scandinavian countries (except Denmark) make tax records publicly available, the Norwegian tax disclosure during 2001–2013 was exceptional because of its accessibility
(Aftenposten, 2011).8 In Finland, accessibility of tax records is similar to that in Norway prior
6

In selected municipalities and only shortly before 2001, some local organizations sold books with information
from the local tax rolls. Bø, Slemrod and Thoresen (2013) exploit variation across these municipalities to identify
the effects of transparency. We cannot use this same identification strategy because we lack sufficient data (we
would need a survey sample orders of magnitude higher and with a higher frequency).
7
The following are sample websites: www.skattelister.no, www.nrk.no/skatt, www.tu.no/skattelister and
skatt.na24.no.
8
In other countries, information about incomes can be easily accessible online for a subset of the population
(e.g., public employees in some U.S. states).

6

to 2001, requiring individuals to visit the tax agency in person (New York Times, 2018).9 In
Sweden, the requests for tax returns are not anonymous and must be done by phone, making
this practice much less popular than it is in Norway.10 In Iceland, tax records are also difficult
to access and available during two weeks of the year only.

2.2

Evolution of the Online Tax Lists

Between 2001 and 2013 (the last year of our survey data), several factors may have contributed
to increased or decreased use of online tax lists, though none of these changes in visibility was
remotely comparable in size to the change of 2001.
Some factors may have contributed to a gradual increase in income visibility. For example,
the media added convenient and engaging ways to browse tax records. One newspaper released
an app that connected to Facebook and automatically created leaderboards showing the highest and lowest earners among Facebook friends, as shown in Figure 3.11 Another application
allowed users to tap on a map to see the incomes of everyone living near that position.12 Just
like the websites, these smartphone apps were incredibly popular (Digi, 2009; Teknologiradet,
2010).13 There was also a modest increase in Internet access during the 2000s, which may have
contributed to higher income visibility: according to Statistics Norway, the share of Internet
users increased from 72.8% in 2002 to 95.1% in 2013.
On the other hand, some government regulations may have decreased the degree of income
transparency. From 2004 to 2006, regulators introduced restrictions to the use of the tax lists:
visitors had to use an official search tool conduct searches, which was only available during
three weeks of the year (Teknologiradet, 2010). The official search tool was easy to use, and the
newspapers seamlessly embedded it in their own websites. The three-week restriction may not
9

In the day that the tax records are released, a few dozen Finish journalists line up in the tax agency to look
up the incomes of some news-worthy individuals. However, that number pales in comparison to the millions of
searches conducted in Norway every year. One exception of the Finish law is that the tax records are searchable
online for the top 10,000 richest individuals. Also, there was a period in which requests for tax records could be
done over the phone – however, to the best of our knowledge, this option was not nearly as widespread as the
online searches were in Norway.
10
In 2006, a credit reporting company called Ratsit published a website with a search tool for tax records
similar to the ones offered in Norway (The Local, 2015). However, it was taken down by the Sweden’s Chancellor
of Justice shortly thereafter. The website was later allowed, but the searches were non-anonymous and subject
to a fee. In 2015, this same company began selling physical copies of the tax records at the municipality level,
just like in some Norwegian municipalities prior to 2001.
11
Also, the top-right corner of Figure 1 shows an advertisement for one of these apps.
12
Appendix Figure A.1.b shows an screenshot of one of these apps.
13
In addition to showing individual records, some of the websites and apps offered tools to navigate aggregate
data. For example, Appendix Figure A.1.c shows the screenshot of one of the websites offering an interactive
tool to figure out the user’s position in the income distribution of the country or a city (Dagens Næringsliv,
2014). Also, the data published on the tax lists were eventually indexed by all the popular search engines. As
a consequence, searching for the name of a Norwegian citizen in Google would show the individual’s tax record
at the top of the search results (Teknologiradet, 2010).

7

have had significant effects either, as individuals could conduct the same number of searches,
just in a concentrated period. Indeed, most searches occurred during that same three-week
period even when the restriction was not in place, because the timing coincided with tax record
updates. For example, about 60% of data searches published in October of 2013 were conducted
during the first three weeks after the tax lists were posted (E24, 2014), even though individuals
were allowed to search all year long.
The 2004 restrictions were removed in 2007, with no new restrictions added until 2011. From
2011 to 2013, the government required individuals who wanted to search tax records to log in
to the official website of the tax agency using a pin-code and a password.14 Most individuals
presumably already had accounts for filing their taxes and other online services.15 Search volume
probably declined due to this added hassle, but it remained substantial (Aftenposten, 2013).
The final and most significant restriction was introduced in 2014, when the searches became
non-anonymous. This change is not relevant for our empirical analysis, because it occurred after
the last year of the survey data. However, we discuss this regulatory change below, because it
provides evidence about how individuals had been using the search lists.

2.3

Popularity of the Online Tax Lists

We use three sources of data to assess the popularity of the tax lists. The most direct evidence
comes from a 2007 survey conducted by Synovate, which was representative of the population
of taxpayers. Around 40% of respondents reported to have used the online search tools (Skatte
Betaleren, 2008). This behavior may be under-reported in surveys because of social desirability
bias. Thus, the true fraction of Norwegians using these websites may have been even larger
than 40%.
Web traffic data confirm media claims about the massive popularity of the online tax lists,
with one website reporting 29.4 million searches in the year after the publication of the tax
records for 2007 (VG, 2008). This figure implies 7.47 searches per capita among 3,935,000
Internet users in Norway in 2007. Even if these statistics are inflated due to self-reporting by
the website owners, this figure excludes traffic from other websites and smartphone apps offering
access to the tax records, making the likely number of searches even higher.
There is also publicly available data from to the period when tax records were accessible
only from the tax agency’s official website. According to Norway’s Ministry of Finance (2014),
14

The 2011 legislation also introduced a limit on the maximum number of searches per month (500), although
it seems that such restriction would not be binding for the vast majority of individuals. Also, the government
still allowed the media to disseminate some information from the tax lists, such as the lists of the top-100 richest
individuals or break downs of average income by county – see for example the following website, which is still
functional: www.vg.no/spesial/skattelister/. For reference, Appendix Figure A.1.a shows a screenshot of the
search tool from the official website of the tax agency as of 2015.
15
However, individuals who were not registered in the tax agency, such as minors or visitors from other
countries, could not log into the website.

8

920,896 unique users conducted slightly more than 17 million searches in 2013.16 In that year,
only adults with a valid account could log in to the official website to conduct searches. Among
the 3,797,822 adults in Norway, about 24.25% searched for at least one tax record in 2013, and
the average user made 18.46 searches.
The statistics reported for 2007 and 2013 are not directly comparable to each other, because
they come from different sources and are probably based on different definitions. With that
caveat, the number of individuals conducting searches and the number of searches per capita
decreased from 2007 to 2013. This difference is probably due to the 2011 requirement that users
log in to the official tax agency website to search tax records.
We also assess the popularity of the income search tool using data from Google Trends, which
include the number of times that a keyword is searched in the Google search engine.17 For the
main search category, skattelister, we include searches for the two words used most often to
refer to the tax records, “skattelister” and “skattelistene,” which both translate literally to “tax
list.” For instance, one popular website with access to the tax records was www.skattelister.no.
As benchmarks, we use data on two keywords that are consistently among the most popular
keywords around the world: “weather” and “YouTube.” As a proxy for the general interest in
information about taxes, we study the number of searches for “tax.”
Figure 4.a shows the popularity of selected keywords in 2010 (the last year when users could
conduct searches outside of the official website of the tax agency). The left half of Figure 4.a
shows the results for Norway. Google Trends does not provide information about the absolute
number of searches, so the search totals are normalized as a fraction of YouTube searches.18
The data suggest a remarkable interest in the tax lists: for every five searches for YouTube,
there was about one for skattelister. Norwegians were more likely to search for the tax records
than to search for the weather. Searches for the tax lists were roughly three times higher than
those for taxes, suggesting that a general interest in taxes does not explain the popularity of
the search tool. As a robustness check, the right half of Figure 4.a provides comparable search
data for Sweden, where there is no reason for individuals to search for skattelister. The volumes
of searches for weather, taxes, and YouTube are roughly similar between Norway and Sweden,
but searches for skattelister are virtually nonexistent in Sweden.
Figure 4.b shows the distribution of Google searches over the course of each week of 2010.
Search volumes are normalized so that searches in all categories sum up to 1 in the first week
of 2010. During most of the year, searches for the tax lists remained stable at roughly twice
16

The statistics that have been reported for 2011 and 2012 are similar in magnitude to those for 2013: Bergens
Tidende (2014a) reports over 700,000 unique visitors making over 13 million searches in 2011, and over 900,000
unique visitors making over 16.5 million searches in 2012.
17
The data can be accessed using the following URL: trends.google.com. For a discussion of the advantages
and limitations of this type of data, see Stephens-Davidowitz (2014).
18
As additional benchmark, the number of searches for Youtube are slightly higher than the combined searches
for “porn” and its Norwegian translation, “porno.”

9

the volume of searches for taxes and at about the same as weather-related searches. In the
third week of October, when data from the previous tax calendar year were released, searches
for the tax lists increased sharply.19 During that week, the number of searches for the tax lists
exceeded the number of searches for YouTube, suggesting that Norwegians were more interested
in learning about others’ incomes than in watching videos on YouTube.

2.4

Uses of the Online Tax Lists

This section presents some evidence that the online tax lists were being used primarily to snoop
on social contacts.
Perhaps the best piece of evidence comes from the regulatory change that took place in 2014,
when searches for tax records stopped being anonymous. Specifically, any individual could use
the same website to identify who searched for their tax records. This non-anonymity should
have discouraged individuals from unsavory uses of the tax records, such as snooping, due to
the threat of social sanctions. Consistent with this hypothesis, the tax agency reported that the
number of searches dropped by 88% after the removal of anonymity. Furthermore, the number
of users logging in to the system did not decrease much; however, instead of searching for others’
incomes, most users logged in to find out who searched for them.20
The aforementioned 2007 Synovate survey offers more direct evidence about the uses of the
tax lists (Skatte Betaleren, 2008). The survey asked whether respondents searched for specific
types of individuals: 61% reported searching for close relatives, 53% for themselves, 42% for
friends, 26% for work colleagues, 25% for other relatives, 23% for neighbors, 18% for celebrities,
and 6% for politicians. This pattern is more consistent with snooping on social contacts than
investigating corruption. Indeed, around 77% of respondents who used the tax records reported
using them for curiosity or fun and only 2% for monitoring, such as uncovering tax evasion
(Digi, 2008). And in another survey conducted by Synovate in 2011, only 15% of respondents
believed that the tax lists provided useful information (Sunnmørsposten, 2011).
We also present evidence based on Internet browsing behavior from panel data covering a
significant share of Internet users in Norway in 2010. We focus on visitors to a popular website
that provided access to the tax records. The data span 200,000 unique browser sessions with at
least one visit to this website. Figure 5.a shows the distribution of total visits by the number
of profile visits. The results suggest that most traffic is not directed to famous people, such
as athletes and politicians, because visits to popular profiles (i.e., visited at least 100 times)
account for less than 3% of total traffic. Figure 5.b provides a histogram of the number of
19

We find a consistent peak in Google Trends data for other years. This peak is also consistent with the
Internet browsing data discussed below.
20
Some individuals started selling a search service under their names to allow users make anonymous searches,
although the service has not met popular demand (Bergens Tidende, 2014b).

10

profiles visited per user session on the day of the release of the 2009 tax calendar data.21 The
data suggest that large-volume users, such as mass marketers, did not contribute heavy traffic
to these websites. For example, users visiting more than 100 profiles per session account for
only 0.27% of total visits. Figure 5.b also shows that individuals did not search only for their
own incomes, as the typical session involved searching for several individuals. Even under the
conservative assumption that all sessions with a single profile visit corresponded to individuals
searching for their own incomes, this type of searches comprise just 2.62% of total traffic.
Last, we discuss the possibility that individuals used the online tax lists to learn information
about salaries for salary negotiations and career choices (Cullen and Pakzad-Hurson, 2018). In
the previously mentioned survey data, only 26% of individuals searched for work colleagues in
the tax lists, and they may have been snooping rather than researching. Moreover, due to the
nature of the data, the Norwegian tax lists have been described as “completely useless” for
salary comparisons (NRK, 2008). As a benchmark, the website of state employees studied in
Card, Mas, Moretti, and Saez (2012) publishes information about salaries, with breakdowns by
base salary and other forms of compensation. In contrast, the Norwegian tax records reveal
the net income of the individual, which aggregates all salaried income, including bonuses and
commissions, and non-salaried income, such as capital gains, self-employed income, and social
benefits. Thus, if you found out that a coworker was listed in the tax records with a higher net
income than yours, you would not be able to tell whether that coworker has a higher salary or
whether he or she has additional sources of income.

3

Econometric Specification and Survey Data

3.1

Econometric Specification

The baseline specification is the following:
SWB i,t = α1 · IncomeRanki,t + α2 · IncomeRanki,t · It01−13 + Xi,t β + δt + i,t

(1)

SWB i,t is a measure of subjective well-being of individual i in year t, with a higher value
denoting higher well-being. IncomeRanki,t is the position of individual i in the national distribution of household income in year t, from 0 (the poorest household) to 1 (the richest).
It01−13 is a dummy variable indicating the period of higher income transparency, equal to 1 if
t ∈ [2001, 2013] and 0 otherwise. δt denotes the year effects, Xi,t is a vector with additional
control variables, and i,t denotes the error term.
The coefficient α1 corresponds to the average gradient between SWB i,t and IncomeRanki,t
21

This is a lower bound on the number of profiles visited per user that day, for instance, because one may
have visited the website from multiple devices.

11

between 1985 and 2000. We expect this coefficient to be positive, meaning that being richer is
associated to higher subjective well-being. This association may arise purely from intrinsic utility from consumption (e.g., richer individuals can afford nicer houses, food and entertainment),
or from a combination of intrinsic utility and income comparisons (e.g., richer individuals get
higher self-esteem and social-esteem). The coefficient α2 measures the change in the happinessincome gradient from 1985–2000 to 2001–2013. Our main hypothesis is that α2 is positive: i.e.,
by facilitating income comparisons, the higher transparency increased the happiness-income
gradient.
This regression has a differences-in-differences interpretation in which It01−13 corresponds to
the indicator of post-treatment period and IncomeRanki,t corresponds to the intensity of treatment (from 0 to 1). An important concern with this specification, as in every other differencesin-differences design, is the possibility of differential pre-trends. In other words, it is possible
that the happiness-income gradient had been gradually increasing even before 2001, yielding
α2 > 0, even if there was not a discontinuous change in this gradient around 2001. The following
specification is a traditional way of addressing this concern, by allowing for differential trends:
SWB i,t = α1 · IncomeRanki,t + α2 · IncomeRanki,t · It01−13 +

(2)

+ γ · IncomeRanki,t · (t − 1985) + Xi,t β + δt + i,t

In this specification, the coefficient α1 corresponds to the happiness-income gradient in 1985.
The coefficient γ corresponds to the linear trend for this gradient from 1985 to 2013. And the
coefficient α2 corresponds to the change in the happiness-income gradient around 2001, above
and beyond the linear trend.
Another standard method to assess differential pre-trends is based on the following specification:
SWB i,t = α1 · IncomeRanki,t + α2 · IncomeRanki,t · It01−13 + α3 · IncomeRanki,t · It97−00 +

(3)

+ Xi,t β + δt + i,t

Where It97−00 is a “fake” treatment indicator that occurs just before the actual change
in disclosure: i.e., a dummy variable that equals 1 if t ∈ [1997, 2000] and 0 otherwise. In
this specification, α1 corresponds to the happiness-income gradient from 1985–1996, whereas
α2 measures the change in that gradient from 1985–1996 to 2001–2013, and α3 measures the
change in the happiness-income gradient from 1985–1996 to 1997–2000. If the happiness-income
gradient changed sharply around 2001, we would expect α2 > 0 and α3 = 0. We also present
event-study graphs, which extend this specification by including further interactions with It89−92 ,
It93−96 and so on.
If the happiness-income gradient increased in 2001, it is possible that this increase was
caused by another significant change besides transparency that occurred in 2001 and persisted
12

over the following twelve years. To the best of our knowledge, there was no major event around
that time that could have had such a large effect on the happiness-income gradient. We use two
additional identification strategies to address this concern.
The first strategy consists of a “placebo” analysis that reproduces the regressions for another
country (i.e., Germany), for which there is similar survey data but no change of disclosure around
2001. If the effects in Norway are due to an event that also happened in Germany, such as the
growth of information technology or the dot-com burst of 2001, then the results in Germany
should be similar to the results in Norway.
The second strategy consists of a triple-differences specification. Ideally, we would construct
a variable indicating the type of individuals who would be most exposed to the effects of online tax lists. This exposure variable would identify individuals who are likely to search for
themselves, to be searched for by their social contacts, to be aware that their social contacts
are searching for them, and so on. Then, we could test if the well-being effects are stronger
for these individuals. Unfortunately, we cannot construct this ideal exposure variable, because
our survey data do not contain information such as whether a respondent visited the tax list
websites. Instead, we construct our exposure variable based on Internet access data.
Let the dummy variable HigherInterneti,t take the value 1 if individual i’s observable
characteristics in year t, such as the age and education, predict above-median Internet access
at home.22 Consider the following triple-differences specification:
SWB i,t = α1 · IncomeRanki,t + α2 · IncomeRanki,t · It01−13 + α3 · HigherInterneti,t +

(4)

+ α4 · HigherInterneti,t · It01−13 + α5 · IncomeRanki,t · HigherInterneti,t +
+ α6 · IncomeRanki,t · HigherInterneti,t · It01−13 + Xi,t β + δt + i,t
The coefficient α2 is interpreted as the effect of the policy on individuals with lower Internet
access, which we expect to be small or even zero. On the other hand, the parameter α6 measures
the differential effect of transparency for individuals with higher Internet access, relative to
individuals with lower Internet access. Our main hypothesis is that α6 > 0: i.e., the change in
disclosure had a greater effect on individuals with higher Internet access.23

22

We cannot base the triple-differences strategy on a dummy variable for whether the respondent has Internet
access or not. First of all, the question about Internet access was not added until 1999. Most important, the
the share of individuals with Internet access has increased dramatically in the sample period. For example,
a small share of the population had Internet access before 1996: according to the World Telecommunication
Development Report, only 6.4% of Norwegians had Internet access in 1995. As a result, even if we had data
on Internet access for that period, it would make little sense to estimate the happiness-income gradient for
individuals with Internet access.
23
Moreover, we can also use these two coefficients to predict the effects on the happiness-income gradient for
individuals with higher Internet access (α2 + α6 ) and for the population at large (α2 + 21 α6 ).

13

3.2

Survey Data

We use data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, which was a repeated cross-sectional survey
conducted by the market research institute Ipsos MMI. The data were collected every other year
in 1985–2013 through a self-completion questionnaire sent by mail to a representative sample
of Norwegians. This dataset has been used to explore the relationship between well-being and
age (Hellevik, 2002), between well-being and values (Hellevik, 2003), and between well-being
and sustainability (Hellevik, 2015).
The final sample used in our regression analysis comprises 48,570 observations collected in
15 different years, implying an average of 3,238 observations per survey year. This sample seems
to be representative of the general population in some observable characteristics. For example,
in the year 2011, 53.0% of respondents were women, the median age was 37, and the mean gross
household income was $129,684 (in 2011 U.S. dollars). In comparison, administrative data from
Norway for that same year suggest a share of women of 50.5%, a median age of 39.1, and a
mean gross household income of $152,890.24
The survey team did not collect information about the date when each survey was completed
or mailed back, but they believe that the questionnaires were completed between late September
and early December.25 Recall that the tax agency releases the income data for the previous
fiscal year in mid-October. In the weeks following the data release, traffic to the online tax
lists is highest. Thus, a substantial share of the respondents may have completed the survey
during a time when income transparency was most salient. Our estimated effects of income
transparency thus may overestimate the effects of income transparency on an average day of
the year. On the other hand, a significant share of survey responses for 2001 may have been
collected before the change in disclosure took place, thus leading to an under-estimation of the
effects of disclosure during the year 2001.
We discuss below the definitions of the main variables:
Subjective Well-Being. The main outcome of interest is subjective well-being. The
Norwegian Monitor Survey includes questions about happiness and life satisfaction, which are
the two most widely used measures of subjective well-being (Easterlin, 2004; Kahneman and
Deaton, 2010). The happiness question is: “Will you mostly describe yourself as: Very happy;
Quite happy; Not particularly happy; Not at all happy.” The life satisfaction question is, “How
satisfied are you with your life? Very satisfied; Somewhat Satisfied; Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied; Slightly dissatisfied; Very dissatisfied.” Happiness and life satisfaction are known as
evaluative measures of well-being, because answering them requires respondents to think about
24

The data sources are: Central Intelligence Agency’s World Factbook for the female share and median age,
and the Euromonitor’s World Consumer Income and Expenditure Patterns for the mean household income.
25
According to private communications with the administrators of the survey, the questionnaires were typically
sent to the respondents in the third week of September (following a national or local election), and the vast
majority of surveys are sent back before the second week of December.

14

their lives in general.26 It is well established that evaluative measures do not vary over the days
of the week, are significantly correlated with income, and remain correlated with income even
at high levels of income (Kahneman and Deaton, 2010). We use the happiness question in our
baseline regressions because it was asked in all survey waves from 1985 to 2013, whereas life
satisfaction was asked starting in 1999.27
In the baseline specification, instead of arbitrarily assigning values 1, 2, 3, or 4 to the four
possible answers to the happiness question, we employ the Probit-OLS method to assign these
values (van Praag and Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2008). By construction, a higher value denotes higher
happiness. We use this method with all subjective questions, including life satisfaction. Moreover, to facilitate the interpretation of the regression coefficients, we standardize all subjective
outcomes to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. Table 1 summarizes the definitions for
happiness, life satisfaction, and all other main variables in the analysis. Table 2 provides the
corresponding descriptive statistics.
Although subjective well-being measures have some well-documented limitations, a growing
body of evidence indicates that they contain significant information about the individual’s
true well-being. Subjective well-being is positively correlated to objective measures of wellbeing, such as emotional expressions (Sandvik et al., 1993), aggregate suicide rates (Di Tella,
MacCulloch and Oswald, 2003), and activity in the pleasure centers of the brain (Urry et
al., 2004). Subjective well-being also positively correlates with decision utility. For instance,
Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and Rees-Jones (2012) conducted a survey in which subjects were
shown pairs of hypothetical scenarios with tradeoffs between two aspects (e.g., higher income
versus longer workdays). They showed that, despite some deviations, most respondents choose
a scenario that maximizes life satisfaction (see also Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and ReesJones, 2014). Similarly, Perez-Truglia (2015) showed that the expenditure choices predicted by
life satisfaction data are largely consistent with the actual expenditure behavior of the same
individuals.
Income Rank. The variable Income Rank is the position of the respondent in the distribution of household income for the current year.28 As is typical in household surveys, respondents
26

The alternative to evaluative measures are hedonic measures, which are assessed by asking about the
presence of various emotions in the experience of yesterday (e.g., happiness, sadness, worry), and they often
have different correlates than evaluative measures (Deaton and Stone, 2013). Unfortunately, our survey data do
not include hedonic measures.
27
For histograms of the responses to the Happiness and Life Satisfaction questions, see Appendix Figure A.2.
28
While this measure is based on the rank in the national income distribution, individuals probably care
the most about the comparison to narrower reference groups such as their relatives, friends, neighbors and
coworkers (Clark and Senik, 2010). We cannot construct measures of Income Rank based on these more specific
reference groups because we do not know who the respondent’s relatives, friends or other social contact are.
Due to this source of measurement error, our results may under-estimate the importance of income comparisons.
Similarly, since the tax records disclosed the wealth of individuals, it is likely that individuals also engaged in
wealth comparisons. This is another source of measurement error that may lead us to under-estimate the overall
importance of (income and wealth) comparisons.

15

were asked about their annual gross household income using bins.29 This question provides no
information to rank households within a particular income bin and year. To ameliorate this
measurement error, we follow the standard imputation method from the literature (e.g., Stevenson and Wolfers, 2008; Kahneman and Deaton, 2010), using information on other household
characteristics that correlate with income (e.g., education, age, county) to break ties within
income bins.30
Higher Internet. The goal of this variable is to split individuals by whether their observable characteristics are associated with higher Internet access (once the Internet becomes
available). We base this exercise on the dummy variable Internet Access, which equals 1 if the
individual has Internet access at home and 0 otherwise. Using survey responses for 2001, we
estimate an OLS regression of Internet Access on a series of observable characteristics: age, age
squared, and dummy variables for gender, education, marital status, household size, and number of working household members. Appendix Table A.8 reports the results from this auxiliary
regression. The coefficients suggest that individuals with higher Internet access are, on average,
more likely to be male, educated, and young, and their households are likely to be larger with
more working members. These correlations are largely consistent with the correlations reported
in other studies of Internet access and Internet use in developed countries (File and Ryan, 2013).
We use the estimated coefficients to predict Internet Access for the entire survey sample. The
dummy variable I{Higher Internet} equals 1 if the individual’s own predicted Internet access
exceeds the median for the current year.31
Perceived Income Rank and Income Adequacy. Starting in 1993, the survey included
a subjective question about self-perceived income rank: “In comparison to other Norwegians,
would you say that your economic situation is...? Much worse than average; Slightly worse than
average; Average; Slightly better than average; Much better than average.” We construct the
variable Perceived Rank using responses to this question, which are coded with the Probit-OLS
method and then standardized. By definition, higher values of this variable denote a higher
perceived rank. For an additional test of the self-perceptions channel, we use data on another
question that was added to the survey in 1993: “How do you feel about your economic situation?
Do you really need more money than you have to be able to live a satisfying life, do you manage
with your current income, or would you be able to cope with less if you had to?” The possible
answers are “I need more money,” “I manage with what I have,” and “I could cope with less.”
29

We drop 6% of the sample corresponding to individuals who did not respond the income question.
The first step of this procedure consists in estimating, for each year, an interval regression of the logarithm
of income on dummies for gender, education, marital status, age, number of household members and county.
The second step consists of using the estimated parameters to predict the logarithm of income for each individual, conditional on belonging to the reported income bracket. We can then construct Income Rank by ranking
individuals based on their predicted household income.
31
This definition guarantees that the distribution of I{Higher Internet} will be stable over time: i.e., in any
given year, half of the sample has I{Higher Internet}=1 and the other half has I{Higher Internet}=0.
30

16

We construct the variable Income Adequacy using the Probit-OLS method and then standardize
it so that its mean is 0 and standard deviation is 1. Higher values of this variable indicate that
one’s income is more adequate.32
Control Variables. We include a standard set of control variables used in studies of
subjective well-being: age, age squared, and dummies for gender, education, marital status,
total number of household members, and number of working household members.
German Data. For the placebo test, we employ data from the German Socio-Economic
Panel survey, collected every year from 1985 to 2013.33 The data do not include a question on
happiness but do include a question on life satisfaction: “How satisfied are you with your life,
all things considered?” Responses are measured on a 11-point scale ranging from “Completely
dissatisfied” (0) to “Completely satisfied” (10). We code and standardize this outcome using
the same method as for the Norwegian data. Moreover, we reproduce the same regression
specification for Germany, including all the same control variables and the same procedure to
create I{Higher Internet}.34 The final number of observations in Germany (108,209) is more
than twice that of the Norwegian Monitor Survey (48,570).

4

Results

4.1

Effects on the Happiness-Income Gradient

Table 3 explores the effects of the change of disclosure on the happiness-income gradient. The
dependent variable in column (1) is Happiness. This column uses the simplest specification from
equation (1). The estimated coefficient on Income Rank (0.311) is positive, precisely estimated
and statistically significant (p-value<0.001). This coefficient implies that during 1985–2000,
going from the lowest to the highest income rank in Norway was associated with an increase in
happiness of 0.311 standard deviations. This happiness-income gradient is in the same order of
magnitude as the corresponding gradients reported in other studies.35
32

For histograms of the responses to the Perceived Income Rank and Income Adequacy questions, see Appendix
Figure A.2.
33
To maximize power, we use all the years available in the German data – Appendix A.1 shows that the
results are robust if we focus on responses on odd-numbered years, like in the Norwegian survey.
34
There are a couple of differences between the German and Norwegian surveys. In Germany, we have to
include dummies for years of education instead of the dummies for levels of educational attainment used in
Norway. And while in Norway we use Internet Access for the year 2001, that question was not included in
Germany in 2001 so we have to use the responses for the year 2002 instead. Last, we restrict the German data
data to household heads in West Germany.
35
For example, results reported in Table 2 from Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) suggest that, using data for a
number of countries from the World Values Survey, the ordered probit regression of happiness on the logarithm
of household income yields a coefficient of 0.244 (SE 0.008). We can provide a direct comparison by estimating
the same regression with our Norwegian data, which yields a coefficient in the same order of magnitude (0.307;
SE 0.008). This gradient for Norway is higher than, and statistically different from, the corresponding gradient
from Stevenson and Wolfers (2008). However, we would not expect them to be exactly equal: there is no reason

17

Column (1) of Table 3 also reports the coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank
and I{2001–2013 }. This estimated coefficient (0.090) is positive, large and statistically significant (p-value=0.005). These findings suggest that the happiness-income gradient increased
substantially (by 29%, from 0.311 to 0.401) from 1985–2000 to 2001–2013.
The first concern is that the coefficient on the interaction of Income Rank with I{2001–2013}
may not correspond to the 2001 change in disclosure, but instead results from a gradual change
in this gradient that started years before 2001. To address this concern, column (2) of Table 3
shows results for the specification corresponding to equation (2), which includes the interaction
between Income Rank and the time trend. The coefficient on the interaction between Income
Rank and the time trend (-0.001) is close to zero and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.877),
whereas the coefficient on the interaction of Income Rank with I{2001–2013} (0.098) remains
positive and statistically significant (p-value=0.099). Indeed, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the latter coefficient (0.098) equals the corresponding coefficient of 0.090 from column
(1) (p-value=0.877).36
In turn, column (3) of Table 3 presents results from the specification corresponding to equation (3), which introduces the interactions of Income Rank with I{2001–2013} and I{1997–2000 }
simultaneously. The coefficient on the interaction of Income Rank with I{2001–2013} (0.090)
reported in column (3) is statistically significant (p-value=0.015) and identical in magnitude
to the corresponding coefficient from column (1) (0.090). On the contrary, the coefficient on
the interaction of Income Rank with I{1997–2000} is close to zero (0.001) and statistically
insignificant (p-value=0.975). Furthermore, in column (3) the coefficients on the interactions
with I{1997–2000} (0.001) and I{2001–2013} (0.090) are statistically different from each other
(p-value=0.043).
Figure 6.a takes the last specification a step further by means of an event-study analysis. This
figure shows the evolution of the happiness-income gradient over the entire 1985–2013 period.
Each coefficient denotes the change in the happiness-income gradient relative to 1997–2000.
Thus, the coefficient on 1997–2000 is normalized to zero.
To attribute the coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank and I{2001–2013} to the
effect of the disclosure policy, the happiness-income gradient should be stable during 1985–2000
and then increase after 2001. This is exactly the pattern shown in Figure 6.a. All pre-treatment
coefficients are close to zero and statistically insignificant (p-values of 0.749, 0.737, and 0.612),
suggesting that the happiness-income gradient remained constant during 1985–2000. And the
to believe that Norway should be representative of the world average; additionally, these differences may be due
to differences in how income and subjective well-being are measured in the two datasets.
36
This is an equality test between two coefficients based on the same data but different regressions. To
allow for a non-zero covariance between these two coefficients, we estimate a system of Seemingly Unrelated
Regressions. In the remainder of the paper, when comparing coefficients from the same data but different
regressions, we always use this method.

18

three coefficients on the post-treatment period are positive and mostly statistically significant
(p-values of 0.057, 0.024, and 0.311), suggesting that the happiness-income gradient increased
after 2001 and remained high.
One challenge in interpreting these findings is that the effects may result from something
other than the transparency change in 2001. To the best of our knowledge, there were no
events that could explain these patterns, such as major changes to the income tax schedule
or welfare benefits. To address this concern more directly, we use the triple-differences design
corresponding to equation (4).
The dummy variable I{Higher Internet} equals 1 if the individual’s characteristics, such
as being younger and more educated, predict higher Internet access. For short, we refer to
individuals with I{Higher Internet}=1 as individuals with higher Internet access. Our tripledifference strategy is then based on the assumption that the individuals with higher Internet
access, such as younger and more educated individuals, are the same types of individuals who
are more exposed to the effects of the online tax lists.
Several arguments support this assumption. The websites require Internet access, thus
individuals with higher Internet access and Internet use are more likely to use the online tax
lists, more aware that they exist, and more aware that their social contacts may be searching
for them. Due to homophily, individuals with higher Internet access have social contacts who
also have higher Internet access, and thus are more likely to be searched in the tax lists by
their social contacts. Beyond Internet access itself, individuals with higher Internet access may
be the type of individuals who care more about income comparisons. For example, Clark and
Senik (2010) show that individuals with higher Internet access report that income comparisons
are more important to them. As final evidence consistent with our assumption, the individual
characteristics associated with higher Internet access in our data (disproportionately younger,
more educated and male) also are associated with self-reported use of the online tax lists (Skatte
Betaleren, 2008).
Column (4) of Table 3 reports the results from the triple-differences specification. The evidence indicates that, consistent with the hypothesis that the change in transparency caused
the effects, changes in the happiness-income gradient were concentrated entirely among individuals with higher Internet access. The coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank
and I{2001–2013} is close to zero (-0.004), statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated.
This coefficient suggests that the happiness-income gradient did not change in 2001 for individuals with lower Internet access. The coefficient on the triple interaction between Income
Rank, I{2001–2013} and I{Higher Internet} (0.217) is positive, large, and statistically significant (p-value=0.003). This coefficient indicates that the happiness-income gradient increased
substantially for individuals with higher Internet access.37
37

According to column (4) of Table 3, the average effect of the income disclosure on the happiness-income

19

Figure 6.b provides the event-study equivalent of the triple-differences identification strategy. The results show that, for individuals with lower Internet access, the happiness-income
gradient was stable prior to 2001 and remained the same after 2001. For individuals with higher
Internet access, the happiness-income gradient was stable prior to 2001, increased after 2001,
and remained at a higher level for the subsequent twelve years.
As discussed in section 2.2, during the twelve years following the change of disclosure, some
factors may have increased or decreased the degree of income transparency. Due to the precision
of the estimates, we cannot rule out ups and downs in the effects of the policy during the twelve
years. However, based on Figure 6.b, the best guess is that the effects of transparency were
stable: we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the three post-treatment coefficients (0.286,
0.260, and 0.221) are equal (p-value=0.757).38
As an additional robustness check, we compare the effects on happiness with the effects on life
satisfaction. Both outcomes are evaluative measures of well-being, and they are normally found
to be significantly correlated to income. Furthermore, despite conceptual differences, happiness
and life satisfaction often are treated as interchangeable in the literature on subjective well-being
(Easterlin, 2004). We thus expect similar effects of transparency across these two outcomes.
Columns (5) and (6) of Table 3 show results using Life Satisfaction as the dependent variable
instead of Happiness. We are cautious when interpreting this evidence, however. Whereas
Happiness has been available since 1983, the Life Satisfaction question was not added to the
survey until 1999 and thus has only one year of pre-treatment data. Consequently, the standard
errors for the Life Satisfaction regressions are almost twice as large as those for the Happiness
regressions.
Column (5) of Table 3 presents the results for Life Satisfaction under the baseline specification from equation (1). The coefficient on Income Rank (0.585) is large and statistically
significant (p-value<0.001). Indeed, this gradient is larger than the corresponding gradient for
Happiness (0.311, from column (1)). This difference in gradients is not unreasonable, given
that the two questions are supposed to measure somewhat different aspects of well-being and
even use different scales. Most important, column (5) of Table 3 shows that the coefficient
on the interaction between Income Rank and I{2001–2013} (0.122) is positive and statistically
significant (p-value=0.026). These estimates imply that higher income transparency increased
the life satisfaction–income gradient by 21%, from 0.585 to 0.707. Moreover, we cannot reject
the null hypothesis that the 21% increase in the life satisfaction–income gradient equals the
corresponding 29% increase in the happiness–income gradient (p-value=0.645).
For the sake of completeness, column (6) reports the triple-differences specification for the
gradient is 0.104 (= −0.004 + 0.5 · 0.217) and statistically significant (p-value=0.005). As expected, this average
effect is close to the average effect reported in the baseline specification (0.090, from column (1) of Table 3).
38
See Appendix A.1 a more detailed discussion, including a more disaggregated event-study graph.

20

Life Satisfaction outcome. The key coefficient on the triple interaction between Income Rank,
I{2001–2013}, and I{Higher Internet} (0.168) is positive, large, and statistically indistinguishable from the corresponding Happiness coefficient (0.217, from column (4)). However, due to
the lower precision of the Life Satisfaction results, the coefficient is statistically insignificant
(p-value=0.195).
The next robustness check involves estimating the same regressions in a placebo country,
Germany, which was not exposed to the Norwegian change in income transparency of 2001.
A similar change in the happiness-income gradient in Germany around 2001 would imply that
the effects for Norway must be explained by a factor different than the change in disclosure.
In turn, finding no effects in Germany would rule out any shocks that began in 2001 and were
common between Norway and Germany, such as the dot-com burst or the growth of information
technology.
Columns (7) and (8) of Table 3 report the results for Germany, using Life Satisfaction
as the dependent variable. Column (7) reports the results under the basic specification from
equation (1). The results indicate that, prior to 2001, the gradient between income and life
satisfaction was similar between Germany and Norway: the coefficient on Income Rank (0.539,
from column (7)) is statistically significant (p-value<0.001) and in the same order of magnitude
as the corresponding coefficient for Norway (0.585, from column (5)).39 Most important, column
(7) indicates that, unlike in Norway, there was no significant change in the life satisfactionincome gradient in Germany around 2001. The coefficient on the interaction of Income Rank
and I{2001–2013} (0.018) is close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated. We
can reject the null hypothesis that this coefficient for Germany (0.018, from column (7)) equals
the corresponding coefficient estimated in Norway (0.090, from column (1)), with a p-value of
0.030.40 These findings are consistent with Figure 6.c, which reproduces the event-study analysis
for Germany (equivalent to Figure 6.a for Norway). In Norway, the happiness-income gradient
was stable prior to 2001, then increased, and remained at the higher level. On the contrary, the
life satisfaction-income gradient in Germany was stable prior to 2001 and remained at the same
level after 2001.
Column (8) of Table 3 reports the results for Germany under the triple-differences specification. The coefficient on the triple interaction between Income Rank, I{2001–2013}, and I{Higher
Internet} (-0.011) is close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated. This coefficient indicates that in Germany, there was no differential change in the life satisfaction-income
gradient between individuals with lower versus higher Internet access. Indeed, we can confidently reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient for Germany (-0.011, from column (8))
39

Modest differences should be expected because these are two different countries and also because the life
satisfaction and income questions are elicited in different ways.
40
We can also reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient from Germany (0.018, from column (7)) is equal
to the corresponding coefficient reported in column (5) (0.122) for Norway (p-value=0.090).

21

equals the corresponding coefficient for Norway (0.217, from column (4)), with a p-value of
0.009. These results are consistent with those in Figure 6.d, which reproduces the event-study
analysis for Germany by Internet access (equivalent to Figure 6.b for Norway). As in Norway,
the gradient in Germany between well-being and Income Rank was stable prior to 2001 for
individuals with higher and lower Internet access. In Norway, these two gradients diverged after
2001, whereas in Germany they continued to be similar after 2001.
Last, these results do not address the effect of higher transparency on the average level
of well-being. The happiness-income gradient may have increased because richer individuals
became happier, because poorer individuals became unhappier, or a combination of the two.
Appendix A.2 presents some estimates of the average effects on well-being with a differencesin-differences estimator using the exposure indicator based on Internet access. The results
suggest that the change in disclosure did not have a significant effect on average happiness and
life satisfaction. These findings suggest that the disclosure policy resulted in a transference
of well-being from poorer to richer individuals. Also, this idea that the change of disclosure
created roughly as many winners as losers is consistent with data from the 2007 Synovate survey
indicating that about half of the Norwegian population (46%) opposed the income transparency
policy (Aftenposten, 2011).41

4.2

The Self-Perceptions Channel

We cannot measure all possible channels that could explain the effects of transparency on wellbeing, but we provide some suggestive evidence of the role of self-perceptions.
There is abundant evidence that individuals perceive themselves to be closer than they are
to the middle of income distribution (Cruces, Perez-Truglia and Tetaz, 2013).42 This middleclass bias is believed to arise due to assortativity neglect: rich people look around and see other
rich people, so they incorrectly conclude that they are middle class; likewise, poor individuals
see other poor people around them and believe that they are middle class.43 Unfortunately, the
question on perceived income rank included in the Norwegian Monitor Survey uses a subjective
scale, so we cannot measure the middle class bias directly, as in Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz
(2013). However, we observe suggestive signs of this bias: most respondents (89.7%) believe
that their incomes are slightly above, slightly below, or about average, and this tendency is true
even for individuals in the tails of the income distribution.44
41

This share was still similar (49%) when measured again in 2011 (Sunnmørsposten, 2011).
Cruces, Perez-Truglia and Tetaz (2013) first documented this bias using data from Argentina. Since then,
other studies have documented this same middle-class bias in other countries: see for example Poppitz (2016)
and Bublitz (2017).
43
Indeed, Frick, Iijima and Ishii (2018) show that, under some assumptions about payoffs and the information
structure, this type of “assortativity neglect” is not only one possible equilibrium, but the unique equilibrium.
44
Only 16% of households from the top income decile report to be much better than average, and only 25%
of households in the bottom income decile report to be much worse than average. However, there are several
42

22

Under a middle class bias, a higher income transparency would increase the gradient between
perceived income rank and actual income rank. That is, poorer individuals would realize that
they are poorer than they thought, and richer individuals would realize that they are richer
than they thought. We test this hypothesis using the same regression specification from before
but with Perceived Rank as the dependent variable instead of Happiness. Columns (1) through
(4) of Table 4 present the regressions with this dependent variable. These results are based
on smaller time frames and sample sizes, because Happiness has been collected since 1985, but
Perceived Rank has been measured only since 1993.
Column (1) of Table 4 presents the results for the simplest specification from equation
(1). The coefficient on Income Rank (2.172) is positive, large, and statistically significant (pvalue<0.001). This coefficient implies that, during 1993–2001, moving from the poorest to the
richest household was associated with an increase of 2.172 standard deviations in perceived
income rank. This strong gradient between perceived and actual income ranks suggests that
self-perceptions of income rank were at least somewhat accurate. Most important, column (1)
shows that the coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank and I{2001–2013} (0.185)
is positive, large, and statistically significant (p-value<0.001). These results imply that higher
income transparency increased the gradient between perceived income rank and actual income
rank by 8.5% (from 2.172 to 2.357). The fact that perceptions became more correlated to reality
suggests that perceptions became more accurate.
Column (2)–(4) of Table 4 assesses the robustness of the results with the other specifications.
Column (2) adds the interaction between the time trend and Income Rank. In this alternative
specification, the coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank and I{2001–2013} (0.135)
is still positive, large, and statistically significant (p-value=0.015). Column (3), which adds
the fake treatment interaction, also suggests that the results are robust: the coefficient on the
interaction between Income Rank and I{1997–2000} is statistically insignificant and statistically different from the coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank and I{2001–2013}
(p-value<0.001). The results reported in column (4), corresponding to the triple-differences
specification, are less robust. The triple interaction between Income Rank, I{2001–2013} and
I{Higher Internet} (0.092) is statistically insignificant (p-value=0.228). However, because the
coefficient is not precisely estimated, we cannot rule out that this coefficient equals the 0.185
coefficient from the baseline specification reported in column (1) (p-value=0.267).45
To assess the self-perceptions mechanism further, we measure the effects on Income Adreasons why this misalignment may not be attributed to misperceptions. In the extreme case, if individuals
interpret the range from “slightly below average” to “slightly above average” as between -90% and 1000% of the
average, then almost everyone would be right to pick those categories. Additionally, part of the misalignment
may reflect measurement error in the actual income rank.
45
For the sake of completeness, Appendix A.1 presents the event-study graphs for Perceived Rank and Income
Adequacy.

23

equacy. Individuals may form their income aspirations by looking at the incomes of others.
Richer individuals, who found out that they were richer than they thought, may have felt that
their incomes were more adequate; poorer individuals, who learned that they were poorer than
they thought, may have felt that their incomes were less adequate. To test this hypothesis,
columns (5) through (8) present results with Income Adequacy as the dependent variable. Column (5) corresponds to the simplest regression specification. The coefficient on Income Rank
(1.290) is positive, large, and statistically significant (p-value<0.001). This coefficient suggests
that moving from the poorest to the richest household is associated with an increase of 1.290
standard deviations in the adequacy of own income. Column (5) also suggests that the higher
transparency increased the gradient between Income Adequacy and income rank: the coefficient
on the interaction between Income Rank and I{2001–2013} (0.061) is positive and statistically
significant (p-value=0.083). These estimates suggest that the higher transparency increased the
gradient between income adequacy and income rank by 4.7% (from 1.290 to 1.351). Indeed,
this 4.7% effect is statistically indistinguishable from the 8.5% increase in the gradient between
perceived and actual income ranks (p-value=0.149).
Columns (6)–(9) of Table 4 assess the robustness of the results with the other specifications.
In column (6), which introduces the interaction with the linear trend, the coefficient on the
interaction between Income Rank and I{2001–2013} is even larger (0.094) than in the baseline
specification of column (5). However, due to the loss in precision, this coefficient is statistically
insignificant (p-value=0.120). The results from column (7), which includes the fake interaction
term, are mixed. On the one hand, the coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank and
I{2001–2013} becomes larger (0.101) and more statistically significant (p-value=0.044). On
the other hand, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that this coefficient equals the coefficient
on the fake interaction (p-value=0.396). Last, the results from column (8) also are mixed:
the coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank, I{2001–2013} and I{Higher Internet}
(0.101) suggests effects that are larger than in the baseline specification (0.061, from column
(5)), but due to the lack of precision, this coefficient is statistically insignificant (p-value=0.225).
The effects on well-being coincided with the effects on perceived relative income and adequacy of own income. However, this finding does not constitute definitive proof of the selfperceptions channel. Indeed, even if no effects on perceived relative income had been found,
the self-perceptions channel would have not been ruled out. For example, transparency may
affect well-being by making self-perceptions more salient, or it may operate through other selfperceptions such as whether individuals believe that others perceive them as rich. However,
the evidence from this section suggests that some effects of transparency on well-being operate
through changes in self-perceptions. The change in the perceived rank and income adequacy
gradients (8.5% and 4.7%) are smaller in magnitude than the changes in the happiness and life
satisfaction gradients (29% and 21%). This finding suggests that the self-perceptions channel
24

cannot fully account for effects on well-being and thus additional mechanisms must be at play.

4.3

Additional Robustness Checks

In this section, we provide a brief discussion of the robustness checks that, due to space constrains, are reported in Appendix A.
In the baseline specification, we code the happiness and life satisfaction questions using the
Probit-OLS method. Appendix A.3 shows nearly identical results, both in terms of magnitude
and statistical significance, under two alternative specifications: coding these variables with
consecutive integers and using an ordered Probit model instead of OLS.
The baseline specification also assumes a linear relationship between subjective well-being
and Income Rank. We use this linear specification because it fits the data well and, presumably
for that reason, it is widely used in the literature (Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2004). In Appendix
A.4, we present results under a more flexible specification based on binned scatterplots. The
findings confirm that the linear specification provides a fair approximation and that the results
are not driven by outliers or non-linearities. Relatedly, Appendix A.5 compares the results to an
alternative definition of Income Rank based on the rank within the county of residency instead
of the national rank. The results are qualitatively and quantitatively consistent across the two
definitions. If anything, the estimated effects of transparency are slightly larger under the local
definition of Income Rank.
A potential concern is that Income Rank is measured with a survey question, which may
introduce measurement error.46 This concern is probably minor, because survey measures of income correlate highly with their counterparts from the administrative records (Karadja, Mollerstrom, and Seim, 2017). Moreover, measurement error in Income Rank does not necessarily
challenge the validity of our findings. To explain our findings, the measurement error must
have experienced a large, sudden, and permanent reduction in 2001. Moreover, this reduction
must be present for individuals with higher Internet access but not for individuals with lower
Internet access. Given that individuals with higher and lower Internet access answered the same
question about income, this confounding factor seems unlikely.
To address these concerns more directly, Appendix A.6 presents results under alternative
definitions of Income Rank. As the income question is elicited in bins, our baseline specification
uses the standard method from the happiness literature to impute the values of Income Rank
within each bin (Stevenson and Wolfers, 2008; Kahneman and Deaton, 2010). In Appendix
A.6, we show that the results are robust under the non-imputed version of Income Rank. This
result should not be surprising, because the imputed and non-imputed versions correlate highly
with each other (correlation coefficient of 0.984). A related potential concern is that the ninth
46

Ideally, we would like to merge the survey responses to the income data from the administrative records.
Unfortunately, this is not possible because the Norwegian Monitor Survey does not collect individual identifiers.

25

bin in the income question was added in 1999, which could contaminate the comparison of the
happiness-income gradient around 2001. Appendix A.6 mitigates this concern: the results are
almost identical if we pool the ninth and eight bins, as if the ninth bin was never introduced.
This result should not be surprising either, because only 1.55% of individuals fell in the ninth
bin in 1999.
Appendix A.7 assesses the robustness of the results under alternative definitions of I{Higher
Internet}: using responses to Internet Access for 1999 or 1999–2013 (instead of 2001, as in the
baseline specification), dividing the two groups by the median for the whole sample (instead of
year-specific medians), and using a Probit model (instead of OLS). The results are quantitatively
and qualitatively robust for all definitions. Moreover, we use the same method to construct
I{Higher Internet} in Germany as in Norway. As a result, if the definition of I{Higher Internet}
generated spurious effects in Norway, it should have introduced the same spurious effects in
Germany.
Another potential concern is that the change in the happiness-income gradient is mechanically driven by an increase in income inequality. This possibility seems highly unlikely, given
that it requires a large, sudden, and persistent increase in inequality that would be unprecedented in a developed country. Appendix A.8 addresses this concern more directly. Using survey
data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey and administrative data from Statistics Norway, it
shows that all measures of income inequality remain remarkably stable in Norway, not only
around 2001, but during the entire 1985–2013 period. Relatedly, Appendix A.8 shows that the
composition of the sample of survey respondents did not change significantly around 2001 and,
consistent with that fact, the regression results are not sensitive to the introduction of sampling
weights.

4.4

Interpretation of the Findings

Our evidence suggests an increase in the gradient between subjective well-being and income in
2001 that is probably due to the increase in income transparency. Although we cannot cover
every mechanism that may have mediated this effect, we can briefly discuss some plausible
channels.
Individuals may be affected by the online tax lists because, as a result of them, they are
treated better or worse by others. In other words, rich individuals may have benefited from
having their incomes made public, because others recognize them as rich and treat them better
(e.g., maybe agreeing to favors or dating them). In turn, poorer individuals may have been
treated worse by others. This interpretation aligns with evidence showing that individuals
are treated better when they wear expensive clothing (Fennis, 2008) and drive expensive cars
(Doob and Gross, 1968). It also aligns with evidence suggesting that individuals will pay more

26

for highly visible goods, such as clothing and cars, to signal their income to others (Charles,
Hurst, and Roussanov, 2009).
Another possible mechanism states that individuals care directly about whether they are
richer than others, because they get a psychological utility from holding that belief.47 Richer
individuals may be happier because they find out that they are richer than they thought – for
example, they may form income aspirations by looking at the incomes of others. Alternatively,
richer individuals may be happier by merely thinking that a social contact will find out how
rich they are. Some evidence supports this interpretation: even in contexts of anonymity and
privacy, individuals seem to care about how their own payoffs in the laboratory compare to
the payoffs of other subjects. For example, individuals become less risk averse to avoid being
ranked last (Kuziemko et al., 2014). According to brain imaging data, individuals seem to be
displeased to learn that other subjects in the lab earned higher rewards (Fliessbach et al., 2007).
Another potential channel is that income transparency focused societal or individual attention onto income, thus increasing the marginal utility from income. Individuals use the search
tool, read about it in the media and discuss it with others. Thus, the search tool may make it
more likely for individuals to think about their own incomes, or about the incomes of others, at
any given moment. If well-being depends on what comes to mind, this channel could explain
the increased gradient between well-being and income.
There are other channels unrelated to income comparisons that may affect the happinessincome gradient but we do not believe to have played a substantial role in explaining our
findings. For example, although the higher transparency reduced tax evasion (Bø, Slemrod,
and Thoresen, 2015), the magnitude of these effects (US$33 per household in 2001) are tiny
relative to the magnitude of the change in the happiness-income gradient. Also, if individuals
with lower pay used the tax lists to get a raise or a job with higher pay (Rege and Solli, 2015),
the resulting effects on the happiness-income gradient should be small and point in the opposite
direction.48
Regarding the external validity of the findings, Norway is different from other countries in
many dimensions, and thus income transparency effects may be more or less pronounced. To
assess whether Norway is an exceptional context, we exploit data from the 2006–2007 wave of the
European Social Survey. Following Clark and Senik (2010), we use the question, “How important
is it for you to compare your income with other people’s incomes?” The possible answers ranged
from 0 (“Not at all important”) to 6 (“Very important”). This question was asked in Norway
47

For a discussion on the difference between external and internal benchmarks in income comparisons, see
Senik (2009).
48
As discussed in section 2.4, the tax lists are far from ideal for salary comparisons, and thus this change in
behavior may only affect a small fraction of individuals. And, if anything, this channel would predict effects in
the opposite direction: if lower-paid individuals are moving to higher-paying jobs, then that should reduce the
gap in well-being between richer and poorer individuals.

27

as well as in other 21 European countries.49 The importance of income comparisons seems to
be reasonably homogeneous across these countries, ranging from an average score of 1.95 in the
Netherlands to an average score of 2.82 in Slovakia. Most important, the evidence indicates that
Norway is not special in terms of income comparisons, as the average score in Norway (2.25) is
close to the average score across the other 21 countries (2.30).

4.5

Back-of-the-Envelope Calculations and Comparison to Related
Studies

We start from the framework that income can affect happiness through two channels, intrinsic utility and income comparisons. We use the previously discussed estimates to assess the
relative contribution of income comparisons, ranging from 0% (only intrinsic utility matters)
to 100% (only income comparisons matter). To estimate a lower bound, we start from the
worst-case scenario that the happiness-income gradient was entirely due to the intrinsic utility
channel prior to 2001. Additionally, we assume that the 29% increase in the happiness-income
gradient (column (1) of Table 3) was due to the income comparisons channel. Under those two
0.29
) of the happiness-income gradient after 2001 is due
assumptions, it follows that 22% (= 1+0.29
to income comparisons. As this is based on a worst-case scenario, the 22% provides a lower
bound to the importance of income comparisons.50
We provide a less conservative lower bound by focusing on individuals with higher Internet
access. We assume that the pre-2001 happiness-income gradient was entirely due to the intrinsic
utility channel and that the 56% increase in this gradient (column (4) of Table 3) was entirely
due to income comparisons. Under these two assumptions, it follows that among individuals
0.56
with higher Internet access and after 2001, at least 36% (= 1+0.56
) of the happiness-income
gradient can be attributed to income comparisons.
We also benchmark our results with estimates obtained in other studies. Countless studies
can be used for this comparison, but we focus on a set of five studies that are used as benchmarks in Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2017). Three are based on happiness regressions using data
from the United States, Germany, and Japan, respectively: Luttmer (2005), Ferrer-i-Carbonell
(2005), and Clark, Senik and Yamada (2017). The other two studies are based on hypothetical
trade-offs between absolute and relative incomes: Johansson-Stenman, Carlsson, and Daruvala
(2002) and Yamada and Sato (2013), based on data from Sweden and Japan, respectively.
49

In addition to Norway, the question was asked in the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine and the United Kingdom.
50
We are assuming the worst case scenario that income comparisons did not matter at all prior to 2001.
If, instead, we were to assume that income comparisons explained 50% of the happiness-income gradient prior
to 2001, then we would have concluded that 61% ( 0.5+0.29
1+0.29 ) of the post-2001 gradient was due to the income
comparisons channel. Appendix B provides a simple model to formalize these back-of-the-envelope calculations.

28

Based on the key estimates reported in these studies, the role of income comparisons is estimated at 82.0% in Luttmer (2005), 49.6% in Ferrer-i-Carbonell (2005), 52.8% in Clark, Senik,
and Yamada (2017), 35.0% in Johansson-Stenman, Carlsson, and Daruvala (2002), and 45.8% in
Yamada and Sato (2013).51 These estimates are in the range 35%–82% and are then consistent
with the lower bound of 22% reported in our study.

5

Conclusions

In 2001, Norwegian tax records became easily accessible online, allowing everyone in the country
to observe the incomes of everyone else. We propose that, because of income comparisons,
higher income transparency can increase the differences in well-being between richer and poorer
individuals. Using survey data and multiple identification strategies, we present evidence that
higher income transparency caused an increase of 29% in the happiness-income gradient and
an increase of 21% in the life satisfaction-income gradient. We provide evidence that some,
although probably not all, of these effects operated through changes in self-perceived income
rank. We also provide back-of-the-envelope calculations suggesting that income comparisons
play a significant role in the relationship between well-being and income.
We conclude by discussing some implications for designing disclosure policies. We provide
unique evidence that, as argued by those who opposed it, income transparency had a negative
effect on the well-being of individuals with lower incomes. However, this result does not imply
that transparency is bad. Alternative ways of publicizing and disseminating information can
reduce these adverse consequences while preserving the desirable effects of transparency. For
example, in 2014, Norway made searches of the tax records non-anonymous, which seems to
have successfully leveraged social norms to discourage unintended uses of the data, such as
snooping on friends.
However, in presence of strong privacy norms (Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018), a policy of
non-anonymous searches can discourage legitimate uses of the data such as for salary negotiations and career planning. Governments may want to complement the non-anonymous search
tools by offering anonymous access to de-identified datasets. For example, some U.S. states list
the salaries of all public employees including identifiable information such as full names. Instead, they could offer aggregate data such as average salaries or salary ranges by organization,
51

Let y be an individual’s own income and ȳ the average income in the individual’s reference group. These
studies are based on utility functions of the following form: U = a · log(y) − b · log(ȳ), with a > 0 and b ∈ [0, a].
We can use the ratio between the two coefficients, ab , to measure the fraction of the utility from income that
is due to income comparisons. Luttmer (2005) reports a = 0.361 and b = 0.296 in column (3) of Table 1;
Ferrer-i-Carbonell (2005) reports a = 0.456 and b = 0.226 in column (1) of Table 2; Clark, Senik and Yamada
(2017) report a = 0.290 and b = 0.153 in column (1) of Table 3; Johansson-Stenman, Carlsson and Daruvala
(2002) report ab =0.35 in page 373; and Yamada and Sato (2013) report a = 0.048 and b = 0.022 in column (1)
of Table 4.

29

occupation, and unit. This aggregate data can provide most of the information that individuals
need while avoiding harmful effects on the well-being of the lowest earners.52

References
[1] Aftenposten (2008), “Skattelistene fører til mobbing,” May 26, 2008.
[2] Aftenposten (2011), “Særnorsk praksis rundt skattelistene,” October 12, 2011.
[3] Aftenposten (2013), “Åpne skattelister gir mindre juks,” October 18, 2013.
[4] Balassa, B. (1964), “The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 72 (6), pp. 584–596.
[5] Benjamin, D.J.; Heffetz, O.; Kimball, M.S. and Rees-Jones, A. (2012), “What Do You Think
Would Make You Happier? What Do You Think You Would Choose?” American Economic
Review, Vol. 102 (5), pp. 2083–2110.
[6] Benjamin, D.J.; Heffetz, O.; Kimball, M.S. and Rees-Jones, A. (2014), “Can Marginal Rates of
Substitution Be Inferred From Happiness Data? Evidence from Residency Choices.” American
Economic Review, Vol. 104 (11), pp. 3498–3528.
[7] Bergens Tidende (2014a), “Nå er det slutt på usynlig snoking,” October 16, 2014.
[8] Bergens Tidende (2014b), “Christina sjekker skattelistene for deg,” October 17, 2014.
[9] Bø, E.E.; Slemrod, J. and Thoresen, T.O. (2015), “Taxes on the Internet: Deterrence Effects of
Public Disclosure,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 7 (1), pp. 36–62.
[10] Boskin, M. and Sheshinski, E. (1978), “Optimal Redistributive Taxation When Individual Welfare
Depends on Relative Income,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 92 (4), pp. 589–601.
[11] Bottan, N. and Perez-Truglia, R. (2017), “Choosing Your Pond: Location Choices and Relative
Income,” NBER Working Paper No. 23615.
[12] Bublitz, E. (2017), “Misperceptions of income distributions: Cross-country evidence from a randomized survey experiment,” LIS Working Paper No. 694.
[13] Card, D.; Mas, A.; Moretti, E. and Saez, E. (2012), “Inequality at Work: The Effect of Peer
Salaries on Job Satisfaction,” American Economic Review, Vol. 102 (6), pp. 2981–3003.
[14] Charles, K.K.; Hurst, E. and Roussanov, N.L. (2009), “Conspicuous Consumption and Race,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124 (2), pp. 425-467.
[15] Clark, A.E.; Frijters, P. and Shields, M.A. (2008), “Relative Income, Happiness, and Utility: An
Explanation for the Easterlin Paradox and Other Puzzles,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
46 (1), pp. 95–144.
[16] Clark, A.E. and Senik, C. (2010), “Who compares to whom? The anatomy of income comparisons
in Europe,” Economic Journal, Vol. 120, pp. 573–594.
[17] Clark, A.E.; Kristensen, N. and Westergård-Nielsen, N. (2009), “Economic Satisfaction and Income Rank in Small Neighbourhoods,” Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 7,
pp. 519–527.
52

A similar recommendation is provided in Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2018). They conducted a survey of
employees in a large firm with standard pay secrecy. They show that a vast majority of employees would
prefer the firm to disclose anonymous salary information, such as average salaries per position. However, most
employees would prefer the status quo of pay secrecy over the disclosure of salary records with personally
identifiable information.

30

[18] Clark, A.; Senik, C. and Yamada, K. (2017), “When experienced and decision utility concur: the
case of income comparisons,” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics, Vol. 70, pp.
1–9.
[19] Cruces, G.; Perez-Truglia, R. and Tetaz, Martin (2013), “Biased Perceptions of Income Distribution and Preferences for Redistribution: Evidence from a Survey Experiment,” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 98, pp. 100–112.
[20] Cullen, Z. and Perez-Truglia, R. (2018), “The Salary Taboo: Privacy Norms and the Diffusion of
Information,” NBER Working Paper No. 25145.
[21] Cullen, Z. and Pakzad-Hurson, B. (2018), “Equilibrium Effects of Pay Transparency in a Simple
Labor Market,” Mimeo.
[22] Dagbladet (2009), “Nå får du skattesøk på iPhone,” October 15, 2009.
[23] Dagens Næringsliv (2010), “Skattelister gir ikke innbruddsbølger,” May 22, 2010.
[24] Dagens Næringsliv (2014), “Sjekk skattelister 2014,” October 16, 2014.
[25] Deaton, A. and Stone, A. (2013), “Two Happiness Puzzles,” American Economic Review: Papers
& Proceedings, Vol. 103 (3), pp. 591–597.
[26] Digi (2008), “Vil fjerne skattelistene på nettet,” October 16, 2008. 2008.
[27] Digi (2009), “Dette tjener de på iPhone-skattesøk,” October 21, 2009.
[28] Di Tella, R.; MacCulloch, R. and Oswald, A. (2003), “The Macroeconomics of Happiness,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 85 (4), pp. 809–27.
[29] Doob, A. and Gross, A. (1968), “Status of Frustrator as an Inhibitor of Horn-Honking Responses,”
Journal of Social Psychology, Vol. 76, pp. 213-218.
[30] E24 (2014), “Nå strammes innsyns-reglene inn,” May 14, 2014.
[31] Easterlin, R.A. (1974), “Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evidence,”
Nations and Households in Economic Growth, Vol. 89, pp. 89–125.
[32] Easterlin, R. (2004), “The economics of happiness” Daedalus, Vol. 133 (2), pp. 26–33.
[33] Easterlin, R.; Angelescu, L.; McVey, M.; Switek, O.; Sawangfa, J. and Smith, Z. (2010), “The
happiness–income paradox revisited,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 107
(52), pp. 22463-22468.
[34] Easterlin, R.A. (2017), “Paradox Lost?” Review of Behavioral Economics, Vol. 4 (4), pp. 311–339.
[35] Fennis, B.M. (2008), “Branded into submission: Brand attributes and hierarchization behavior in
same-sex and mixed-sex dyads,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology, Vol. 38, pp. 1993–2009.
[36] Ferrer-i-Carbonell, A. (2005), “Income and Well-Being: An Empirical Analysis of the Comparison
Income Effect,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 89, pp. 997–1019.
[37] File, T. and Ryan, C. (2014), “Computer and Internet Use in the United States: 2013,” American
Community Survey Report.
[38] Fliessbach, K.; Weber, B.; Trautner, P.; Dohmen, T.; Sunde, U.; Elger, C.E. and Falk, A. (2007),
“Social Comparison Affects Reward-Related Brain Activity in the Human Ventral Striatum,”
Science, Vol. 318 (5854), pp. 1305-1308.
[39] Frank, R.H. (1985), “The Demand for Unobservable and Other Positional Goods,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 75, pp. 101–116.
[40] Hagerty, M.R. and Veenhoven, R. (2003), “Wealth and Happiness Revisited – Growing National
Income Does Go with Greater Happiness,” Social Indicators Research, Vol. 64, pp. 1–27.
[41] Hellevik, O. (2002), “Age differences in value orientation – life cycle or cohort effect?” International Journal of Public Opinion Research, Vol. 14 (3), pp. 286–302.

31

[42] Hellevik, O. (2003), “Economy, values and happiness in Norway,” Journal of Happiness Studies,
Vol. 4 (3), pp. 243–283.
[43] Hellevik, O. (2015), “Is the good life sustainable? A three decade study of values, happiness and
sustainability in Norway,” in Mueller, M.L. and Syse, K.V.L. (eds.), Sustainable Consumption
and the Good Life. London & New York: Routledge.
[44] Johansson-Stenman, O.; Carlsson, F. and Daruvala, D. (2002), “Measuring future grandparents’
preferences for equality and relative standing,” Economic Journal, Vol. 112, pp. 362–383.
[45] Kahneman, D. and Deaton, A. (2010), “High income improves evaluation of life but not emotional
well-being,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 107 (38), pp. 16489–16493.
[46] Karadja, M.; Mollerstrom, J. and Seim, D. (2017), “Richer (and Holier) than Thou? The Effect
of Relative Income Improvements on Demand for Redistribution,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 99 (2), pp. 201–212.
[47] Kuziemko, I.; Buell, R.W.; Reich, T. and Norton, M. (2014), “Last-place Aversion: Evidence and
Redistributive Implications,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 129 (1), pp. 105–149.
[48] Linden, L. and Rockoff, J.E. (2008), “Estimates of the Impact of Crime Risk on Property Values
from Megan’s Laws,” American Economic Review, Vol. 98 (3), pp. 1103–27.
[49] Luttmer, E.F.P. (2005), “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 120 (3), pp. 963–1002.
[50] Mas, A. (2017), “Does Transparency Lead to Pay Compression?” Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 125 (5), pp. 1683–1721.
[51] New York Times (2009), “Norway Divided by Citizen Wealth Tables,” October 23, 2009.
[52] New York Times (2018), “Happy National Jealousy Day!” November 1, 2018.
[53] Norway Ministry of Finance (2014), “Høringsnotat om innstramminger i reglene om offentlige
skattelister,” January 24, 2014.
[54] NRK (2008), “Dette er økonomisk pornografi!” October 14, 2008.
[55] Origo (2010), “Debatten om skatten,” October 20, 2010.
[56] Perez-Truglia, R. (2015), “A Samuelsonian Validation Test for Happiness Data,” Journal of Economic Psychology, Vol. 49, pp. 74–83.
[57] Perez-Truglia, R. and Troiano, U. (2018), “Shaming Tax Delinquents,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 167, pp. 120–137.
[58] Perez-Truglia, R. and Cruces, G. (2017), “Partisan Interactions: Evidence from a Field Experiment in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 125 (4), pp. 1208–1243.
[59] Poppitz, P. (2016), “Does self-perceptions and income inequality match? The case of subjective
social status,” Working Paper.
[60] Rege, M. and Solli, I.F. (2015), “Lagging Behind the Joneses: The Impact of Relative Earnings
on Job Separation,” Mimeo.
[61] Samuelson, P.A. (1964), “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 46 (2), pp. 145–154.
[62] Sandvik, E.; Diener, E. and Seidlitz, L. (1993), “Subjective Well-Being: The Convergence and
Stability of Self-Report and Non-self-Report Measures,” Journal of Personality, Vol. 61 (3), pp.
317–42.
[63] Senik, C. (2004), “When Information Dominates Comparison. Learning from Russian Subjective
Panel Data,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 88, pp. 2099–2133.
[64] Senik, C. (2009), “Direct Evidence on Income Comparison and their Welfare Effects,” Journal of

32

Economic Behavior and Organization, Vol. 72, pp. 408–424.
[65] Skatte Betaleren (2008), “Til Kamp Mot Skattelistene,” Issue 2008–5.
[66] Stephens-Davidowitz, S. (2014), “The cost of racial animus on a black candidate: Evidence using
Google search data,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 118, pp. 26–40.
[67] Stevenson, B. and Wolfers, J. (2008), “Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being: Reassessing
the Easterlin Paradox,” NBER Working Paper No. 14282.
[68] Sunnmørsposten (2011), “Flere sier nei til offentliggjøring av skattelister,” May 13, 2011.
[69] Teknologiradet (2010), “Innspill til komitébehandling om offentliggjøring av skattelister,” Mimeo.
[70] The Local (2015), “Salary snooping steps up in Sweden,” June 9, 2015.
[71] Urry, H.L.; Nitschke, J.B.; Dolski, I.; Jackson, D.C.; Dalton, K.M.; Mueller, C.J.; Rosenkranz,
M.A.; Ryff, C.D.; Singer, B.H. and Davidson, R.J. (2004), “Making a Life Worth Living: Neural
Correlates of Well Being,” Psychological Science, Vol. 15 (6), pp. 367–372.
[72] van Praag, B.M.S. and Ferrer-i-Carbonell, A. (2008), “Happiness Quantified: A Satisfaction Calculus Approach.” Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[73] VG (2008), “I natt kommer de nye skattetallene,” October 14, 2008.
[74] Yamada, K. and Sato, M. (2013), “Another avenue for anatomy of income comparisons: Evidence
from hypothetical choice experiments,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Vol. 89,
pp. 35–57.

33

Figure 1: Screenshot of Search Tool for Tax Records

Notes: Intro webpage from skattelister.no as of June 16, 2010. Source: web.archive.org.

Figure 2: Screenshot of a Sample Search Result from the Search Tool

Notes: Search result from skatt.na24.no as of August 1, 2015. Source: web.archive.org.

34

Figure 3: Screenshot of a Smartphone Application Showing an Income Leaderboard

Source: Dagbladet (2009).

35

Figure 4: Popularity of Online Tax Lists Measured by Google Search Data
b. Weekly Search Volumes, Norway
1.0

90%

0.9

80%

0.8

Google Search Index

100%

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%

0.3

an
2
31 010
ja
n2
28 010
fe
b2
01
28
0
m
ar
20
25
10
ap
r
23 201
0
m
ay
20
1
20
0
ju
n2
01
18
0
ju
l2
01
15
0
au
g2
01
12
0
se
p2
0
1
10
oc 0
t2
01
07
0
no
v2
0
05
10
de
c2
0
10
02
ja
n2
01
1

be

er
th

ut
u
Yo

03
j

Sk

W
ea

at
te
lis

Ta

x

r
te

e
ub

he
W

Yo
ut

ea
t

te

r

0.0

Ta
x

0%

lis

Youtube

0.4

0.1

te

Weather

0.5

10%

at

Tax

0.6

0.2

Sk

Skattelister

0.7

20%

r

Google Searches (relative to Youtube)

a. Annual Search Volumes, Norway vs. Sweden

Norway

Sweden

Week (start date)

Notes: Google Trends data for 2010. Panel (a) shows the annual number of Google searches for each
category of keywords, relative to the searches for “youtube.” The Skattelister category is comprised by
“skattelister+skattelistene”, Tax is comprised by “skatt+skatter”, Weather is comprised by “yr+ver”
in Norway and “väder” in Sweden. Panel (b) shows the weekly number of searches for each keyword
category in Norway, normalized so that total searches sum up to 1 in the first week of 2010.

Figure 5: Internet Browsing Data on the Uses of the Online Tax Lists
a. Traffic by Profile Popularity

b. Traffic by Session Length

60%

20%

Share of All Sessions

Share of All Visits

50%

40%

30%

20%

15%

10%

5%
10%

0%

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11-100

0%

101+

Number of Visits to Profile

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

20+

Number of Profiles Visited per Session

Notes: Data from a proprietary panel of Internet users, on the visits to a popular website that offered
a tool to search the Norwegian tax records during 2010. Panel (a) shows the number of repeated visits
to profiles during 2010 (for profiles that have been visited at least once). Panel (b) shows the number
of profiles visited per session, for sessions with at least one profile visited, corresponding to October
20, 2010 (the release date for the data on incomes corresponding to the 2009 tax calendar). A session
begins when the user opens the Internet browser and ends when the user closes the browser.

36

Figure 6: Event-Study Analysis of the Gradient between Subjective Well-Being and Income
Rank
a. Norway
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
-.1
-.2

Change in Happiness-Income Gradient

Higher Internet
Lower Internet

-.3

-.1

0

.1

.2

Average Effect
90% CI

-.2

Change in Happiness-Income Gradient

b. Norway by Internet

85&87

89&91

93&95

97&99

01&03

05&07

09&11&13

85&87

89&91

93&95

Year

05&07

09&11&13

.4

d. Germany by Internet

-.1

0

.1

.2

.3

Higher Internet
Lower Internet

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

Change in Life Sat.-Income Gradient

Average Effect
90% CI

-.2

.2

01&03

Year

c. Germany
Change in Life Sat.-Income Gradient

97&99

85-88

89-92

93-96

97-00

01-04

05-08

09-13

85-88

Year

89-92

93-96

97-00

01-04

05-08

09-13

Year

Notes: Each coefficient corresponds to the change in the gradient between subjective well-being and Income
Rank relative to the period 1997–2000 (by construction, the coefficient for these years is normalized to zero).
The green vertical line represents the change in disclosure that took place in Norway in 2001. The measure of
subjective well-being in Norway is Happiness (panels (a) and (b) and Life Satisfaction in Germany ((c) and
(d)). Both of these outcomes are normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, with higher values
denoting higher happiness/satisfaction. Income Rank denotes the respondent’s household rank for that year,
from 0 to 1. All regressions control for year dummies, age, age squared, a gender dummy, three education
dummies, four dummies for marital status, four dummies for household size and three dummies for number of
working household members. Panels (a) and (b) are based on 48,570 observations from the Norwegian Monitor
Survey, collected every other year in 1985–2013 – see Table 1 for more detailed data definitions and Table 2 for
descriptive statistics. Panels (c) and (d) are based on 108,209 observations from the German Socio-Economic
Panel Survey, collected every year in 1985–2013. Panel (b) is similar to panel (a), only that two regressions are
estimated separately for individuals with I{Higher Internet}=1 and I{Higher Internet}=0 . Likewise, panel (d)
is similar to panel (c), only that based on two separate regressions by I{Higher Internet}.

37

Table 1: Summary of Data Definitions for the Main Variables from the Norwegian Monitor
Survey
Variable Name

Definition

Happiness

Based on the following question: “Will you mostly describe yourself as: Very happy; Quite happy; Not particularly happy; Not at all happy.” These 4 categories were assigned values using the Probit-OLS method, and
then the variable was standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Higher values denote higher
happiness.

Income Rank

Estimated position in the national distribution of household gross income in a given year, from 0 (lowest
income in the country) to 1 (highest). This rank is based on the following question: “What would you
estimate the household’s total gross income? That is, all total income before taxes and deductions: Less
than NKR100,000; NKR100,000-199,000; NKR200,000-299,000; NKR300,000-399,000; NKR400,000-499,000;
NKR500,000-599,000; NKR600,000-799,000; NKR800,000-999,000; Above NKR1,000,000.” Before 1995, the
bottom bin was split in two bins (0K–59K and 60K–100K). In 1995, they merged those two bins and added the
seventh and eight bins. They added the ninth bin in 1999. The within-bin ranks are imputed using interval
regressions as in Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) and Kahneman and Deaton (2010).

Life Satisfaction

Based on the following question: “How satisfied are you with your life? Very satisfied; Somewhat Satisfied;
Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied; Slightly dissatisfied; Very dissatisfied.” These 5 categories were assigned values
using the Probit-OLS method, and then the variable was standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation
1. Higher values denote higher satisfaction.

Perceived Rank

Based on question: “In comparison to other Norwegians, would you say that your economic situation is...?
Much worse than average; Slightly worse than average; Average; Slightly better than average; Much better
than average.” These 5 categories were assigned values using the Probit-OLS method, and then the variable
was standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Higher values denote higher rank.

Income Adequacy

Based on the following question: “How do you feel about your economic situation? Do you really need more
money than you have to be able to live a satisfying life, do you manage with your current income, or would
you be able to cope with less if you had to?” The possible answers were “I need more money,” “I manage with
what I have” and “I could cope with less,” which were assigned values using the Probit-OLS method, and then
the variable was standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Higher values denote higher income
adequacy.

Internet Access

Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the individual responds affirmatively to the following question: “Do
you have Internet access at home?”

I{Higher Internet}

Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the respondent has above-median predicted Internet Access in the
current year. We estimated an OLS regression of Internet Access on age, age squared and dummy variables for
gender, marital status, education, household size and number of workers in the household using the responses
from 2001 (the results from this regression are presented in Appendix Table A.8). Then, for each sample year,
we used the estimated coefficients to generate predicted Internet Access and then split the observations for
that year by the corresponding median value.

38

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for the Main Variables from the Norwegian Monitor Survey
Variable Name

Availability

Observations

Mean (Std.)

Happiness

1985–2013

48,570

0.00 (1.00)

Income Rank

1985–2013

48,570

0.50 (0.29)

Life Satisfaction

1999–2013

29,655

0.00 (1.00)

Perceived Rank

1993–2013

38,938

0.00 (1.00)

Income Adequacy

1993–2013

38,950

0.00 (1.00)

Internet Access

1999–2013

29,875

0.76 (0.43)

I{Higher Internet}

1985–2013

48,570

0.50 (0.50)

Notes: See Table 1 for a summary of data definitions for all of the variables listed above. Std. stands
for “Standard Deviation.” Data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey.

39

Table 3: Effects on the Gradient between Subjective Well-Being and Income Rank

Income Rank
Income Rank * I{2001-2013}(i)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Happiness

Happiness

Happiness

Happiness

0.311∗∗∗
(0.028)
0.090∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.315∗∗∗
(0.040)
0.098∗
(0.059)

0.310∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.090∗∗
(0.037)

Income Rank * I{2001-2013} * I{Higher Internet}
Income Rank * (Year-1985)

40

(6)
Life
Satisf.

(7)
Life
Satisf.

(8)
Life
Satisf.

0.331∗∗∗
(0.040)
-0.004
(0.051)
0.217∗∗∗
(0.073)

0.585∗∗∗
(0.056)
0.122∗∗
(0.055)

0.526∗∗∗
(0.085)
0.050
(0.088)
0.169
(0.131)

0.539∗∗∗
(0.018)
0.018
(0.021)

0.646∗∗∗
(0.025)
-0.049
(0.035)
-0.011
(0.046)

Norway
85-13
48,570

Norway
99-13
29,655

Norway
99-13
29,655

Germany
85-13
108,209

Germany
85-13
108,209

-0.001
(0.004)

Income Rank * I{1997-2000}(ii)

0.001
(0.048)

P-value (i)=(ii)
Country
Period
Observations

(5)
Life
Satisf.

0.043
Norway
85-13
48,570

Norway
85-13
48,570

Norway
85-13
48,570

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parenthesis. Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression. Happiness and
Life Satisfaction are subjective well-being measures normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, with higher values denoting higher happiness/satisfaction.
Income Rank denotes the position of the respondent’s household relative to all the other respondents for that year, from 0 to 1. I{2001–2013} takes the value 1 for
2001–2013. I{1999–2000} takes the value 1 for 1997–2000. I{Higher Internet} is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the respondent’s predicted Internet Access is
above the median value for a given year. All regressions control for year dummies, age, age squared, a gender dummy, three education dummies, four dummies for marital
status, four dummies for household size and three dummies for number of working household members. Column (4) also controls for all the additional interactive terms
listed in equation (4). Columns (1) through (6) are based on data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, collected every other year in 1985–2013 – see Table 1 for a summary
of data definitions and Table 2 for descriptive statistics. Columns (7) and (8) are based on the same specifications used in columns (1) and (3), only that using data from
the German Socio-Economic Panel, collected every year in 1985–2013.

Table 4: Effects on the Additional Outcomes: Perceived Income Rank and Adequacy of Own Income

Income Rank
Income Rank * I{2001-2013}(i)

(1)
Perc.
Rank

(2)
Perc.
Rank

(3)
Perc.
Rank

(4)
Perc.
Rank

(5)
Income
Adequacy

(6)
Income
Adequacy

(7)
Income
Adequacy

(8)
Income
Adequacy

2.172∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.185∗∗∗
(0.033)

2.117∗∗∗
(0.060)
0.135∗∗
(0.056)

2.130∗∗∗
(0.047)
0.228∗∗∗
(0.047)

2.275∗∗∗
(0.048)
0.138∗∗∗
(0.053)
0.092
(0.077)

1.290∗∗∗
(0.035)
0.061∗
(0.035)

1.326∗∗∗
(0.065)
0.094
(0.060)

1.249∗∗∗
(0.050)
0.101∗∗
(0.050)

1.300∗∗∗
(0.049)
-0.013
(0.054)
0.101
(0.083)

Income Rank * I{2001-2013} * I{Higher Internet}
Income Rank * (Year-1985)

0.005
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.005)
0.069
(0.055)

0.066
(0.059)

P-value (i)=(ii)

<0.001

0.396

41

Income Rank * I{1997-2000}(ii)

Country
Period
Observations

Norway
93-13
38,938

Norway
93-13
38,938

Norway
93-13
38,938

Norway
93-13
38,938

Norway
93-13
38,950

Norway
93-13
38,950

Norway
93-13
38,950

Norway
93-13
38,950

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parenthesis. Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression. Perceived Rank
and Income Adequacy are subjective measures normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, with higher values denoting higher rank/adequacy. Income Rank
denotes the rank of the household income for that year, from 0 to 1. I{2001–2013} takes the value 1 for 2001–2013. I{1999–2000} takes the value 1 for 1997–2000. I{Higher
Internet} is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the respondent’s predicted Internet Access is above the median value for a given year. All regressions control for
year dummies, age, age squared, a gender dummy, three education dummies, four dummies for marital status, four dummies for household size and three dummies for
number of working household members. Columns (4) and (8) also control for all the additional interactive terms listed in equation (4). All regressions are based on data
from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, collected every other year in 1985–2013 – see Table 1 for a summary of data definitions and Table 2 for descriptive statistics.

Online Appendix: For Online Publication Only
A
A.1

Additional Results and Robustness Checks
Additional Event-Study Graphs

In this section, we present some additional event-study graphs.
Figure A.3 presents variations of the event study graphs from Figure 6. Figure A.3.a reproduces Figure 6.b, only that breaking down the coefficients at the yearly level instead of using
pairs of years. Given that we are estimating twice as many coefficients with the same number of
observations, each individual coefficient is less precisely estimated and thus one must be more
careful with the interpretation.
As discussed in section 2.2, there were some factors during 2001–2013 that may have increased or decreased the degree of income transparency. The event-study analysis from Figure
A.3.a allows for a closer look at this. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that, for individuals with higher Internet access, all the post-2001 coefficients from Figure A.3.a are equal
(p-value=0.201). This evidence suggests that the effects of higher transparency were stable over
time. One possible interpretation is that the events during 2001–2013 did not affect the degree
of income transparency. An equally valid interpretation is that there were factors reducing and
increasing the degree of transparency over time, but these positive and negative effects canceled
each other out.
We can use Figure A.3.a to get a closer look at what happened in 2001. For individuals
with lower Internet access, the coefficient on 2001 is close to zero and statistically insignificant.
On the contrary, for individuals with higher Internet access, the coefficient on 2001 is positive,
large and statistically significant. The point estimate for 2003 is higher than the point estimate
for 2001, suggesting that perhaps the effects of the higher transparency took a bit more time
to fully materialize.53 However, the difference between these two coefficients is not statistically
significant (p-value=0.1744). Moreover, this difference could be due to measurement error: due
to the timing of the survey collection, a non-trivial share of the survey responses for 2001 may
have been collected before the change in disclosure took place, which will bias the coefficient
for 2001 downwards.
Figure A.3.a also allows for a closer look at what happened in 2004–2016, when the online
tax lists were limited to the three-week period following the release of the data. Due to the
53

It may take some time after the online tax lists are published for its effects on well-being to fully materialize.
Consider for example the anecdote about kids being bullied at school because their classmates found out that
their parents were poor through the website. Even though some kids may have been bullied the day after the
publication of the online tax lists, most kids would probably not be bullied until months after the tax lists
became available.

i

timing of our survey, this restriction is unlikely to affect our estimates. The survey was collected
every two years, and thus only one of the survey years, 2005, falls in this sub-period. Moreover,
in 2005 the income search tool was available during the last two weeks of October and the
first week of November. Since the survey responses are collected from late September to early
December, it is likely that most of the survey responses in 2005 were collected while the income
search tool was available. And since the tool was not available during the rest of the year, the
income search tool may have been especially salient in this period of 2005. Figure A.3.a shows
a coefficient for higher Internet in 2005 that is positive and statistically significant, suggesting
that the effects of higher transparency did not decline in 2005.54
We can use Figure A.3.a to get a closer look at what happened in 2011–2013, when the
government introduced a hassle to use the tax lists: individuals had to log into the official
website of the tax agency with a pin-code and a password. The coefficients for 2011 and 2013
suggest that the effects of the transparency policy persisted through 2011–2013. This finding is
consistent with the evidence discussed in section 2.3, according to which the volume of searches
was still substantial in 2011–2013. Moreover, even if the search volume was reduced, that should
not necessarily undo the effects of transparency. Indeed, even if the online tax lists were removed
altogether, it may take years for the effects on well-being to vanish. If an individual became
unhappy because she found out that she is poorer than she thought, removing her access to the
online tax lists will not make her suddenly forget how poor she is. Similarly, if the individual is
being bullied by others, those others will not suddenly forget that the individual is poor after
losing access to the website.
Figure A.3.b presents a robustness check for the analysis of the data from the German SocioEconomic Panel survey. The German survey was collected every year in 1985–2013, while the
data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey was collected every odd year in 1985–2013. In the
baseline specification, to maximize power, we use all the years available in the German data. As
a robustness check, Figure A.3.b reproduces the German event study from Figure 6.c, only that
restricting the German observations to the odd-numbered years, to mimic the frequency of the
Norwegian Monitor Survey. The coefficients in Figure A.3.b are less precisely estimated because
we are discarding roughly half of the data. However, the main result is still robust: Figure A.3.b
shows that the life satisfaction-income gradient did not change in Germany post–2001.
Figure A.3.c reproduces Figure 6.a, only that breaking down the coefficients at the yearly
level instead of using pairs of years. Again, given that we are estimating twice as many coefficients with the same number of observations, each individual coefficient is less precisely
estimated and thus the results must be interpreted with that caveat in mind.
Figure A.4 shows the event-study graphs for the other two outcomes used in the analysis:
54

On the other hand, if we measured the effect of higher transparency as the gap between the coefficient for
lower and higher Internet, that estimate would suggest that the effects of transparency were smaller in 2005.

ii

Perceived Rank and Income Adequacy. Note, however, that we have to be more careful when
interpreting these results. First, these two questions were not included in the survey until 1993,
and thus the results will be less precisely estimated than for Happiness. Second, the magnitude
of the effects for these two outcomes (8.5% and 4.7%, respectively) are substantially smaller
than the effects for Happiness (29%), and thus these effects would be more difficult to detect
even if we could hold constant the number of observations.
Figure A.4 shows that, consistent with the results presented in regression form in section
4.2, the event-study analysis for Perceived Rank and Income Adequacy are suggestive but not
nearly as sharp as the results for well-being. Figure A.4.a reproduces Figure 6.b, only that
using Perceived Rank as dependent variable instead of Happiness. Figure A.4.a shows that
the gradient between perceived and actual income rank evolved similarly for individuals with
higher and lower Internet access, but then diverged after 2001. However, this divergence is less
precisely estimated. Figure A.4.b reproduces Figure 6.b, only that using Income Adequacy as
dependent variable instead of Happiness. Again, the event-study graph suggests a divergence in
the gradient after 2001, but this finding is not nearly as precisely estimated as the corresponding
finding for Happiness.
Last, for the sake of completeness, Figures A.4.c and A.4.d reproduce Figure 6.a, but instead of using Happiness as dependent variable they use Perceived Rank and Income Adequacy,
respectively.

A.2

Effects on the Average Level of Well-Being

Section 4.1 reports the findings for the effect of transparency on the gradient between subjective
well-being and income rank. In this section, we report the findings for the effects of transparency
on the average level of subjective well-being.
To estimate these average effects, we follow a differences-in-differences strategy that is based
on the exposure variable discussed in section 4:
SWB i,t = α1 · HigherInterneti,t + α2 · HigherInterneti,t · It01−13 + Xi,t β + δt + i,t

(A.1)

SW Bi,t denotes subjective well-being of individual i in year t. HigherInterneti,t takes the
value 1 if individual i’s observable characteristics in year t, such as the age and education,
predict above-median Internet access at home. It01−13 is a dummy variable indicating the period
of higher income transparency. Xi,t is a vector with a set of control variables. δt denotes the
year dummies. And i,t denotes the error term.
The coefficient α1 estimates the well-being gap between individuals with higher and lower
Internet access during 1985–2000, while α2 measures the change in that gap from 1985–2000 to
2001–2013. If we assume that individuals with HigherInterneti,t = 0 were not affected by the

iii

change in transparency while individuals with HigherInterneti,t = 1 were affected by it, then
α2 measures the effect of the 2001 change of disclosure on the average level of well-being.55
The results from section 4 suggest that the effects on the happiness-income gradient for
individuals with higher Internet was 0.217 (column (3) of Table 3). If that effect was purely
a redistribution of happiness from poorer to richer individuals, we would expect the effect
on average happiness to be null (i.e., α2 = 0). However, it is possible that the effects were
asymmetric. However, if poorer households lost more happiness than the happiness gained by
richer households, then we would expect α2 < 0. On the contrary, if richer households gained
more happiness than the happiness lost by poorer households, then we would expect α2 > 0.
Column (1) of Table A.1 reports the regression results using Happiness as the dependent
variable. The estimated α2 (0.014) is close to zero and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.460).
This evidence is consistent with a pure redistribution of happiness from poorer to richer households (α2 = 0). As a robustness check, column (2) introduces the falsification test to assess
the possibility that the parameter α2 is biased because of differential pre-trends across individuals with high and low Internet access, as in the specification from equation (3) in section 3.
The results from column (2) are consistent with column (1): the coefficient α2 (0.019) is still
small and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.362), and the coefficient on the interaction with
I{1997–2000} (0.015) is also small and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.582). As an additional robustness check, column (3) uses life satisfaction as the dependent variable instead of
happiness. Since this outcome was measured starting in 1999, the pre-treatment period consists
of just one year of data and thus the findings must be taken with a grain of salt. The estimated
α2 (0.027) is still small and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.390). In sum, the estimates
for happiness and life satisfaction suggest that the change in disclosure had a null effect on the
average level of well-being.
For the sake of completeness, columns (4) through (7) of Table A.1 reproduce the results
from columns (1) and (2), but with the additional outcomes (Perceived Rank and Income Adequacy) as dependent variables. Column (4) suggests that the effect on the average perceived
income rank is positive (0.061) and statistically significant (p-value=0.001). This finding is
robust to the alternative specification, reported in column (5): the coefficient on the interaction with I{1997–2000} (-0.017) is close to zero, statistically insignificant (p-value=0.570), and
statistically different from the interaction with I{2001–2013} (p-value=0.002). These results
imply that individuals found out through the online tax lists that, on average, their income
rank was higher than they thought. This evidence is consistent with the findings from Karadja,
Mollerstrom, and Seim (2017) that, on average, households under-estimate their own income
55

If individuals with lower Internet access were affected less than individuals with higher Internet access but
still affected to some extent, then the coefficient α2 would still measure the average effect of transparency but
suffer from attenuation bias.

iv

rank and thus will update their perceptions upwards when provided with accurate information.
Last, columns (6) and (7) show the results for Income Adequacy as the dependent variable.
Column (6), which reports the most basic specification, indicates that the coefficient on the
interaction with I{2001–2013} (0.037) is close to zero, although statistically significant (pvalue=0.069). In the alternative specification, reported in column (7), this coefficient is even
smaller (0.003) and becomes statistically insignificant (p-value=0.924). These results suggest
that were no significant effects on the average level of Income Adequacy.

A.3

Probit-OLS versus OLS and Ordered Probit

In the baseline specification, we coded the subjective questions using the Probit-OLS method.
In this section, we show that the results are robust under alternative econometric models.
When constructing the happiness outcome, instead of arbitrarily assigning values 1, 2, 3, and
4 to the four possible answers to the happiness question, we employ the Probit-OLS method to
assign these values (van Praag and Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2008). This method consists of assigning
values to match the distribution of responses to a normal distribution. For example, if a fraction
q reports the lowest category (“not at all satisfied”), the Probit-OLS method assigns the lowest
category an score of E[z|z < q], where z is distributed standard normal. The resulting values
for the happiness scores are 1.36 (“very happy”), -0.17 (“quite happy”), -1.67 (“not particular
happy”) and -2.79 (“not at all happy”).
Table A.2 explores the robustness of the results to different treatments of the subjective
data. Columns (1) and (2) denote the baseline specifications for Happiness and Life Satisfaction, respectively (these results are identical to columns (3) and (5) from Table 3). Columns
(3) and (4) from Table A.2 correspond to the specifications from columns (1) and (2), but with
the responses to the happiness and life satisfaction questions coded from 1 to 4 and 1 to 5,
respectively. The results from columns (3) and (4) are qualitatively consistent with the results
from columns (1) and (2). The magnitudes of the coefficients from columns (3) and (4) are
not directly comparable to the coefficients from columns (1) and (2), because of the differences
in scales of the dependent variables. With that caveat in mind, the findings are quantitatively
robust across the two specifications: column (3) suggests that the change in disclosure increased
), which is close to (and statistically indistinthe happiness-income gradient by 27% (= 0.049
0.179
guishable from) the 29% increase implied by the coefficients from column (1); and column (4)
indicates that the change in disclosure increased the life satisfaction-income gradient by 20%
(= 0.089
), which is close to (and statistically indistinguishable from) the 21% increase implied
0.452
by the coefficients from column (2).
Columns (5) and (6) from Table A.2 estimate the same specifications from columns (1) and
(2), except that they use an Ordered Probit model instead of the OLS model from the baseline

v

specification. Columns (5) and (6) report the raw coefficients from the Ordered Probit model,
which cannot be compared in magnitude directly to the OLS coefficients from columns (1) and
(2). In terms of signs and statistical significance, the results from columns (5) and (6) are
consistent with the results from columns (1) and (2). The results are also quantitatively robust:
column (5) suggests that the change in disclosure increased the happiness-income gradient by
30% (= 0.113
), which is very close to (and statistically indistinguishable from) the 29% increase
0.380
implied by the coefficients from column (1). Similarly, column (6) indicates that the change in
), which is close to (and
disclosure increased the life satisfaction-income gradient by 25% (= 0.166
0.667
statistically indistinguishable from) the 21% increase implied by the coefficients from column
(2).

A.4

Binned Scatterplots

In the baseline specification, we assume a linear relationship between subjective well-being and
Income Rank. In this section, we present results under a more flexible specification using binned
scatterplots.
In addition to exploring the role of outliers and non-linearities, the binned scatterplots
can also shed light on the distribution of the effects of transparency. These effects could be
unevenly distributed along the income distribution due to an uneven exposure to the online tax
lists. Indeed, the evidence from the triple-differences specification already indicates that the
effects were concentrated in individuals with higher Internet access. Since the individuals with
higher Internet access tend to be richer than the rest of the population, then we would expect
effects that are stronger for richer individuals.56
We follow the baseline regression specification but, instead of letting Income Rank enter
linearly in the right hand side of the regression equation, we include this variable as a set of
dummies for nine equal-sized income groups: one set of dummies for the post-2001 period, and
another one for the 2001–2013 period. The middle groups are set as omitted categories, and
thus their coefficients are normalized to zero.
Figure A.5 presents the results for the binned scatterplot analysis. Figure A.5.a shows
the results for Happiness, and Figures A.5.b through A.5.d show the results for the rest of
the outcomes. Most important, these figures suggest that the linear specification used in the
baseline specification for Income Rank provides a fair approximation. These figures also confirm
that the results are not driven by outliers or non-linearities. Last, the results are consistent
56

Additionally, richer individuals may be more salient in the online tax lists – for example, it was common
for the online search tools to provide rankings with the richest individuals in each city. Also, the effects may be
stronger for some income groups due to the nature of income comparisons. For example, if individuals are lastplace-averse (Kuziemko et al., 2014), then the effects of transparency may be particularly strong at the bottom
of the income distribution. Similarly, if well-being is a concave function of relative pay (Fehr and Schmidt, 1999),
the effects of transparency may be weaker among richer individuals (Card et al., 2012).

vi

with the expectation that, due to differences in Internet access, the effects were stronger in the
upper part of the income distribution.

A.5

Local vs. National Income Rank

In the baseline specification, Income Rank corresponds to the position of the respondent in the
national distribution of household income. To the extent that this does not fully capture the
income comparisons that people care about, this can be a source of measurement error and thus
introduce an attenuation bias. In this section we present results under an alternative definition,
based on the local instead of the national income rank.
Using the local alternative for Income Rank may be a more appropriate specification for a
number of reasons. For example, due to the Balassa-Samuelson effect, the local income rank
may predict purchasing power better than the national income rank. And regarding income
comparisons, individuals may care the most about the comparisons to their social contacts,
which are probably drawn disproportionately from the same area of residence.
The most disaggregated geographic identifiers in the Norwegian survey data correspond to
the county identifiers. There are 19 counties in Norway, with populations in 2001 ranging from
73,417 in Finnmark to 599,230 in Oslo, with a median of 233,705 in Vestfold (Source: Statistics
Norway). We constructed a local Income Rank, based on the within-county rank instead of
the national rank. The income distributions across these 19 regions are fairly similar, and as a
result the national and county ranks are highly correlated to each other (correlation coefficient
of 0.9681).
The results are presented in Table A.3. Columns (1) and (2) denote the baseline specifications for happiness and life satisfaction, respectively, which are identical to columns (3) and (5)
from Table 3. Columns (5) and (6) from Table A.3 reproduce the specifications from columns
(1) and (2) but using the local version of Income Rank instead. The results from columns (5)
and (6) are similar to (and statistically indistinguishable from) the results from columns (1) and
(2) – if anything, and consistent with the argument of attenuation bias, the estimated effects of
transparency are slightly larger under the local definition of Income Rank.

A.6

Alternative Definitions of Income Rank

This section provides some robustness checks related to the construction of Income Rank.
One potential source for concern is that the income question added a bin in 1999, which
could contaminate the comparison of the happiness-income gradient around 2001. Since only
1.55% of respondents fell in the ninth bin in 1999, this is probably a minor concern. To address
any remaining concerns, Table A.4 presents a sharp robustness check. The results from columns
(1) through (3) correspond to the baseline definition of Income Rank (identical to columns (1),
vii

(3) and (4) of Table 3). The results from columns (4) through (6) are based on the same specifications but with an alternative version of Income Rank, which ignores the distinction between
the eight and ninth bin. That is, we treat the data as if the ninth bin was never introduced:
we start by pooling the responses to the ninth and eight bins in the raw data, and then we
replicate the data construction and analysis starting from this revised dataset. The results are
robust to this check: the coefficients from columns (1) through (3) are almost identical to the
corresponding coefficients from columns (4) through (6). For example, column (1) indicates
that transparency increased the happiness-income gradient by 0.090 (p-value=0.005), while the
corresponding coefficient in column (4) is 0.090 (p-value=0.005).
Since the income question is elicited in bins, our baseline specification uses the standard
method from the happiness literature to impute the values of Income Rank within each bin
(Stevenson and Wolfers, 2008; Kahneman and Deaton, 2010). Table A.4 also assesses the
sensitivity of the results to this imputation method. Again, columns (1) through (3) correspond
to the results with the baseline definition of Income Rank, which uses the imputation. Columns
(7) through (9) show the results under the alternative definition of Income Rank using the raw
data (i.e., without the within-bin imputation). Most important, the results are qualitatively
and quantitatively robust across the imputed and non-imputed versions of Income Rank. For
example, column (1) indicates that the happiness-income gradient increased by 29% after 2001,
while column (7) indicates that it increased by 25% – moreover, we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that these two estimates are equal. Additionally, the comparison of the coefficient
on Income Rank between columns (1)–(3) and (7)–(9) suggests that the imputation method is
indeed helping to ameliorate the measurement error: the happiness-income gradients are almost
10% higher when using the imputation.

A.7

Alternative Definitions of Higher Internet

This section shows the robustness of the results under alternative definitions of I{Higher Internet}.
The results are presented in Table A.5. Column (1) corresponds to the baseline definition
of I{Higher Internet} (identical to column (4) of Table 3). Columns (2) through (5) are based
on the same specification but with alternative versions of I{Higher Internet}. In column (2),
I{Higher Internet} is identical to the baseline definition except that, instead of using responses
to Internet Access for 2001, it is based on responses for 1999. In column (3), I{Higher Internet}
is identical to the baseline definition except that it is based on responses to Internet Access
for the entire period for which the Internet Access is available (1999–2013). In column (4),
I{Higher Internet} is identical to the baseline definition except that it splits individuals by the
median value of predicted Internet access over the entire sample, rather than splitting them by

viii

the median value for the respective year. In column (5), I{Higher Internet} is identical to the
baseline definition except that we predict Internet access using a Probit regression instead of an
OLS regression. The coefficients reported in Table A.5 indicate that the results are qualitatively
and quantitatively robust between the baseline specification (column (1)) and the alternative
specifications (columns (2)–(5)).

A.8

Evolution of Inequality and Sample Composition

Since the survey is a repeated cross-section, we need to check that the composition of the survey
respondents has not changed abruptly around 2001. To address this concern, Table A.6 presents
the yearly averages of some individual characteristics. Consistent with the gradual changes in
the composition of the universe of Norwegians, over the 28 years there were gradual changes in
the composition of of the survey respondents: a gradual increase in age and education, and a
gradual decrease in marriage rates. Most important, the results confirm that the composition
of the survey respondents has not changed abruptly around 2001.
Relatedly, Table A.3 explore the robustness of the results to the use of sampling weights.
Columns (1) and (2) denote the baseline specifications for happiness and life satisfaction, respectively, which are identical to columns (3) and (5) of Table 3. Columns (3) and (4) of Table
A.3 reproduce the same regressions from columns (1) and (2), but using individual-specific sampling weights computed by the team in charge of collecting the survey data. As expected, using
sample weights does not change the results: the coefficients in columns (3) and (4) are very
similar to (and statistically indistinguishable from) the coefficients from columns (1) and (2).
Another potential source for concern is that the change in the happiness-income gradient is
mechanically driven by an increase in income inequality. In other words, richer individuals may
become happier because they are able to afford more stuff, while poorer individuals become
less happy because they can afford less stuff. This possibility seems highly unlikely, because it
would require a large, sudden and persistent increase in inequality that would be unprecedented
in a developed country. To address this concern more directly, Table A.7 presents data on the
evolution of income inequality in Norway during the sample period.
Table A.7 shows the evolution of income inequality according to the data from the Norwegian
Monitor Survey. The coefficient of variation in incomes did not change abruptly in 2001 –
furthermore, it was stable during the entire 1985–2001 period. For example, we can mimic the
comparison from the event-study analysis: the coefficient of variation went from an average of
0.521 in 1997/99 to an average of 0.520 in 2001/03, amounting to a mere reduction of 0.21%.
This change in inequality is tiny compared to the estimated 29% increase in the happinessincome gradient around 2001.
Table A.7 also presents results for two measures of inequality constructed with administrative

ix

data.57 The Gross Gini Index is an index of inequality based on the gross household income,
while the Net Gini Index is an index of inequality based on the net household income. Just
like the survey data, the administrative data indicates that there was no abrupt change in
income inequality around 2001, and that the levels of inequality were stable over the entire
1985–2013 period. Moreover, we can mimic the comparison from the event-study analysis with
these alternative measures of inequality. The Gross Gini Index increased from an average of
44.24 in 1997/99 to an average of 44.79 in 2001/03. This amounts to a mere 1.3% increase in
income inequality, which is insignificant relative to the 29% increase in the happiness-income
gradient measured around 2001. Similarly, the Net Gini Index increased from an average of
24.55 in 1997/99 to an average of 25.15 in 2001/03, amounting to a mere 2.4% increase in
income inequality. Again, these changes in income inequality are minuscule compared to the
estimated 29% increase in the happiness-income gradient around 2001.

57

These measure of inequality were obtained from the Chartbook of Economic Inequality and are publicly
available in the following URL: https://www.chartbookofeconomicinequality.com/.

x

Figure A.1: More Screenshots of Websites and Apps Designed to Search the Tax Records
a. Official Search Tool for the Tax Records of 2014

b. TV2s Skattelisten Iphone App

c. Interactive Tool to Learn about the Income Distribution

Source: (a) and (b): Origo (2010). (c) web.archive.org.

xi

Figure A.2: Histograms for All the Outcome Variables
a. Happiness

b. Life Satisfaction
60

N=29,655
Period=1999-2013

m

ew

Ve
ry

ha
tS

at

sa
tis

is
f

fie

d

ie
d

.
er
..
N
So

Will you mostly describe yourself as?

How satisfied are you with your life?

c. Perceived Rank

d. Income Adequacy
N=38,950
Period=1993-2013

uc

h

ss
le
w

tI

pe

ha

co

ith

Ic

ou

ld

w
e
Im

be

an

tte

ag

rt

In

ha

ee

n

d

av

m

w

or

e

ag
er

er
av
n
ha
rt
tte

ith

ha

ey
m

e

e
ag

e
ag
er
Av
be

How do you feel about your economic situation?
Do you really need more money than you have to be able to live a satisfying life,
do you manage your current income or
would you be able to cope with it less if you had to?

M

ly
ht
ig

ht
ig
Sl

Sl

ly

w

w

or

or

se

se

th
a

th
a

n

n

av

av

er

er

ag

ag

e

e

on

0

h
uc
M

ve

0

10

20

Percent
20
30

Percent
40

40

60

N=38,938
Period=1993-2013

50

ei
th

at
is
Sl
ig

Ve
ry

ht
ly

di
ss

di
ss

at

Ve
r

y

is
f

fie

ie
d

d

0

ha
p

py

ha
pp
y
ui
te
Q

N
ot

pa

N

ot

rti
cu

at
al
l

la
rly

ha
pp
y

ha
pp
y

0

20

20

Percent

Percent
40

40

60

80

N=48,570
Period=1985-2013

In comparison to other Norwegians,
would you say that your economic situation is...?

Notes: The histograms show the raw distribution of dependent variables used in the analysis. See
Table 1 for further data definitions.

xii

Figure A.3: Alternative Event-Study Graphs for Subjective Well-Being

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Higher Internet
Lower Internet

13

11

09

07

05

03

01

95

&9
9

97

93

91

89

87

85

-.3 -.2 -.1

Change in Happiness-Income Gradient

a. Norway (yearly, by Internet)

Year

-.1

0

.1

Average Effect
90% CI

-.2

Change in Life Sat.-Income Gradient

.2

b. Germany (odd years)

85&87

89&91

93&95

97&99

01&03

05&07

09&11&13

Year

-.1

0

.1

.2

Average Effect
90% CI

13

11

09

07

05

03

99

01

97
&

95

93

91

89

87

85

-.2

Change in Happiness-Income Gradient

c. Norway (yearly)

Year

Notes: Variations of the event study graphs presented in Figure 6. Panel (a) reproduces panel (b) from Figure
6, except that it breaks down the coefficients at the year level. Panel (b) reproduces panel (c) from Figure 6,
only that it restricts the data to odd-numbered years in 1985–2013. Panel (c) reproduces panel (a) from Figure
6, except that it breaks down the coefficients at the year level. See notes to Figure 6 for more details about the
specification and the data.

xiii

Figure A.4: Event-Study Graphs for Perceived Income Rank and Income Adequacy

.2

b. Income Adequacy (by Internet Access)

-.2

-.1

0

.1

Higher Internet
Lower Internet

-.3

Change in Inc. Satisf.-Income Gradient

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Higher Internet
Lower Internet

-.3

Change in Perc. Rank-Income Gradient

a. Perceived Rank (by Internet Access)

93&95

97&99

01&03

05&07

09&11&13

93&95

97&99

Year

05&07

09&11&13

Year

d. Income Adequacy
.2

c. Perceived Rank

-.1

0

.1

Average Effect
90% CI

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Change in Happiness-Income Gradient

Average Effect
90% CI

-.2

Change in Happiness-Income Gradient

01&03

93&95

97&99

01&03

05&07

09&11&13

93&95

Year

97&99

01&03

05&07

09&11&13

Year

Notes: Panel (a) reproduces panel (b) from Figure 6, only that it uses Perceived Rank as the dependent variable
instead of Happiness. Panel (b) reproduces panel (b) from Figure 6, only that it uses Income Adequacy as
dependent variable instead of Happiness. Panel (c) reproduces panel (a) from Figure 6, only that it uses
Perceived Rank as the dependent variable instead of Happiness. Panel (d) reproduces panel (a) from Figure 6,
only that it uses Income Adequacy as dependent variable instead of Happiness. All the dependent variables have
been normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1. See notes to Figure 6 for more details about the
specification and the data.

xiv

Figure A.5: Binned Scatterplot Showing the Change in Gradient Between Happiness and Income
Rank
b. Life Satisfaction
.4

.3

a. Happiness

1999-2000
2001-2013

Slope=0.68

.2

1985-2000
2001-2013

Slope=0.55

Income Rank

9%

00
%
-1
89

-8
78

8%
-7
67

7%

6%

-6
56

Slope=1.31

.4

Slope=2.30

.2
0

.25

%
00
-1
89

9%
-8
78

8%
-7
67

7%
-6
56

6%
-5
44

4%
-4
33

3%
-3
22

2%
-2

11
0-

Income Rank

11

%

%
00
-1
89

9%
-8
78

8%
-7
67

7%
-6
56

6%
-5
44

4%
-4
33

3%
-3
22

11

-2

2%

-.6

-.4

-.2

Income Adequacy

Slope=1.25
Slope=2.11

-.25

Perceived Rank

1993-2000
2001-2013

.6

1993-2000
2001-2013

.75

1.25

d. Income Adequacy

-.75
11 -1.25
%

-5

Income Rank

c. Perceived Rank

0-

44

4%
-4
33

3%
-3
22

-2
11

%

2%

-.4
11
0-

9%

00
%
-1
89

-8
78

8%
-7
67

7%
-6
56

6%
-5
44

4%

3%

-4
33

-3
22

2%
-2
11

0-

11

%

-.3

-.2

-.2

0

0

Slope=0.31

-.1

Happiness

.1

Life Satisfaction

.2

Slope=0.40

Income Rank

Notes: Panel (a) corresponds to the same regression from column (1) of Table 3, only that Income Rank is introduced
as two sets of nine equally-sized dummies (one set for the post-2001 period and another one for the pre-2001 period),
with the coefficients on the middle categories normalized to zero. Panel (b), (c) and (d) are identical to panel (a),
only that instead of Happiness they use the dependent variables Life Satisfaction, Perceived Rank and Income
Adequacy, respectively. All these dependent variables have been normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation
of 1, with higher values denoting higher happiness/satisfaction/rank/adequacy. See notes to Table 3 for more details
about the regression specification and the data.

xv

Table A.1: Effects on the Average Level of Well-Being

I{Higher Internet}
I{Higher Internet} * I{2001-2013}(i)

(1)

(2)

Happiness

Happiness

-0.010
(0.017)
0.014
(0.018)

-0.016
(0.020)
0.019
(0.021)
0.015
(0.027)

I{Higher Internet} * I{1997-2000}(ii)

P-value (i)=(ii)
xvi

Period
Observations

(3)
Life
Satisf.

(4)
Perc.
Rank

-0.037 -0.078∗∗∗
(0.033) (0.019)
0.027
0.061∗∗∗
(0.032) (0.018)

0.861
85-13
48,570

85-13
48,570

(5)
Perc.
Rank

(6)
Income
Adequacy

(7)
Income
Adequacy

-0.067∗∗
(0.027)
0.050∗
(0.026)
-0.017
(0.030)

-0.048∗∗
(0.021)
0.037∗
(0.020)

-0.013
(0.029)
0.003
(0.029)
-0.055∗
(0.034)

0.002
99-13
29,655

93-13
38,938

93-13
38,938

0.016
93-13
38,950

93-13
38,950

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parenthesis. Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression. Happiness, Life Satisfaction, Perceived Rank and Income Adequacy were normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, with higher values denoting higher happiness/satisfaction/rank/adequacy.
I{Higher Internet} is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the respondent’s predicted Internet Access is above the median value for a given year. I{2001–2013} takes the
value 1 for 2001–2013. I{1997–2000} takes the value 1 for 1997–2000. All regressions control for year dummies, age, age squared, a gender dummy, three education dummies, four
dummies for marital status, four dummies for household size, three dummies for number of working household members and Income Rank (i.e., the respondent’s position in the
national distribution of household income for that year). Data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, which has been collected every other year in 1985–2013. See Table 1 for a
summary of data definitions and Table 2 for descriptive statistics.

Table A.2: Robustness to Alternative Econometric Models
(1)
Happiness
Income Rank
Income Rank * I{2001-2013}(i)
Income Rank * I{1997-2000}(ii)

0.310∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.090∗∗
(0.037)
0.001
(0.048)

xvii

P-value (i)=(ii)

0.043

Model
POLS Transformation
Period
Observations

OLS
Yes
85-13
48,570

(2)
Life
Satisf.
0.585∗∗∗
(0.056)
0.122∗∗
(0.055)

(3)
Happiness
0.179∗∗∗
(0.018)
0.049∗∗
(0.021)
0.001
(0.028)

(4)
Life
Satisf.
0.452∗∗∗
(0.043)
0.089∗∗
(0.042)

0.053
OLS
Yes
99-13
29,655

OLS
No
85-13
48,570

(5)
Happiness
0.380∗∗∗
(0.039)
0.113∗∗
(0.045)
-0.000
(0.059)

(6)
Life
Satisf.
0.667∗∗∗
(0.064)
0.166∗∗∗
(0.062)

0.034
OLS
No
99-13
29,655

O-Probit
No
85-13
48,570

O-Probit
No
99-13
29,655

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parenthesis. Column (1) through (4) report coefficients from OLS regressions, while columns
(5) and (6) report raw coefficients from an Ordered Probit model. Happiness and Life Satisfaction are responses to subjective questions where higher value denotes higher
happiness/satisfaction. In columns (1) and (2), responses to these questions were coded using the Probit-OLS method, and then normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation
of 1. In columns (3) and (5), responses to the happiness question are assigned values from 1 (not at all happy) to 4 (very happy). In columns (4) and (6), responses to the life
satisfaction question are assigned values from 1 (very dissatisfied) to 4 (very satisfied). Income Rank denotes the position of the respondent’s household relative to all the other
respondents for that year, from 0 to 1. I{2001–2013} takes the value 1 for 2001–2013. I{1997–2000} takes the value 1 for 1997–2000. All regressions control for year dummies, age,
age squared, a gender dummy, three education dummies, four dummies for marital status, four dummies for household size and three dummies for number of working household
members. Data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, which has been collected every other year in 1985–2013. See Table 1 for a summary of data definitions and Table 2 for
descriptive statistics.

Table A.3: Robustness to the Local Definition of Income Rank and the Sample Weights
(1)
Happiness
Income Rank
Income Rank * I{2001-2013}(i)
Income Rank * I{1997-2000}(ii)

P-value (i)=(ii)
xviii

Weights
Income Rank
Period
Observations

0.310∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.090∗∗
(0.037)
0.001
(0.048)

(2)
Life
Satisf.
0.585∗∗∗
(0.056)
0.122∗∗
(0.055)

0.043
No
Nation
85-13
48,570

(3)
Happiness
0.306∗∗∗
(0.036)
0.087∗∗
(0.043)
-0.022
(0.056)

(4)
Life
Satisf.
0.563∗∗∗
(0.063)
0.112∗
(0.061)

0.034
No
Nation
99-13
29,655

Yes
Nation
85-13
48,570

(5)
Happiness
0.268∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.098∗∗∗
(0.037)
0.006
(0.048)

(6)
Life
Satisf.
0.554∗∗∗
(0.056)
0.115∗∗
(0.055)

0.035
Yes
Nation
99-13
29,655

No
County
85-13
48,570

No
County
99-13
29,655

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parenthesis. Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression. Happiness and Life
Satisfaction are responses to subjective questions where higher value denotes higher happiness/satisfaction, normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1. Income Rank
denotes the position of the respondent’s household, from 0 to 1, relative to all the other respondents for that year in the nation (columns (1) through (4)) or county (columns (5)
and (6)). I{2001–2013} takes the value 1 for 2001–2013. I{1997–2000} takes the value 1 for 1997–2000. In columns (3) and (4), the regressions use population weights computed
by the group in charge of conducting the survey. All regressions control for year dummies, age, age squared, a gender dummy, three education dummies, four dummies for marital
status, four dummies for household size and three dummies for number of working household members. Data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, which has been collected every
other year in 1985–2013. See Table 1 for a summary of data definitions and Table 2 for descriptive statistics.

Table A.4: Robustness to Alternative Definitions of Income Rank
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Happiness

Happiness

Happiness

Happiness

Happiness

Happiness

Happiness

Happiness

Happiness

Income Rank

0.311∗∗∗

0.310∗∗∗

0.331∗∗∗

0.313∗∗∗

0.313∗∗∗

0.333∗∗∗

0.291∗∗∗

0.283∗∗∗

0.305∗∗∗

(0.028)

(0.032)

(0.040)

(0.028)

(0.032)

(0.040)

(0.026)

(0.030)

(0.037)

Income Rank * I{2001-2013}(i)

0.090∗∗∗

0.090∗∗

-0.004

0.090∗∗∗

0.091∗∗

-0.006

0.072∗∗

0.081∗∗

-0.003

(0.032)

(0.037)

(0.051)

(0.032)

(0.037)

(0.052)

(0.031)

(0.036)

(0.048)

0.217∗∗∗

Income Rank * I{2001-2013} * I{Higher Internet}

0.223∗∗∗

(0.073)
Income Rank * I{1997-2000}(ii)

P-value (i)=(ii)
Income Rank Definition
Observations

0.168∗∗

(0.073)

(0.069)

0.001

0.001

0.024

(0.048)

(0.048)

(0.048)

0.043

0.042

0.196

I

I

I

II

II

II

III

III

III

48,570

48,570

48,570

48,570

48,570

48,570

48,570

48,570

48,570

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parenthesis. Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression. Happiness is normalized

xix

to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, with higher values denoting higher happiness. Income Rank denotes the position of the respondent’s household in the national income
distribution, from 0 to 1. In columns (1) through (3), Income Rank is defined as in the baseline specification described in Table 1. In columns (4) through (6), the ninth bin
(introduced in 1999) is merged with the eight bin before constructing Income Rank. In columns (7) through (9), Income Rank is constructed without the imputation of the
within-bin ranks. I{2001–2013} takes the value 1 for 2001–2013. I{1997–2000} takes the value 1 for 1997–2000. I{Higher Internet} is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if
the respondent’s predicted Internet Access is above the median value for a given year. All regressions control for year dummies, age, age squared, a gender dummy, three education
dummies, four dummies for marital status, four dummies for household size and three dummies for number of working household members. Data from the Norwegian Monitor
Survey, which has been collected every other year in 1985–2013. See Table 1 for a summary of data definitions and Table 2 for descriptive statistics.

Table A.5: Robustness to Alternative Definitions of Higher Internet

Income Rank
Income Rank * I{2001-2013}(i)
Income Rank * I{2001-2013} * I{Higher Internet}

I{Higher Internet} Definition
Observations

(1)
Happiness

(2)
Happiness

(3)
Happiness

(4)
Happiness

(5)
Happiness

0.331∗∗∗
(0.040)
-0.004
(0.051)
0.217∗∗∗
(0.073)

0.336∗∗∗
(0.040)
0.016
(0.050)
0.152∗∗
(0.071)

0.382∗∗∗
(0.041)
-0.023
(0.053)
0.209∗∗∗
(0.075)

0.351∗∗∗
(0.040)
-0.010
(0.053)
0.211∗∗∗
(0.074)

0.334∗∗∗
(0.040)
0.007
(0.052)
0.187∗∗
(0.074)

I
48,570

II
48,570

III
48,570

IV
48,570

V
48,570

xx

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parenthesis. Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression. Happiness is normalized
to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, with higher value denoting higher happiness. Income Rank denotes the position of the respondent’s household in the national income
distribution, from 0 to 1. I{2001–2013} takes the value 1 for 2001–2013. I{Higher Internet} is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the respondent’s predicted Internet Access
is above the median value for a given year. In column (1), I{Higher Internet} is defined as in the baseline specification described in Table 1. In columns (2) through (5), I{Higher
Internet} is based on alternative definitions. In column (2), I{Higher Internet} is identical to the baseline definition except that it is based on responses to Internet Access for 1999
instead of 2001. In column (3), I{Higher Internet} is identical to the baseline definition except that it is based on responses to Internet Access for 1999–2013 instead of 2001. In
column (4), I{Higher Internet} is identical to the baseline definition except that instead of splitting the sample within each year, we split the sample using the median value over
the entire 1985–2013 period. In column (5), I{Higher Internet} is identical to the baseline definition except that it is constructed using a Probit model instead of an OLS model.
All regressions control for year dummies, age, age squared, a gender dummy, three education dummies, four dummies for marital status, four dummies for household size and three
dummies for number of working household members. Data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, which has been collected every other year in 1985–2013. See Table 1 for a summary
of data definitions and Table 2 for descriptive statistics.

Table A.6: Descriptive Statistics by Year
Female

Age

Married

College

Oslo

Density

1985

0.499
(0.011)

40.861
(0.361)

0.721
(0.010)

0.231
(0.010)

0.118
(0.007)

185.719
(9.388)

1987

0.505
(0.010)

40.733
(0.325)

0.731
(0.009)

0.249
(0.009)

0.119
(0.006)

188.673
(8.338)

1989

0.508
(0.010)

39.759
(0.318)

0.684
(0.009)

0.280
(0.009)

0.108
(0.006)

176.713
(7.789)

1991

0.501
(0.010)

39.352
(0.333)

0.622
(0.010)

0.270
(0.009)

0.114
(0.006)

182.496
(8.063)

1993

0.494
(0.010)

39.989
(0.304)

0.527
(0.010)

0.288
(0.009)

0.122
(0.006)

192.982
(8.182)

1995

0.490
(0.010)

40.906
(0.334)

0.483
(0.010)

0.311
(0.009)

0.119
(0.006)

188.013
(8.371)

1997

0.517
(0.008)

41.212
(0.245)

0.488
(0.008)

0.360
(0.007)

0.113
(0.005)

181.017
(6.358)

1999

0.537
(0.008)

42.492
(0.253)

0.486
(0.008)

0.394
(0.008)

0.117
(0.005)

186.894
(6.597)

2001

0.554
(0.008)

44.571
(0.252)

0.496
(0.008)

0.412
(0.008)

0.114
(0.005)

183.217
(6.542)

2003

0.542
(0.008)

45.205
(0.257)

0.510
(0.008)

0.421
(0.008)

0.114
(0.005)

185.332
(6.626)

2005

0.559
(0.008)

47.563
(0.261)

0.539
(0.008)

0.461
(0.008)

0.112
(0.005)

179.919
(6.674)

2007

0.531
(0.008)

51.840
(0.253)

0.573
(0.008)

0.489
(0.008)

0.117
(0.005)

188.027
(6.727)

2009

0.561
(0.008)

48.434
(0.293)

0.546
(0.008)

0.521
(0.008)

0.116
(0.005)

187.730
(7.004)

2011

0.531
(0.008)

50.763
(0.249)

0.579
(0.008)

0.598
(0.008)

0.124
(0.005)

198.645
(6.850)

2013

0.535
(0.008)

47.821
(0.304)

0.503
(0.008)

0.577
(0.008)

0.137
(0.006)

215.520
(7.310)

Notes: Data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey (48,570). Female takes the value 1 if the respondent is female. Age is the
age in years. Married takes the value 1 if married. College takes the value 1 for College graduates. Oslo takes the value 1 for
Oslo residents. Density corresponds to the population per square kilometer in the county of residence (Statistics Norway, 2011).
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parenthesis.

xxi

Table A.7: Income Inequality by Year
Administrative Data
Gini Index

Norwegian Monitor Survey
Absolute Income

Income Rank

I{Higher Internet}

Year

Gross

Net

Mean

SD

CV

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

1985

40.37

21.00

5.10

2.96

0.581

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

1986

40.47

21.00

1987

40.84

21.00

5.76

3.24

0.563

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

1988

40.72

21.10

1989

40.07

22.80

5.69

3.09

0.543

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

1990

40.58

21.70

1991

41.07

21.90

5.53

3.32

0.600

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

1992

42.59

22.30

1993

43.98

22.90

4.44

2.40

0.540

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

1994

44.35

24.10

1995

44.18

23.60

4.22

2.47

0.586

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

1996

44.36

24.50

1997

44.72

24.90

4.79

2.48

0.518

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

1998

43.59

23.80

1999

43.76

24.20

5.18

2.71

0.524

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

2000

45.57

26.20

2001

43.51

22.90

5.32

2.79

0.524

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

2002

45.30

26.40

2003

46.08

27.40

5.86

3.02

0.516

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

2004

46.90

28.30

2005

50.62

32.70

6.06

3.11

0.513

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

2006

44.67

24.30

2007

45.68

25.20

6.40

3.27

0.511

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

2008

44.90

24.80

2009

44.68

24.10

6.70

3.44

0.513

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

2010

45.13

24.50

2011

45.14

24.70

7.45

3.80

0.510

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

2012

45.22

24.90

2013

45.44

25.00

7.72

4.52

0.585

0.50

0.29

0.50

0.50

Notes: The Gini Index are inequality indeces. The Gross Gini Index is based on gross household income, while the Net Gini Index is based on the net
household income. Both of these measures were obtained from the Chartbook of Economic Inequality and are based on administrative data. The rest of
the outcomes are based on data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey (N=48,570). Absolute Income is the gross household income measured in hundreds
of thousands of Kroner, and converted to 2013 prices with the consumer price index from Statistics Norway. SD stands for standard deviation, and CV
stands for coefficient of variation (i.e., the ratio between the standard deviation and the mean). Income Rank is respondent’s position in the distribution
of Absolute Income in a given year, and I{Higher Internet} is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the respondent’s predicted Internet Access is
above–median – see Table 1 for more detailed data definitions.

xxii

Table A.8: Auxiliary Regression Results: Predictors of Internet Access
Dependent Variable: Internet Access * 100
Female

-9.294∗∗∗
(1.391)

Age

2

0.479∗
(0.266)

Age Squared

Number of HH Members (omitted: 1)

(3.029)
3

-0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)

4

11.688∗∗∗
18.881∗∗∗
(2.732)

College

5+

Number of HH Workers (omitted: 0)
1

2

18.859∗∗∗
(2.794)

-10.327∗∗∗

3+

(2.218)
-7.443∗∗
(3.327)
Separated/Divorced

9.448∗∗∗
(2.609)

Marital Status (omitted: Married)

Single

16.999∗∗∗
(3.945)

30.729∗∗∗
(2.731)

Cohabitant

12.808∗∗∗
(3.656)

(2.920)
High School

13.561∗∗∗
(3.334)

Education (omitted: Primary School)
Middle School

8.449∗∗∗

24.909∗∗∗
(4.055)

Constant

33.856∗∗∗
(8.607)

-4.310
(3.363)

Widowed

2.287
(4.063)

Notes: N = 3, 931. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
in parenthesis. Coefficients of an OLS regression. Internet Access*100 takes the value 100 if
the respondent has Internet access at home and 0 otherwise. Data from the Norwegian Monitor
Survey for the year 2001. The average of the dependent variable is 60.75 percentage points.

xxiii

B

A Simple Model of the Effects of Income Transparency
Through Income Comparisons

This section provides a simple model to illustrate how an increase in income transparency can
increase the gradient between utility and income rank. This model is not intended to capture
all the different forms that income comparisons can take. Instead, it is based on two specific
channels (social-esteem and self-esteem) that have received some attention in the economics
literature.

B.1

The Model

There is a continuum of individuals with a non-degenerate income distribution, where ritrue
denotes the true relative position in the income distribution of individual i.
Intrinsic Utility. We assume that intrinsic utility from income is a linear function of the
true income rank of the individual:
Uiintrinsic = η0 · ritrue

(B.1)

Using this particular functional form for the intrinsic utility function is made just to simplify
the notation – the intuitions would still apply under more standard functional forms, such as
making intrinsic utility equal to the logarithm of absolute income.
We model income comparisons through two distinct channels: self-image utility and socialimage utility. These two sources of utility depend on the social interactions with other individuals from the same population. The incomes of the individuals involved in each interaction
are observable with some exogenous probability ν ∈ [0, 1]. This parameter ν is a reduced-form
representation of the degree of income visibility.58
Social-Image Utility. Each individual is paired with a random individual from the same
population. A third party, the allocator, allocates some social-image utility worth η1 > 0. The
allocator wants to give the social-image utility to the individual in the pair with the higher
income. With probability ν, the allocator can observe the incomes of the two individuals in
the pair, in which case the allocator gives the social-esteem to the individual with the higher
income. With probability 1−ν the allocator cannot observe incomes, in which case the allocator
simply randomizes who gets the social-esteem. As a result, the ex-ante utility from social-image
is the following:
58

We use a unique ν to simplify the notation. In reality, there should be at least two ν’s: one relevant for
the formation of self-image and another for the formation of social-image. For example, it is probably easier
to observe information to infer one’s position in the income distribution, for which it suffices to have access to
aggregate income statistics, than to observe the income of a particular individual.

xxiv

1
· η1
(B.2)
2
By taking the derivative of (B.2) with respect to ritrue , we obtain the gradient between socialimage utility and income. By taking an additional derivative with respect to ν, we show that
this gradient increases with income visibility:
Uisocial = ν · ritrue · η1 + (1 − ν) ·

∂ 2 Uisocial
= η1 > 0
∂ritrue ∂ν

(B.3)

The intuition behind this result is simple. An increase in visibility would make an individual
with a below-median income worse off, because with a higher probability her peers would observe
her income and learn that she is poorer than they would have thought otherwise. On the other
hand, a visibility increase would make an individual with above-median income better off,
because with a higher probability the peers would observe her income and learn that she is
richer than they would have thought otherwise.
Self-Image Utility. Self-image utility is similar to social-image utility, only that the
individual is comparing herself to others rather than being compared by the allocator. The individual is paired with another individual randomly chosen from the population. The individual
must decide whether she deserves some self-image utility worth η2 > 0. Whether the individual
feels deserving of or not depends on whether she thinks she is richer than the individual she is
paired with. With probability ν, she can observe the actual income of the peer, in which case
she gets the self-image utility if and only if her income is higher than the income of the peer.
From an ex-ante perspective, this happens with probability ritrue (i.e., equal to the probability
of being paired with someone poorer). With probability 1 − ν, the income of the paired peer
is not observable, in which case she will get a fraction of the self-image utility, equal to the
perceived probability of being richer than the other individual. Let riself be this prior perceived
probability. We let the prior beliefs be heterogeneous and (possibly) correlated to the actual
income ranks: riself,prior = θ0 + θ1 · ritrue .
Let riself,post be the posterior belief about the own income rank. If the individual learns
rationally, the expectation of the posterior beliefs should be as follows:
riself,post = ν · ritrue · η2 + (1 − ν) · θ · ritrue

(B.4)

Following the evidence on the middle class bias (Cruces, Perez-Truglia and Tetaz, 2013), we
assume θ1 < 1.59 As a result, the ex-ante expected utility from self-image is:

59

To figure out whether θ1 is equal, above or below 1, we can test an intermediate prediction of the model:

∂ 2 riself,post
∂ritrue ∂ν

= (1 − θ1 ). Thus, if θ < 1, we would predict that higher income visibility increases the gradient
between self-perceived income rank and actual income rank.

xxv





Uiself = ν · ritrue · η2 + (1 − ν) · θ0 + θ1 · ritrue · η2

(B.5)

By taking the derivative of (B.5) with respect to ritrue , we obtain the gradient between selfimage utility and income. By taking an additional derivative with respect to ν, we can show
that this gradient is increasing in income visibility:
∂ 2 Uiself
= η2 · (1 − θ1 ) > 0
∂ritrue ∂ν

(B.6)

The intuition for this result is also straightforward. When incomes are more easily observable, poor individuals learn that they are actually poorer than they thought, thus losing
self-image utility; and rich individuals learn that they are actually richer than they thought,
thus gaining self-image utility.
Finally, we can also explore the predictions of this model for the effect of income transparency on average well-being. Regarding social-image, it is straightforward to check that the
average effect is zero. Intuitively, increasing visibility transfers social-image from poor to rich
individuals, but no social-image utility gets created or destroyed in the process. Regarding
self-image, it is straightforward to check that the average effect of higher visibility depends on
whether θ0 is above or below 12 . Intuitively, if θ0 > 12 , it means that on average individuals were
over-estimating their own position in the income distribution. Since the higher transparency
corrects this systematic bias, there is a net loss in utility from self-image. Similarly, if if θ0 < 21 ,
higher visibility would lead to an increase in average happiness; and if the average bias in selfperceived income rank was zero (θ0 = 12 ), then higher income transparency would have no effect
on the average utility from self-image.

B.2

Back-of-the-Envelope Calculations

To simplify the notation, we focus on the most obvious case of θ1 = 0: i.e., if all incomes were
completely unobservable (ν = 0), then self-perceptions about income rank would be orthogonal
to actual income ranks. To obtain the overall utility, we must add up the three sources of utility:
Ui = Uiintrinsic + Uisocial + Uiself . We add ((B.1), (B.2) and (B.5)) up and then re-arrange as
follows:
Ui = (β1 + β2 · ν) · ritrue + i ,


(B.7)


where β1 = η0 , β2 = η1 + η2 and i = (1 − ν) · 12 · η1 + θ0 · η2 . Note that β1 measures
the intrinsic utility from income, while β2 · ν measures the utility from income through income
2 ·ν
comparisons (in this model, self-image and social-image). As a result, β1β+β
measures the
2 ·ν
value of income comparisons relative to intrinsic consumption. Intuitively, in a world where
xxvi

all incomes are unobservable (ν = 0), an increase in one’s income cannot increase the utility
from self-image or social-image. On the other extreme, increasing one’s income has the highest
possible effect on self-image and social-image when incomes are perfectly visible (ν = 1).
Let ν̄t<2001 and ν̄t≥2001 denote the visibility before 2001 and after 2001, respectively. Note that
ν̄t<2001 must be greater than zero, because even when the tax records were private, individuals
could use other means to learn about the incomes of social contacts and about the income
distribution. For instance, individuals could learn about the income distribution from school,
from the media, or by talking with others about wages and consumption. Also, individuals
reveal their own income to their social contacts, or signal it through conspicuous consumption.
Similarly, ν̄t≥2001 must be lower than 1, because even when the tax records were easily accessible
online, there was still a small cost in attention, memory, and time to search those records. Thus,
individuals did not search for the incomes of everyone with whom they interacted. Also, the
online tax lists probably could not make incomes visible among total strangers – to find out
someone’s income in the tax records, you need to know the name of that person.
2 ·νt
, which is the share
We can measure the importance of income comparisons as st = β1β+β
2 ·νt
of the happiness-income gradient that can be explained by income comparisons. Combining the
regression model (1) with (B.7) and re-arranging:

st<2001 =

α2
α1
ν̄t≥2001 −ν̄t<2001
ν̄t<2001

1+

, st≥2001 =

1
ν̄t≥2001 −ν̄t<2001
ν̄t<2001
1+ α12
α1

(B.8)
ν̄

−ν̄

t<2001
The value of income comparisons depends on two parameters: αα12 and t≥2001
. The
ν̄t<2001
first parameter is the proportional growth in the happiness-income gradient as a result of the
change in disclosure in 2001. This is the main parameter estimated in this study. The second
parameter is the effect of the change in disclosure on income visibility. 60 Because we do not
have an estimate of this second parameter, we present results assuming different values for it.
First, we estimate a lower bound for the value of income comparisons. Note that st≥2001 is
strictly increasing in ν̄t<2001 . Thus, by assuming ν̄t<2001 = 0, we can estimate a lower bound on
st≥2001 . This is a conservative lower bound because it is highly unlikely that income information
was completely private before 2001. Assuming that ν̄t<2001 = 0 implies that, after 2001, income
0.090
comparisons explain at least 22% of the happiness-income gradient (i.e., st≥2001 = 0.311+0.090
)
0.122
and 17% of the life satisfaction-income gradient (i.e., st≥2001 = 0.585+0.122 ). These results suggest
that the value of income comparisons is bound to be large.
ν̄
−ν̄t<2001
Second, we estimate an upper bound for the value of income comparisons. As t≥2001
ν̄t<2001
approaches αα12 from above, both st<2001 and st≥2001 converge to 1. That is, a change in visibility

60

The formula for st<2001 from (B.8) can be interpreted as a Wald estimate: i.e., the ratio between the effect
on the happiness-income gradient (i.e., the reduced form effect) and the effect on visibility (i.e., the first stage
effect).

xxvii

of αα21 would imply that income comparisons explain the entire relationship between income and
well-being. In the case of happiness, we would need to assume that visibility increased by 29%
as a result of the change in disclosure. In the case of life satisfaction, we would have to assume
that visibility increased by 21%. Given all the evidence about the widespread use of the search
tool, it seems somewhat unlikely that the publication of tax records increased income visibility
by just 21%. In this sense, our results suggest that income comparisons may not be the only
factor mediating the effect of income on well-being.

xxviii

