NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING THE EUROPEAN VIEW THAT THE U.S. HAS NO UNEMPLOYMENT PROBLEM

Richard B.Freeman

Working Paper No. 2562

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1988

The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Support from The Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged.

NBER Working Paper #2562
April 1988

Evaluating the European View that the U.S. has No Unemploiient Problem

ABSTRACT

This study contrasts the labor market performance of the U.S. and OECD
Europe in the l980s and critically evaluates the view that the U.S. has

generated more jobs because its labor market is more 'flexible'. The study
finds that the greater employment expansion in the U.S. was associated with
slower growth of real wages and productivi ty than in most of OECD Europe

rather than with relatively costless flexibility. It also finds that while
some aspects of relative wage flexibility, for instance in youth versus adult
wages, helped limit U.S. unemployment, other aspects, for instance regional
wage, show no greater flexibility in the U.S. than in the U.K., where labor

markets are allegedly less flexible. Finally, the study argues that the
disparate experiences of the U.K. ,

with

a relatively decentralized labor

market, and Sweden, with a centralized wage-setting system, show that
decentralized labor markets are neither necessary nor sufficient for employmentenhancing wage settlements.

Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

Evaluating the European View that the US has No Unemployment Problem

'A session on unemployment in America? Ridicule! The U.S. has produced
20 million jobs since 1975.
If only Europe had America's flexible labor market
and 'unemployment' ." -- Archetypal European economist, circa 1987.
Significant differences between the unemployment and employment
experiences of the US and OECD-Europe have made views like these popular
overseas and led many European observers to look longingly at the American
labor market as a paragon of decentralized wage and employment flexibility.
Do the labor market performances of the US and OECD-Europe support this

view? How much of the difference between American and European employment and
unemployment can be attributee to differences in labor market 'flexibility'?

In this paper I examine these questions. I review the labor market
outcomes that have led many Europeans to see the American economy as having no
'real' unemployment problem; evaluate the claim that greater labor market
flexibility underlies US-OECD Europe differences in outcomes; and consider the

costs that accompanied American employment expansion. My main claim is that
the US paid for its employment expansion with reduced growth of real wages and

productivity rather than with relatively costless flexibility. I find that
some aspects of flexibility in relative wage setting helped limit US
unemployment while others did not and argue that the disparate experiences of
the UK and Sweden show that a decentralized labor market is neither necessary
nor sufficient for employment-enhancing wage settlements.
Contrasts in Unemployment/Employment Experiences
Three fundamental facts underlie the European view of American unemploy-

ment: first, the l980s reversal of the longstanding pattern of higher rates of
unemployment in the US than in OECD-Europe (fig. lA); second, the growth of
employment in the US, evinced In a rising employment/working age population
ratio compared to a declining ratio in OECD Europe and even more dramatically
in employment rates adjusted for the sizeable drop in annual hours per employee

2

in Europe (fig. 1B); and, third, the relatively short duration of unemployment
spells in the US, where incomplete spells have averaged from 12 to 20 weeks

compared to several years in many OECD European countries (fig. 1C). While
spell lengths differ partly because many US spells end in labor force withdrawal (Clark and Summers) adult male durations are so much longer in Europe
than in the US that this cannot explain the differences (OECD 1987, table R).
Youth unemployment is also widely judged to be a greater problem in Europe
than in the U.S. ,

though differences in schooling and student work behavior

creates problems in comparisons. In some European countries, such as Italy,
Spain, France, and the UK (but not Germany) the ratio of youth to adult
unemployment rates exceeds that for the U.S. The duration of unemployment
among European youths also tend to be quite lortg, exceeding durations for the

young blacks who bear a disproportionate brunt of US unemployment. And OECDEurope had nothing like the US's 1970-1980 6 point increase in the employnient/

population ratio of 16-24 year olds when the influx of baby boomers into the
job market could have created massive youth joblessness.
Less widely recognized, US and European patterns of unemployment also
differ along gender lines, with the rate of female unemployment relatively
lower in the US than in Europe (save for the U1( and Ireland). Because of the
differences in youth and female unemployment rates, adult male unemployment
rates in the US are closer to those in Europe than the average rates shown in
figure 1A, offsetting somewhat the presumptively greater cost of unemployment
in Europe due to the long durations (OECD 1987, table 2).

Turning to growth of employment, there is a widespread belief that US
growth has been concentrated in low-wage Mcdonald's-type service jobs. Some
hail this as the desireable outcome of flexible wage-setting that permits wide

variation in pay among industries, Others view it as a sign of American
economic decline. In fact, there is nothing special about the growth of

3

service sector employment in the US. From 1973 to 1984 OECD data (1986a) show
that the service share of employment rose by 9 percentage points in OECD-Europe
(45% to 54%) compared to an increase of 5 points in the US (63% to 68%).
Moreover, the shift to services has had only a modest impact on average wages,
in part because the service sector includes high-paying professional and

business services as well as burger joints. Perhaps most telling, employment
and wages have grown more in high level than low skill occupations, not what
one would expect if the skill structure was deteriorating.
This said, it is the patterns of unemployment and employment shown in
Figure 1 that has altered European thinking about the American labor market:
"What at the start of the period was being dubbed as a poor labour productivity
performance in the United States was being hailed at the end as an impressive

job creating performance" (OECD,1986b,p.8). Whereas in the 1950s and l960s
analysts rejected textbook claims that decentralized labor market arrangements
work best on the basis of actual outcomes ("you say unfettered labor markets,
but our .

.. arbitration

tribunals (Australia); bargaining with legal extension

(France); shop-floor unionism (UK) ... produce unemployment far below that in
America") in the 1980s the word is flexibility, US style.

So, the question is: to what extent is the US unemployment/employment

record the result of the flexibility of decentralized labor markets? The
answer turns on the ways in which wage-setting and employment determination is
in fact more flexible in the U.S. than in OECD-Europe and on the quantitative

contribution of those aspects of flexibility to employment. It requires
consideration of aggregate wage change and of wage adjustments and labor
mobility along disaggregate industry, occupation, region, etc. lines.

the contribution of macro-flexibility
In terms of aggregate wages, recent studies in the Phillips curve
tradition suggest that wages in the US react less to price changes and more to

4

unemployment than wages in many European countries, producing greater 'real

wage flexibility' (Bruno and Sachs, Coe). As I am uneasy about the robustness
of inferences from these time series regressions, I focus instead on the basic
fact that the US (and Sweden and some other countries) had smaller changes in
real wages in the l970s-early 1980s than most of OECD-Europe and ask: were
these modest wage changes (call them the 'flexible' response to the post-oil
shock economic world) associated with differences in employment growth across

countries? As table 1 shows, conditional on the growth of real GDP (which
increased more rapidly in the US than in OECD-Europe in total but not in per
capita terms), the answer is yes: in each period countries with large increases
in real wages (measured by mfg hourly earnings, employee compensation/employees
or mfg hourly compensation) had smaller growth in employment or total hours

than countries with small wage increases, with elasticities ranging from -O.

to •O.i. As changes in output per worker and wages are highly correlated
across countries, moreover, there is a parallel inverse relation between
employment and productivity growth, with, for example, wages and productivity
growing slowly and employment rapidly in the US and Sweden and the converse
occuring in Belgium, Spain. and in the 1980s the UK, among others.

If one takes country differences in changes in wages as exogenously
determined by labor market institutions (about which I have some doubts) and
assumes similar rates of exogenous productivity advance in the US and OECD-

Europe, the estimated wage-employment trade-off schedule suggests that much of
the US-OECD Europe difference in employment growth was 'paid for' by lower real

wage growth in the U.S. Between 1973 and 1979, for instance, the OECD (1986a)
estimates that compound annual rates of GDP growth differed only modestly
between the US and OECD-Europe (2.6% versus 2.4%) while the difference in
annual growth in manufacturing wages relative to the COP deflator was huge
(1.0% in US versus 4.7% in OECD-Europe), implying a dominant role for the wage-

5

employment trade-off in the difference in employment growth. While from 1979
to 1984 differences in real wage growth lessened (-0.3% in US v 0.3% in OECD-

Europe) cr4

differences

in COP growth widened (2.0% in US v 1.1% in OECD-

Europe) the trade-off still remains important

in the employment story.

Now for problems with this interpretation. First, differences in real

wage growth cannot be firmly tied to specific labor market structures. On the
one hand, as noted, Sweden and some other countries with quite different labor
market institutions than the US had similar slow real wage growth and sizeable
employment expansion, indicating at the minimum that decentralized US style
labor markets were not necessary for real wage moderation (Indeed, the

performance of Scandinavia and Austria has fueled claims that corporatist
economies perform best in this respect). On the other hand, the UK --

which

has the most decentralized and unregulated labor market in OECD-Europe -

- had

sizeable growth of real wages iii the l980s and experienced the employment

consequences thereof. Reinforcing this point, OECD countries with disparate
labor market institutions such as Belgium, Australia, and Italy reduced their
growth of real wages in the early l980s, some with noticeable employment

consequences, but others with no upswing in employment. Second, workers
bargain for money wages while real wages depend on prices as well as wages,
raising the possibility that country differences in price-setting also

contributed to observed differences in real wage patterns across countries. As
Solow has stressed in this context, the trade-off curve can be Interpreted as
reflecting the joint determination of wages and employment by exogenous
aggregate demand factors, suggesting the need to examine differences in those
factors across countries and their relation to the observed changes.

Regardless of how one interprets the evidence in table 1, however, the wageemployment trade-off represents the key fact that any explanation of US and

OECD-Europe differences must

address.

6

the contribution of relative flexibility
Turning to relative wages and employment (where labor economists feel more
comfortable as they can get 'in close' to behavior), the evidence suggests that
along some dimensions the US labor market has evinced flexibility of the kind
likely to be unemployment reducing, while along other dimensions, it has not.
The strongest case for employment-enhancing flexible market responses is

found in the changing wage and employment of young workers. Between 1970 and
1983 when baby-boomers flooded the U.S. job market, the earnings of the young
men fell sharply: real median weekly earnings of workers 16-24 dropped by 25Z
between 1970 and 1985, with the result that the premium of men 25 and older to

the 16-24 year olds jumped from 43% to 90% (US Department of Labor). On the
demand side, the reduced cost of young workers induced employers to increase
the youth share of employment in virtually all industries, from manufacturing

to services. In several European countries, by contrast, the relative wages of
youths rose or remained steady through the l970s-early 1980s. Regressions of
youth unemployment rates on adult unemployment rates and the ratio of youth to
adult pay in a pooled time-series cross-section of OECD countries shows that
countries where relative pay for youths declined, such as the US, had less
youth unemployment than countries without such responses (Bloom and Freeman;

OECD 1986). While the drop in youth wages presumably affected overall
unemployment more modestly (due to substitution among workers of different
ages), it more likely than not dampened total unemployment as well.

Relative wages by region tell a different story. Consider, for example,
the summary data on the relation between pay, changes in pay and unemployment

across geographic units in countries X and Y in table 2: in-f wages are higher
in high unemployment areas and increases in unemployment have no impact on area

wages; in< wages are uncorrelated with unemployment at a point in time and
declined in areas with relatively rising unemployment - -

seemingly

indicative

7

is the

of a more responsive labor market. Who are the mysterious economies?

US, with states as areas. is the UK, with counties as areas. While the
different pattern of wages might be due to differences in labor market

conditions not reflected in unemployment rates, the data seem prima fade to
reject the notion that geographic wage adjustments are more responsive in
unemployment-reducing ways in the US than in the UK.
It is not only along geographic dimensions, moreover, that the US does not
seem to have more flexibility in the labor market than other OECD countries.
While there are sizeable differences in wage differentials between the US and
some countries (e.g. dispersion of industry wages is much smaller in Sweden and

Denmark than in the US), analyses of changes in wages by industry in West
Germany (Bell) and the UK (Freeman,1987) show the same factors altering
relative wages in those countries with similar magnitudes as in the US. In
addition, in the 1980s pay differentials by skill and by age changed at least
as much in the UK as in the US (with no sizeable impact on unemployment).
With respect to mobility, the U.S. labor market evinces enormous short run
changes in employment among establishments, with gross employment flows far
exceeding the net flows that determine whether aggregate employment expands or

contracts (Leonard). A recent OECD analysis (1987, chapter 4) estimates that
the annual rate of 'job turnover' (the sum of gross job gains and gross job
losses among establishment relative to employment) among Pennsylvania esta-

blishments averaged 25.8% from 1976 to 1985. If European labor markets were
less flexible (say because of hiring and firing laws), one would expect smaller

job turnover rates there. But the OECD reports job turnover rates of 23.3% in
France and 23.5% in Sweden. While Germany had a low job turnover rate (16.5%),
Japan had the lowest (7.7%) as well as the lowest unemployment --

fair

warning

to anyone who believes that high mobility is necessary for low unemployment.

Costs of Employment Expansion
If the l970s and 1980s employment growth in the US resulted from

relatively costless flexible' labor market adjustments, the European
assessment of the experience "as an impressive job creating performance" would

be difficult to assail. But the evidence suggests, au contraire, that there
were substantial costs associated with the US expansion. First, the crosscountry analysis of the wage-employment tradeoff suggests that the U.S. paid

for job creation with slow growth in real wages and productivity. The
magnitude of the trade-off was such, moreover, that despite the fact that
employment/population rates and annual hours per employee increased in the US

relative to OECD-Europe, per capita COP grew at the same 1.3% rate. From this
perspective, Americans worked harder for the same gain in living standards as

Europeans. Second, if, as seems reasonable, some persons entered the labor
market in response to low earnings of heads of households (e.g. married women
with children under 1 year of age, whose 1987 participation exceeded 50%),
their employment reflects a worsening not an improvement in economic well-

being. Third, to the extent that the CDP-expansion generated part of
employment growth entailed the 'double deficits' that turned the nation into
the world's greatest debtor, future living standards will be lower, implying an

even higher cost to job creation. Finally, even with employment expansion, the
U.S. unemployment rate was markedly greater in the 1980s than in the 1970s,

which itself exceeded that in the 1960s, while, as noted, unemployment (and
wages) were more unequally distributed along some dimensions than in the past.
In sum, the US paid more for its improved employment and unemployment

position relative to OECD-Europe than is recognized by those who peddle flexible decentralized labor markets, US style, as the l980s Economic Cure-All.

There were pluses to the US experience but there were also costs that make the
change in overall economic well-being not so different than in OECD-Europe.

References
Bell, Linda(1986) "Wage Rigidity in West Germany: A Comparison with the
U.S. " Fed Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review, Autumn 1986, 11-21

Bloom, David and Richard Freeman, (1986) "The Youth Problem: Age or
Generational Crowding". National Bureau of Research Working Paper 1878, 1986
Bruno, Michael and Jeff Sachs, (1985) Economics of Worldwide Stagflation
Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass 1985)
Clark, Kim and Larry Sununers,(1979) "Labor Market Dynamics and

Unemployment: A Reconsideration" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1979
(July 1979)

Coe, D.T.(1985) "Nominal Wages, the NAIRU and Wage Flexibility, OECD
Economic Studies no 5 Autumn 1985
Freeman, Richard,(1987) "Are British Wages Unresponsive to Market

Forces?" London School of Economics, unpublished
(l988)"Labor Market Institutions, Constraints, and Performance"
Economic Policy, forthcoming 1988
Leonard, Jonathan, (1986) "On the Size Distribution of Employment and
Establishments, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1951

A. Neef (1986) "International Trends in Productivity, Labor Costs in
Manufacturing". Monthly Labor Review. December 1986, Vol. 109, num. 12
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development,
-

- -l986a Statisticques Retrospectives, Paris 1986

-

- - l986b Employment Outlook, Paris Sept 1986

---1987 Employment Outlook, Paris Sept 1987
US Department of Labor, "Median Weekly Earnings of Full-TIme Wage and
Salary Workers by Selected Characteristics", various editions
Solow, Robert (1986), "Unemployment: Getting the Questions Right"

Economica Supplement:l986, vol 53 no 210(S) S23-35

10

FIGURE 1:

U.S. - OECD

European Employment and Unemployment Record, 1973—86

0o' of

O
B

Cnoc,,,rf

9' ri I'f L 11 N2 N NI I5 UI
5-BC Pop.Iof.on

OECO-

50
II?3

IN S en

en ii

C O000fO90 04 JflIpIoyOd, 2

b
I

en

UI IL NI Ni
MOoCM 0r4

I

I

II

Ooo

Ill IL UI NI 81 NI 81 Uk

SOURCE:

OECD (1986a and 1937)

OECD—Europe figures in panel B obtained as a weighted average for
countries reporting data with 1985 employment used as weights for

all years. OECD—Europe figures in panel C obtained as weighted
average for all countries reporting data usinn 1985 unemployment
as weights for all years.

Table 1: Regression Coefficients and Standard Errors
For the Impact of Real Wages and Output on Employment,

OECD Countries, i96O-85

A) Dep. Variable: Change in in Employment

1960-73
1973-79
1979-84

Change in
in Real Wane

Change in

R2

.57 (.11)
-.45 (.11)
-.54 (.15)

.62 (.14)

.65
.59
.56

-

in CDP —
.7i (il)
.62 (.19)

B) Dep. Variable: Change In in Empioyment
in
in Real
Labor Costs
-.76(.O5)
-.62 (.10)
-.53 (.16)

Change

i960-73
1973-79
i979-84

Change In
in GDP
______
.90 (.07)
.75 (.13)
.88 (.22)

.94
.74
.53

C) Dep. Variable: Comp. Annual Change, Total Mfg Hrs
Change in
Real Mfg

Change in
Mfg Output

Compensation _________

1960-73
1973-79
1979-85

-.53 (.08)
-.89 (.22)
-.75 (.24)

.62 (.08)
.36 (.22)
.80 (.13)

R1

—
.86
.67

.81

Source: Panels A and 8, 19 OECD countries from London School of Economics
Center for Labour Econontics-OECD data set. Panel C, 12 Countries (US, Canada,
Japan, France, Germany, Italy, UK, Belgium, Denmark, N,etherlands, Norway, and

Sweden) as given by A. Neef (1986), with wages deflated by GNP deflator, using
OECD data.

12

Table 2: Regression Coefficients and Standard Errors
For the Relation of Wages to Unemployment,

by Area: Country X vs Country Y

Dep. Yariables:

1985-79 Change 1985 Unemployment
Rate
in in Wages
Country Country
Country Country

y

x

x

y

Independent variables
1985-79 Change in
unemployment rate

-

.92

(.27)

-

.43

(.30)

in wage/earnings
1985
% employed mfg,l985
1985
education of
workforce,1985

.03

.11

(.06)

(.02)

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

.25

.51

2
R

.39

.51

Notes: For country X there are 61 areas; the wage change
variable is the 1979-85 change in in weekly wage of male
manual workers.

For country Y there are 50 areas; the wage change
variable is the 1979-85 change in in hourly mfg earnings.
Source: R.B. Freeman (1987) and (1988)

