NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCOME CHANGES AND INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE:
EVIDENCE FROM UNCONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFERS IN KENYA
Johannes Haushofer
Charlotte Ringdal
Jeremy P. Shapiro
Xiao Yu Wang
Working Paper 25627
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25627

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019, Revised July 2019

We are deeply grateful to Justin Abraham, Faizan Diwan, Conor Hughes, Victoria Isika, and
James Reisinger for outstanding project management and data analysis. We further thank the
study participants for generously giving their time; Marie Collins, Chaning Jang, Bena Mwongeli,
Joseph Njoroge, Kenneth Okumu, James Vancel, and Matthew White for excellent research
assistance; Allan Hsiao and Emilio Dal Re for data and code auditing; the team of GiveDirectly
(Michael Cooke, Michael Faye, Raphael Gitau, Piali Mukhopadhyay, Paul Niehaus, Joy Sun,
Carolina Toth, Rohit Wanchoo) for fruitful collaboration; Petra Persson for help in designing the
intrahousehold bargaining and domestic violence module; Claire Cullen, Melissa Hidrobo,
Chaning Jang, Urla Krenk, Michala Riis-Vestergaard, Christopher Roth, Anna Tompsett, and
seminar participants at various institutions for comments and discussion. All errors are our own.
This research was supported by NIH Grant R01AG039297 and Cogito Foundation Grant
R-116/10 to Johannes Haushofer. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Johannes Haushofer, Charlotte Ringdal, Jeremy P. Shapiro, and Xiao Yu Wang. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Income Changes and Intimate Partner Violence: Evidence from Unconditional Cash Transfers
in Kenya
Johannes Haushofer, Charlotte Ringdal, Jeremy P. Shapiro, and Xiao Yu Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 25627
March 2019, Revised July 2019
JEL No. C93,D13,O12
ABSTRACT
In a previous study, we found an improvement in female empowerment after randomized
unconditional cash transfers in Kenya (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016). Here we report detailed
impacts of these transfers on physical and sexual intimate partner violence, and construct a theory
to explain them. Transfers to women averaging USD 709 reduced physical and sexual violence
(-0:26, -0:22 standard deviations). Transfers to men reduced physical violence (-0:18 SD). We
find spillovers: physical violence towards non-recipient women in treatment villages decreased
(-0:16 SD). We show theoretically that transfers to both men and women are needed to
understand why violence occurs. Our theory suggests that husbands use physical violence to
extract resources, but dislike it, while sexual violence is not used to extract resources, but is
pleasurable.
Johannes Haushofer
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
427 Peretsman-Scully Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540
and Busara Center for Behavioral Economics,
Nairobi, Kenya
and also NBER
haushofer@princeton.edu
Charlotte Ringdal
University of Amsterdam
Faculty of Economics and Business
Roetersstraat 11
Room #E7.30
PO Box 15867
1001 NJ Amsterdam
c.ringdal@uva.nl

Jeremy P. Shapiro
Busara Center for Behavioral Economics
Daykio Plaza
Nairobi, Kenya
jeremy.shapiro@busaracenter.org
Xiao Yu Wang
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
xy.wang@duke.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/19

1.

Introduction

Forty-two percent of women in Kenya aged 20–44 report having experienced physical or sexual violence from their current partner (Hindin, Kishor, and Ansara 2008).
To design policies that effectively reduce the incidence of violence, we must first
understand why it happens. How IPV responds to changes in economic variables
for either partner can contribute to building this understanding. A previous study
reported improvements in female empowerment following unconditional cash transfers in Kenya (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016). Here, we report additional results
from this study, including detailed effects on physical and sexual IPV, and construct
a theory to elucidate the underlying motives for IPV.1
Why do husbands engage in IPV? Existing literature distinguishes two motives,
which may work independently or in concert: instrumental and expressive. Violence
(threatened or realized) is said to be instrumental when it is used by husbands to
extract resources from the wife to increase their own consumption (Tauchen, Witte,
and Long 1991; Farmer and Tiefenthaler 1997; Eswaran and Malhotra 2011).2 In
contrast, violence is expressive when it contributes directly to the husband’s utility
(Tauchen, Witte, and Long 1991). These non-pecuniary returns can be positive
or negative: husbands may derive direct pleasure from engaging in violence, e.g. as
a way assert dominance, or in the case of sexual violence. In such cases, violence
is “expressively pleasurable”. Conversely, husbands may find the use of violence
displeasing, for example, because he cares for the wife, or because of stigma. Here,
1

We focus on violence perpetrated by the husband against the wife because it accounts
for the majority of violence, both in this context and in others. The previous paper used a
gatekeeper strategy, i.e. it first tested effects of the program on a set of index variables, and
then explored those indices in more detail that survived correction for multiple comparisons.
We found significant effects on the female empowerment index in treatment compared to control
villages, that survived correction for multiple comparisons across all index variables. In the
original paper, this effect could not be explored further due to space constraints. This is the
purpose of the present paper. Note that, like in the previous paper and as pre-specified in our
PAP, we do not correct for multiple comparisons across variables within a family of outcomes.
2
Some authors use the term “extractive” violence to refer specifically to the extraction of
resources (Bloch and Rao 2002). This is a specific example of instrumental violence, which is
a broader concept and can also include violence to control the wife’s behavior and achieve control
of decisions in the household (Hidrobo, Peterman, and Heise 2016). We focus on extractive
instrumental violence because other types of instrumental violence can be expressed as extractive
as long as transfers are possible.

2

violence is “expressively distasteful”. 3
In addition to the husband’s motives, equilibrium violence is also determined
by the wife’s participation constraint. This constraint reflects the woman’s outside
option, which is affected endogenously by instrumental violence; and her “empowerment”, a function that captures the effect of norms on a woman’s disutility from
violence.4
How can we determine which motives are most salient in explaining equilibrium
violence? In this paper, we present a theory which shows how income changes to
both spouses can be used to make inferences about the motives underlying violence.
Our framework allows all of the motives and channels described above to be at
play: First, changes in income may (endogenously) affect the degree to which the
husband extracts income from the wife. Second, changes in income may affect the
degree to which the husband has a direct taste or distaste for violence. Finally,
changes in income may affect the degree to which the wife tolerates violence instead
of leaving the marriage. Tolerance reflects empowerment, both in the sense that
the wife may not have enough resources to escape, and in the sense that she may
view domestic violence as “normal”.
Our main results show that studying the impact of cash transfers to the wife
alone is insufficient for learning about the husband’s motives for violence. In contrast, the sign of the impact on IPV of cash transfers to both the husband and the
wife can be used to identify pecuniary and/or non-pecuniary returns to violence, i.e.
whether violence is purely instrumental, purely expressive, both, or neither. Our empirical results show that unconditional cash transfers to the husband and to the wife
3

Note that theories of “male backlash”, which have been proposed in psychology, are also
special cases of instrumental and expressive violence. Male backlash refers to cases where the
husband engages in violence in response to an increase in (financial) empowerment of the wife
(Tankard and Paluck 2016; Buller et al. 2018). If such “backlash violence” is used to extract
income or otherwise force the spouse to conform to his preferences, it is instrumental; if it is
used to restore his bruised ego without any economic consequences, it is expressive. In our theory,
we allow for the former case, i.e. the possibility that the husband’s preferred level of violence
increases in the wife’s income because it is more profitable to extract resources from a wealthier
wife. However, this restriction is merely for convenience, and it would be straightforward to
extend the theory to cover expressive backlash violence.
4
Of course, norms may also affect the husband’s (dis)utility from violence; this is captured
in our expressive channel.

3

both reduced violence. Using our theory, we infer that there are pecuniary and nonpecuniary returns to violence: specifically, IPV is instrumental, but the husband has
a direct distaste for it. This result yields substantively different policy recommendations than, for example, a situation where IPV is not instrumental, but the husband
derives direct pleasure from it. We also discuss how different types of violence (e.g.,
physical vs. sexual) may be differentially instrumental and expressive. In particular,
our theory shows that our empirical results suggest that physical violence may be primarily instrumental, while sexual violence may be primarily expressive (pleasurable).
These results suggest different policy approaches to reduce different types of violence.
Our second set of results considers the possibility of within-household transfers
(to reduce confusion between our experimental transfers and the theoretical possibility of transfers between spouses, we refer to the former as “cash transfers” and the
latter as “within-household transfers”). We show that, in a framework with feasible
within-household transfers, the fact that violence exists in the status quo implies
that violence must be expressively pleasurable for the husband (rather than expressively distasteful, as we conclude in the case of limited to no transfers). However, in
such a case, it must be that transfers to the husband particularly lead to an increase
in the husband’s private consumption. Intuitively, when transfers are feasible, the
husband always fully extracts surplus from the wife, because his utility is always
strictly increasing in money extracted through non-violent means. Thus, the wife’s
participation constraint defines an indifference curve over bundles of violence and
transfers: lower levels of violence necessarily correspond to higher transfers. Hence,
the husband’s consumption must rise if violence falls following a transfer to the
husband. However, empirically, we observe no effect on husband’s consumption.
Thus, we infer that within-household transfers play a limited role in our context.
Our third set of results describes how the relative magnitudes of the impact
of transfers to the wife versus the husband shed light on whether violence is more
effectively reduced by decreasing the husband’s demand for it, or by decreasing the
wife’s tolerance of it. For example, we show that if a transfer to the wife reduces
IPV by more than an equivalent transfer to the husband, then the dominant
factors determining violence in the status quo are related to women’s resources and
empowerment, i.e. a combination of women lacking the financial and psychological
4

ability to leave violent marriages. Thus, policy that targeted these areas might
be more effective than policies that focus on making husbands better off. Finally,
we sketch an extension of our model which allows for spillovers of reductions in
domestic violence to neighboring households through social norms.
Our empirical evidence on the effect of income changes on IPV comes from a
randomized controlled trial on unconditional cash transfers with about 1500 households in western Kenya. Effects of the program on economic and psychological
wellbeing variables have already been reported in a previous paper (Haushofer
and Shapiro 2016). That paper also included reduced-form impacts on a female
empowerment index, which was a standardized weighted average of a group of
variables which included indices of physical and sexual violence. In the present
paper we report the detailed impacts that were previously summarized in this index.
Between 2011 and 2013, the NGO GiveDirectly, Inc. made unconditional cash
transfers of, on average, USD 709 PPP, corresponding to about two years of per
capita expenditure, to households in western Kenya using the mobile money system
M-Pesa. Recipients were chosen for meeting a basic means test criterion, did not
expect the transfers, and were explicitly informed that they were unconditional.
We randomized at the village level, the household level within villages, and whether
transfers were sent to the man or the woman in the household.5
In female recipient households, transfers led to a significant reduction in both
physical (0.26 SD) and sexual (0.22 SD) violence. Women in male recipient households report a statistically significant 0.18 SD reduction in physical violence. In
contrast, sexual violence was not significantly reduced when the husband received
money.6 Together with our theory, these results suggest that violence is used
instrumentally, but that physical violence is expressively distasteful; sexual violence,
however, may be expressively pleasurable. Our results further suggest that transfers
5

Additional randomization arms were the magnitude of the transfer (USD 404 PPP vs. USD
1525 PPP) and the timing of the transfer (lump-sum transfer vs. nine monthly installments);
however, in this paper, we focus on the randomization of recipient gender.
6
Social desirability bias or reciprocity is unlikely to account for the improvements in
treatment households because participants were informed by the survey team that the survey
was independent of the intervention. Participants thus had no incentive to deceive field officers.
The fact that several important outcomes, such as health and education, did not show treatment
effects suggests that social desirability bias or reciprocity motives did not play an important role.

5

to the wife primarily reduce IPV by reducing her tolerance of it, while transfers
to the husband reduce IPV by reducing his marginal taste for it.
A further unresolved question about the effect of cash transfers on domestic
violence is whether they affect not only recipient, but also non-recipient households.
In standard economic models, such spillovers would only occur in the presence of
economic spillovers. In contrast, social norms may respond to cash transfers in both
recipient and non-recipient households even in the absence of economic spillovers. If
IPV is reduced in recipient households due to improvements in the wife’s bargaining
power or her outside option (Almås et al. 2018), this reduction might translate
into a change in the perceived prevalence and/or perceived justifiability of IPV.7 If
non-recipients are motivated to conform to these norms, we might expect a change
in IPV even in non-recipient households and in the absence of economic spillovers.
Our two-stage randomization design allows us to study the spillovers of transfers
on non-recipients in the same villages by comparing “spillover” to “pure control”
households. Non-recipient women in treatment villages show an increase of 0.19
SD in the female empowerment index, driven by a 0.16 SD reduction in physical
violence, although no significant reduction in sexual violence (−0.11 SD). These
findings suggest that the reduction of IPV through cash transfers in recipient
households may lead to a change in social norms. In line with this hypothesis,
women in both treatment and spillover households are somewhat less likely to view
IPV as permissible, although these effects are weak and only statistically significant
for a small subset of outcome variables, and not for a norms index.8
7

In social psychology, perceived prevalence is referred to as descriptive norm, while perceived
justifiability is referred to as prescriptive norm (Tankard and Paluck 2016).
8
One concern with these spillover findings is that treatment and spillover households were
surveyed twice, while pure control households were surveyed once. It is possible that being surveyed
at baseline raised awareness of domestic violence in treatment and spillover households, and led to
a change in its incidence simply for this reason, and independently of the cash transfer (Zwane et al.
2011). To rule out this possibility, we conducted a separate “survey effects” experiment, in which
we asked whether a survey in the absence of any other treatment reduces subsequent reports of
IPV. Specifically, we re-administered the same survey to the pure control group two years after the
initial endline survey, and additionally administered the survey to a new sample of 500 households,
randomly chosen from the same population, at the same time. Because neither group receive any
interventions other than the survey, this design allows us to estimate the effects of the initial survey
in the pure control group on responses in the second administration of that same survey. We find
no evidence of survey effects; the coefficients are economically small and statistically insignificant.

6

This study contributes to a growing empirical literature on the effect of economic
variables on IPV. The evidence on the effects of economic changes that mainly affect
women on IPV is mixed: Previous studies have shown that improved outside options
for women due to changes in divorce laws (Stevenson and Wolfers 2006) or reductions
in the wage gap (Aizer 2010) lead to lower levels of violence against women. Several
studies of the Oportunidades program, which made conditional cash transfers to
women in Mexico, have found reductions in domestic violence against women in beneficiary households (Angelucci 2008; Bobonis, Gonzalez-Brenes, and Castro 2013).
Similarly, Hidrobo and Fernald (2013) and Hidrobo, Peterman, and Heise (2016)
show that transfers of cash and food significantly reduce physical and emotional
violence against women in Ecuador. On the other hand, a study in Bangladesh
found that cash transfers only reduced violence when combined with behavior
change communication (Roy et al. 2018). In addition, women may receive more
non-violent threats from their partners as a result of participating in Oportunidades
(Bobonis 2009), and large cash transfers may increase violence perpetrated by men
with traditional views on gender roles (Angelucci 2008). Relatedly, Tankard (2016)
finds that an economic empowerment program for women in Colombia leads to an
increase in IPV among women who experienced baseline IPV. Our study contributes
an additional datapoint to these disparate findings. In addition, previous studies
have not directly estimated the empirical effect of income changes of the husband on
IPV. Heath, Hidrobo, and Roy (2018) study Mali’s national cash transfer program
to heads of households, most of whom are men, but their focus is on comparing the
impact on IPV in polygamous vs. non-polygamous households. Our study builds
on this work by directly estimating and comparing the effect of cash transfers to the
husband and the wife. We then use both of these estimates to identify underlying
motives of violence, which is key for guiding policy design in our context.
Our study further contributes to the theoretical literature on IPV. A number
of models of intimate partner violence have been proposed, and between them,
they describe many of the mechanisms which we discuss in this paper: When the
wife’s income increases, violence may decrease if the extra income improves the
wife’s outside option or otherwise raises her participation constraint in the marriage
(Tauchen, Witte, and Long 1991; Farmer and Tiefenthaler 1997; Eswaran and
7

Malhotra 2011; see also Buller et al. 2018).9 Conversely, violence may increase if
the husband wants to extract some of the additional income from her or otherwise
align outcomes with his preferences (Tauchen, Witte, and Long 1991; Eswaran and
Malhotra 2011; see also Tankard 2016).10 When the husband’s income increases,
violence may increase if the husband derives utility from it and now can “afford” more
of it (Tauchen, Witte, and Long 1991; Farmer and Tiefenthaler 1997; Eswaran and
Malhotra 2011). Conversely, violence may decrease if the husband dislikes violence
(Eswaran and Malhotra 2011) or if transfers to the husband improve the wife’s
outside option (e.g. through divorce settlements; Farmer and Tiefenthaler 1997).
However, the existing models study each of these possible motives for violence in
partial isolation. By contrast, we model all of these motives in a single framework.
Specifically, we allow violence to be either expressively pleasurable, which is how
Tauchen, Witte, and Long (1991) and Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1997) model it; or
expressively distasteful, which is how Eswaran and Malhotra (2011) conceive of it.
Similarly, we allow for instrumental violence, which e.g. Farmer and Tiefenthaler
(1997) do not. Thus, we nest the other models as special cases and allow for
multiple motives to operate and interact in explaining the incidence of violence.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the
theoretical model. Section 3 describes the intervention, the experimental design,
and the econometric approach. Section 4 presents the impacts of the program on
IPV and related outcomes. Section 5 concludes.

9

Buller et al. (2018) present a thorough review of the evidence on the effect of cash transfers
on IPV, and propose three mechanisms by which cash transfers may affect violence: first, they
may improve economic security, e.g. in terms of food security, and thereby lead to an increase in
emotional well-being which then reduces IPV. Second, they may increase the availability of cash
to meet daily needs, and thereby reduce conflict in the relationship; but also possibly increase
conflict due to increased availability of money for temptation goods. Finally, they may lead to
empowerment of women, e.g. through financial autonomy or increased self-confidence, which
may reduce violence, but can also lead to backlash. As will become clear below, all of these
mechanisms can be accommodated in our framework.
10
Less directly related is the model of Bloch and Rao (2002), in which the husband can use
violence to extract money from the wife’s family rather than the wife herself; and that of Pollak
(2004), who models the intergenerational transmission of violence without particular attention
to whether it is used instrumentally vs. expressively.

8

2.

Theoretical framework

2.1

General set-up

Consider a one-period, two-person household in which husband (H) and wife
(W ) earn separate, exogenously-given incomes, yH and yW .11 Both spouses have
increasing and concave utility functions, uH (c) and uW (c). In addition to private
consumption, each may also derive (dis)utility from violence. This (dis)utility can
be pecuniary, through the effects of violence on consumption, and/or non-pecuniary.
Let f(v,yW ) capture the pecuniary, or “instrumental” motive for violence.12 This
function describes how much income a husband using violence level v extracts from
a wife with income yW . The dependence of f(v,yW ) on v captures the instrumentality of violence. Violence is “instrumental” if fv > 0 and “not instrumental” if
fv =0.13 We make no assumption about fvyW .
Second, domestic violence can be expressive, i.e. H may derive direct (dis)utility
from violence (non-pecuniary returns). Let g(v,yH ) denote the husband’s (dis)utility
from IPV. When gv >0, we say that violence is expressively pleasurable: the husband derives more direct utility from higher levels of violence. Conversely, when
gv < 0, violence is expressively distasteful: the husband derives less direct utility
from higher levels of violence. If gv = 0, we say that violence is not expressive.14
We make no assumption about gvyH .
The wife derives disutility from violence, both directly and indirectly through
the reduction in her consumption if violence is used to extract her resources. Let
11

We study exogenous incomes since our experiment gives unconditional cash transfers to
H and W .
12
Let f(v,yW ) be continuous in both its arguments, and f(v,yW ) ≤ yW , f (0,yW ) = 0, and
f(v,0)=0.
13
For clarity in distinguishing “instrumental” from “non-instrumental” violence, it is easiest to
think of f(v,yW ) as monotonically increasing or flat in v. However, the same intuition applies when
f is locally monotonic. For example, it could be that f(v,yW ) is increasing over v <v̄, and not
after — then violence is instrumental up to the point v̄, otherwise not instrumental, and our results
still apply. We can also allow for fv <0 over some interval, but we exclude f(v,yw ) monotonically
decreasing in v on the grounds that it appears implausible that no violence is much more extractive
than some violence. We do consider the possibility of non-violent within-household transfers in 2.3.
14
As with f, note that local monotonicity is sufficient, e.g. violence is expressively pleasurable
if g(v,yH ) is increasing in v in the neighborhood around the status quo level of violence.

9

h(v,yW ) describe the wife’s direct, non-pecuniary disutility from violence, where
h(0,yW )=0. In contrast to g(v,yH ), h(v,yW ) is always increasing in violence v. We
make no assumption about hvyW . Let uW (yW ;v) denote the wife’s outside option,
where ūW (yW ;v) decreases in v, and ūW (yW )≤uW (yW ) so that her participation
constraint, PW , is satisfied when there is no violence.
Then, the equilibrium level of violence solves the following program:15

maxv≥0uH (yH +f(v,yW ))+g(v,yH )
s.t.PW :uW (yW −f(v,yW ))−h(v,yW )≥ uW (yW ;v)

(1)
(2)

Crucially, observe that the wife’s participation constraint PW does not necessarily
bind in equilibrium. For example, suppose that the husband has a strong distaste
for violence (g0(v)<0). Then his unconstrained choice of violence may be lower than
the level that binds PW . However, if the husband derives pleasure from violence
(g0(v)≥0), then PW always binds in equilibrium because he exerts as much violence
as the wife will tolerate without leaving. Notationally, we denote the husband’s
unconstrained choice of violence vH , and the maximal level of violence the woman
tolerates before leaving the marriage, vW (this is the level that binds PW ).
The framework can also accommodate more nuanced motives for violence. One
such motive is stress, which our framework captures if v and yh are weak substitutes
in the expressive, non-pecuniary term g(v,yH ). This causes v and yh to be weak
substitutes in the husband’s total utility (the maximand), as a consequence of
diminishing marginal returns to consumption.16 Thus, poorer men, who are more
stressed, get higher marginal utility from violence. This captures the idea from
existing literature that the husband may use violence to release stress, e.g. from
having a low income. In contrast, a wealthier husband may derive less marginal
pleasure from violence because he is less stressed. Conversely, if v and yH are
strong complements in the husband’s expressive, non-pecuniary term, then v and
15

As is customary, we assume conditions for the existence of a unique interior solution. For
example, fvv ≥0, gvv ≤0, and hvv ≥0 are sufficient.
16 ∂[uH (yH +f(v,yW ))+g(v,yH )]
=u00H fv +gvyH <0 if gvyH ≤0.
∂v∂yH

10

yH will be complements in the husband’s total utility, capturing the possibility
that wealthier husbands derive greater pleasure from violence. These are just a
few additional channels that our framework can accommodate, even though we
explicitly model only the basic instrumental and expressive channels.
In our benchmark model, we do not allow for within-household transfers. We
extend the theory to allow for this possibility in Section 2.3.

2.2

Determining the underlying motives for violence

Our main results show how the responses of violence to cash transfers to both the
husband and the wife enable us to identify and distinguish the motives underlying
equilibrium violence.
First, we observe that cash transfers to the wife alone are insufficient for determining whether violence is purely instrumental, purely pleasurable, instrumental
and pleasurable, or instrumental and distasteful.
Result 1. (a) An increase in IPV following cash transfers to the wife is consistent with violence being purely instrumental, purely pleasurable, instrumental and
pleasurable, and instrumental and distasteful.
(b) A decrease in IPV following cash transfers to the wife is consistent with
violence being purely instrumental, purely pleasurable, instrumental and pleasurable,
and instrumental and distasteful.
First suppose that cash transfers to the wife increase IPV. Cash transfers could
relax her participation constraint (e.g. because her consumption within the marriage
is higher at the original level of violence). Then violence may be purely pleasurable
— the husband is able to use more violence without violating the participation
constraint. Violence may also be purely instrumental — the wife becomes a more
valuable target for extraction. Clearly, violence may also be instrumental and
pleasurable, or instrumental and distasteful, as long as the marginal gains from
extraction outweigh the marginal direct disutility from violence.
Now suppose that cash transfers to the wife decrease IPV. Cash transfers could
tighten her participation constraint (for example, because she is more empowered,
both literally and in terms of norms, and receives greater disutility from experi-

11

encing violence). Even if violence is purely pleasurable, the husband must decrease
v in order to satisfy the wife’s participation constraint. The same is true if violence
is purely instrumental, or instrumental and pleasurable. If violence is instrumental
and distasteful, it could be the woman’s tightened participation constraint that
causes equilibrium violence to fall, or it could be that the marginal distaste cost
now outweighs the marginal gains from extraction for the husband, if a given level
of violence extracts more money from a wealthier wife.
The crucial insight from the preceding discussion is that transfers to the wife,
regardless of how they affect violence, do not allow us to determine the motives
underlying violence. Our main contribution, described next, is to show that transfers to the husband do allow us to gain such insights. In describing how transfers
to the husband can be used to make inferences about the motives for violence, we
foreshadow our empirical results to some extent, because they narrow down the
set of possible motives. They are presented in detail in Section 4.
We immediately rule out the case where violence is neither instrumental nor
expressive (fv =0 and gv =0), because then we should never observe violence in the
status quo. This is inconsistent with baseline and control group levels of violence,
which are high (cf. Section 4). This leaves four cases: (i) violence is instrumental
and weakly expressively pleasurable, fv >0,gv ≥0; (ii) violence is not instrumental
and is expressively pleasurable, fv = 0, gv > 0; (iii) violence is not instrumental
and is expressively distasteful, fv =0,gv <0; and (iv) violence is instrumental and
expressively distasteful: fv >0,gv <0.
Result 2. If violence is weakly expressively pleasurable (gv ≥0; cases (i) and (ii)),
then a cash transfer to the husband has no effect on the equilibrium level of violence.
If the husband derives pleasure from violence, transfers to him cannot affect
violence in equilibrium. If g0(v)≥0, then H’s total utility is strictly increasing in v
(because either gv >0 and fv ≥0, or gv =0 and fv >0). Intuitively, if the husband’s
utility is higher the more violence he uses, then he is already exerting as much
violence as the wife will tolerate in the status quo, and giving him money will not
affect this. More precisely, violence in the status quo is disciplined only by the wife’s
maximal tolerance. That is, v∗ =vW , the level that makes W exactly indifferent
between staying and leaving. But the wife’s participation constraint does not depend
12

directly on yH (yH only enters indirectly, through its effect on v∗). Thus, a cash
transfer to the husband does not change vW , and by implication, does not change v∗.
What happens if yH does change the wife’s participation constraint, for example,
because within-household transfers are feasible, or because a portion of the increase
in yH accrues to the wife through some process? We explicitly consider withinhousehold transfers in 2.3 and show that violence increases because the husband will
use his cash transfer to buy more violence from his wife. If the wife captures some of
yH , and this tightens her participation constraint, a strictly violence-loving husband
will respond by increasing violence to decrease her outside option. Thus, these
extensions all suggest that if gv ≥0, a cash transfer to the husband will increase IPV.
Given that we find empirically that cash transfers to H do have an effect on
violence, in fact, they decrease violence, we rule out gv ≥ 0. That is, husbands
appear to find violence distasteful: gv <0.
Given that gv <0, what can we then infer about the instrumentality of violence?
Result 3. If violence is expressively distasteful (gv <0) and not instrumental
(fv =0), then v∗ =0, i.e. H never chooses positive levels of violence.
If violence is distasteful but not instrumental, then H’s utility is strictly decreasing in violence. But then we should never observe violence. Since we do observe
non-zero levels of violence in the control group and at baseline, we must conclude
that violence, while distasteful, enables H to extract some income from W , which
increases his utility by increasing his consumption.
In light of Results 2 and 3, we conclude that, in our setting, fv >0 and gv <0:
violence is instrumental and expressively distasteful. In other words, the pecuniary
returns are positive, but the non-pecuniary returns are negative.
These results are summarized in Table C1, which describes the effect of a cash
transfer to the husband on equilibrium violence for each of our cases.
It is important to note that these results do not suggest that we do not need
to study the impact of cash transfers to the wife on IPV. Rather, the point is
that we need both. While the effect of cash transfers to the husband is critical for
understanding the instrumental vs. expressive channels, the wife’s participation
constraint is an essential determinant of equilibrium violence and thus a key piece
of the policy puzzle. For example, cash transfers to the husband tell us that
13

in our setting, violence is both instrumental and expressively distasteful. This
helpfully rules out policies that would make sense if violence were purely pleasurable.
However, as C1 shows, in this case, cash transfers to the husband can theoretically
increase or decrease IPV. So, why did our experiment result in a decrease?
To understand this, we must turn to the impact of cash transfers to the wife.
Result 4. A cash transfer to the wife decreases equilibrium violence if violence
and wife’s income are complements in the wife’s disutility from violence (hvyW >0),
the wife’s outside option is convex in her resources, and violence and wife’s income
are weak complements in the extractive technology (i.e. fvyw >0).
Note that this is a sufficient, but not necessary set of conditions; it is possible
for a cash transfer to the wife to decrease equilibrium violence even if some of these
conditions do not hold.
The intuition is as follows. A transfer to the wife reduces her maximallytolerated violence if the increase in her income exposes her to norms that are less
tolerant of IPV, or empowers her to feel less tolerant of IPV, or gives her more
resources to leave a bad marriage. Moreover, if an additional “unit” of violence yields
a much higher pecuniary return when the wife is wealthier, then the husband does
not need to use as much violence to extract the same level of consumption. Since
the husband has both a distaste for violence and diminishing marginal returns to
consumption, this puts downward pressure on the level of violence he prefers to use.
If we had instead observed that a transfer to the wife increased IPV, then that
would tell us that in this context, cash infusions to the wife do not empower her or
increase her ability to leave bad marriages. Rather, they are co-opted by the husband
and/or only serve to make her a more valuable target for extraction, which would
be essential to know for policy design. We discuss this possibility further in 2.3.
Finally, observe that the husband’s underlying motives for different “types” of
violence may be different, so that it may be important to study distinct types of
violent behavior, rather than looking only at “pooled” violence. For example, we
find empirically that a cash transfer to the wife decreases both physical and sexual
violence, while a cash transfer to the husband decreases only physical violence and
has no effect on sexual violence (see Section 4). Using our Result 2, we conclude that
gvphysical<0 but gvsexual > 0: the husband derives expressive distaste from physical
14

violence, but expressive pleasure from sexual violence. In addition, physical violence
is likely more extractive of consumption than sexual violence; this is why the husband
reduces his use of physical violence following a cash infusion, but not his use of sexual
violence. Why does a cash transfer to the wife reduce both types of violence? Using
our Result 4, we conclude that the cash transfer to the wife tightens her participation
constraint by empowering her to reject both types of violence, and/or by increasing
her resources to escape a violent marriage. Hence, in our context, physical violence
may be primarily instrumental, while sexual violence may be primarily expressive.
To reduce the former, cash transfers to the husband may be more effective, while
cash transfers to the wife may be more effective at reducing the latter.
Appendix A3 presents a numerical example and a graphical representation of
the benchmark model. Appendix A also presents additional results describing what
we can further learn about the underlying motives of violence by examining not
only the signs, but the relative magnitudes of the impact of cash transfers to the
wife and the husband on IPV.

2.3

Within-household transfers

In our benchmark model, we have abstracted away from the possibility of withinhousehold transfers. But what if, in addition to a level of violence, the husband
and wife can also “agree” on a feasible transfer between themselves? Existing
models of household decision-making often allow for transfers; we therefore modify
our benchmark model to allow for transfers t from the wife to the husband. The
maximization program is now:
maxuH (yH +f(v,yW )+t)+g(v,yH ) s.t.
v≥0,t

PW :uW (yW −f(v,yW )−t)−h(v,yW )≥ ū(yW −f(v,yW )−t)
t∈[−yH ,yW ]
Let the wife’s outside option be uW (yW ;v)=ruW (yW ;v),r ∈(0,1). This reflects
the extra cost of using resources to escape a bad marriage, rather than simply
consuming the resources and staying.
15

Note that this is a cooperative model and that the outcome will be Paretoefficient.
Lemma 1. The wife’s participation constraint always binds when withinhousehold transfers are feasible.
Observe that H’s utility is strictly increasing in t, while W ’s utility is strictly
decreasing in t. Essentially, the husband always likes money he can receive frictionlessly. Clearly, v = 0 and t = yW always binds PW . Thus, H will always fully
extract surplus using t. The worst he can do (from the point of view of the wife’s
welfare) is to consume both yH and yW and use no violence.
Given this, rearrange the binding PW to express the within-household transfer
t in terms of v:
h(v,yW )
uW (yW −f(v,yW )−t)=
1−r
Because u(c) is strictly increasing and continuous, it is invertible. Moreover,
since uc >0, it follows that u−1
c >0. Thus:
t(v)=yW −f(v,yW )−u−1
W



h(v,yW )
1−r



Substituting this expression into the maximand yields:



−1 h(v,yW )
maxuH yH +yW −uW
+g(v,yH )
v≥0
1−r
h

i
h(v,yW )
Notationally, call this maximand UH (v;yH,yW )=uH yH +yW −u−1
+
W
1−r
g(v,yH ).
We obtain the following results.
Result 5. If violence is expressively distasteful (gv <0), then there is no violence
in equilibrium, and spousal income changes do not affect violence.
If gv < 0, UH clearly decreases in v. Intuitively, if violence is expressively
distasteful for H, then the husband will always “extract” consumption from the
wife non-violently, via within-household transfers; this is cheaper for him than
extraction through violence. The wife “agrees” to transfer the husband the money,

16

because t=yW and v =0 satisfies PW .17
Thus, if within-household transfers are at play, our empirical finding that a
cash transfer to the husband reduced IPV rules out violence being expressively
distasteful, in stark contrast with our benchmark model.
Result 6. There exists a positive constant c such that, if gv >> c, then cash
transfers to the husband increase violence.
If gv >>c, then UH increases in v. In other words, H’s marginal utility from
v (which yields pecuniary benefits through extraction, as well as the non-pecuniary
benefit of pleasure) is greater than his utility from increasing consumption c nonviolently (u0H (c)). In this case, he uses all of his money to “buy
from
 violence”

−1 h(v,yW )
the wife: t = −yH , and v satisfies yH + yW = f(v,yW ) + u
. (This is
1−r
the maximal level of violence H can use without violating PW .) Clearly, the only
constraint to violence in equilibrium is how much H can afford. If he receives a
cash transfer, then yH rises and he can afford more violence, so violence increases.
This contradicts our empirical findings, so we can rule this case out.
Result 7. Suppose gv >0 for v <ṽ, while gv ≤0 for v ≥ ṽ; i.e., violence is expressively pleasurable up to some level of violence, and thereafter weakly expressively
distasteful. Then:
(a) A cash transfer to H decreases violence iff gvyH <0.
(b) A cash transfer to W decreases violence iff hvyW >0.
For ease of notation, denote the consumption of H and W as:
cH ≡yH +yW −u−1
W
cW ≡u−1
W



h(v,yW )
1−r



h(v,yW )
1−r





Then the (necessary and sufficient) first-order condition with respect to v is:


1 ∂uH
∂u−1
h(v,yW ) ∂h
∂g
W
F OCv :−
(cH )
(v,yW )+ (v,yH )=0
1−r ∂c
∂c
1−r
∂v
∂v

17

Note that it is not the case that the wife has no bargaining power; her outside option is
her threat point.

17

Remark. Since the first term is clearly negative, this implies that
1
Because (u−1)0(a)= u0(u−1
, we can rewrite F OCv as:
(a))
1
1−r

∂uH
(cH )
∂c
=
∂uW
(c
)
W
∂c

∂g ∗
(v ,yH )>0.
∂v

∂g
(v,yH )
∂v
∂h
(v,yW )
∂v

What happens when yH increases?
∂g
If ∂v∂y
> 0, then an increase in yH means the numerator is bigger at the
H
∂g pre pre
∂g pre post
original level of violence ( ∂v
(v ,yH )> ∂v
(v ,yH )). To countervail this, v needs
to move to increase the denominator. Since h is increasing and convex in v, this
means v increases.
∂g
If ∂v∂y
< 0, then an increase in yH means the numerator is smaller at the
H
∂g pre post
∂g pre pre
original level of violence ( ∂v
(v ,yH )< ∂v
(v ,yH )). To countervail this, v needs
to move to decrease the denominator. Since h is convex and increasing, this means
v decreases.
What happens when yW increases?
∂h
If ∂v∂y
> 0, then an increase in yW means the denominator is bigger at
W
post
pre
the original level of violence ( ∂h
(vpre,yW
) > ∂h
(vpre,yH
)). Thus, v needs to
∂v
∂v
respond to make the numerator bigger, too. Since g is concave, and we know that
∂g pre
(v ,yH )>0 (by the Remark), this means that v must decrease.
∂v
∂h
If ∂v∂y
<0, the analogous logic implies that v must increase.
W
Thus, our analysis so far implies that, if within-household transfers are feasible,
it must be the case that violence is initially pleasurable, but then becomes distasteful
at high levels. Violence may or may not be instrumental.
Since these are very different conclusions than those we reached under our
benchmark model with no within-household transfers, we look to more of our
empirical evidence to help us identify which world we are in.
2.3.1

The impact of an increase in yH and yW on individual consumption

What predictions does our theory generate about the impact of cash transfers on
private consumption patterns of H and W , when conditions are such that cash

18

transfers to both spouses reduce IPV?
Result 8. (a) When within-household transfers are feasible, and conditions are
such that cash transfers to both spouses reduce IPV, cash transfers to both spouses
reduce W ’s consumption, and increase H’s consumption.
(b) When within-household transfers are not feasible, and conditions are such
that cash transfers to both spouses reduce IPV, a cash transfer to W increases W ’s
consumption by more than it increases H’s consumption. A cash transfer to H
increases H’s consumption, but by less than the amount of the transfer, and also
increases W ’s consumption.
Intuitively, (a) is true because, when within-household transfers are feasible, the
husband always uses such a transfer to fully extract surplus from W . (Recall that
taking money away from W not only reduces her consumption, it also reduces her
outside option.) Thus, PW defines an indifference curve of bundles of violence and
transfers (v,t(v)): W is indifferent between lower transfers and higher violence, and
higher transfers and lower violence. Therefore, if a policy causes a reduction in the
use of violence, it necessarily must also cause an increase in the within-household
transfer that W makes to H. This increase in within-household transfers exactly
countervails the reduction in violence and keeps her on the same indifference curve.
However, as we show below, we observe an increase in the wife’s private consumption after transfers to both her and the husband. This fact is thus not consistent
with a model in which within-household transfers are important.
In contrast, in the model in which within-household transfers are not feasible,
transfer to either yW or yH which reduce violence partially accrue to the wife. This
is precisely because violence is the husband’s only method of extracting resources
from W in this model. We have shown that a cash transfer to H can only reduce
IPV when violence is a costly (distasteful) method of extraction (unlike a frictionless
within-household transfer). Thus, when violence is reduced under these conditions,
W ’s consumption can actually go up. When the cash transfer is to H, diminishing
marginal returns to consumption and distasteful violence imply that he reduces the
use of violence. Thus, his consumption increases by less than the amount of the
transfer (because he reduces his extraction). The reduced extraction increases W ’s
consumption. When the cash transfer is to W , the increase in her empowerment
19

and the fact that violence is a costly method of extraction for H leads to an increase
in her consumption that outweighs the increase in his. Thus, the model without
within-household transfers is consistent with an increase in her private consumption,
which we empirically observe.
Together, we view these considerations as evidence that within-household transfers play a limited or no role, and our benchmark model is a good approximation
of our setting.

2.4

Spillovers and Norms

In the following we describe a simple mechanism based on social norms that would
produce spillovers for untreated households. Assume that the direct utility of IPV
for the husband can be decomposed into two terms. The first term is the (dis)utility
term g(v) discussed above. The second term reflects social norms. For simplicity,
we model the norm as the average level of domestic violence in the village, v̄. Any
deviation from the social norm creates a disutility for the husband (for example,
through stigma from non-conformity). Let the husband’s utility be given by:
uH (c)+g(v)−(v−v)2
where v denotes the average level of IPV in the village. We square the disutility
term to allow for disutility both when the husband engages in more violence than
is the norm, but also when he engages in less violence.
The constraints are the same as mentioned above. The husband’s maximization
problem can then be written as:

maxv≥0uH (yH +f(v,yW ))+g(v,yH )−(v−v̄)2
s.t.PW :uW (yW −f(v,yW ))−h(v,yW )≥

(3)
uW (yW ;v)

(4)

It is straightforward to see that a decrease in the average level of domestic violence
in a village from v̄ to v̄0 < v̄ decreases violence in a given household. If v > v, a
decrease in v makes the deviation from the social norm more painful, and thus H’s
20

preferred level of violence, vH , decreases. If v <v, H originally exerts less domestic
violence than the social norm. If the social norm decreases, H has the opportunity
to decrease domestic violence even more because the deviation has become less
painful. Thus, the effect of a change in the social norm on equilibrium violence is
weakly negative.
As described above, psychologists distinguish between descriptive norms, which
describe perceptions of actual outcomes, from prescriptive norms, which describe
desired outcomes. Our modeling approach extends easily to these settings: if
the husband incurs disutility from violating descriptive norms, his utility would
decrease in deviations of his level of violence from φ(v̄), where φ(·) maps levels of
violence to perceptions, with φ0 >0. Similarly, if the husband incurs disutility from
violating prescriptive norms, his utility would decrease in deviations of his level of
violence from an analogous function describing “acceptable” levels of violence in the
village. Importantly, prescriptive norms can integrate preferences over desired levels
of violence of both women and men, making it possible that changes in women’s
attitudes towards violence affect husband’s preferred levels of violence.
We could also have used a similar approach for the wife’s utility, where she incurs
¯ That is, W incurs additional disutility
additional disutility max{v−v̄,0} or (v− v).
if she experiences more violence than average and nothing additional otherwise,
or she can even derive positive utility from experiencing less violence than average.
In both types of cases, a decrease in v̄ decreases her tolerance of violence. Again
this line of reasoning extends easily to both descriptive and prescriptive norms.

3.

Intervention, experimental design, and econometric approach

The intervention, experimental design, and econometric approach used in this study
have previously been described by us elsewhere (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016), and
are briefly summarized here. We refer the reader to the companion paper for details.

21

3.1

Intervention

GiveDirectly, Inc. (GD; www.givedirectly.org) is an international NGO founded in
2009 whose mission is to make unconditional cash transfers to poor households in
developing countries. At the time of the study, eligibility was determined by living
in a house with a thatched (rather than metal) roof. Recipients were informed that
they would receive a transfer of KES 25,200 (USD 404 PPP), and that this transfer
was unconditional and one-time. Recipients were provided with a Safaricom SIM
card and had to register it for the mobile money service M-Pesa in the name of
the name of the designated transfer recipient.

3.2

Design and timing: Main study

An overview of the design and timeline is shown in Figure B2. Among the 120
villages with the highest proportion of thatched roofs in Rarieda district, Kenya,
60 were randomly chosen to be treatment villages. Within these villages, half of
all eligible households were randomly chosen to be treatment households, while the
other half were control households. A household was eligible if it had a thatched
roof. This process resulted in 503 treatment households and 505 spillover households
in treatment villages at baseline. Villages had an average of 100 households, of
which an average of 19 percent were surveyed, and an average of 9 percent received
transfers. The transfers amounted to an average of 10 percent of aggregate baseline
village wealth (excluding land).
Among treatment households, we further randomized whether the transfer went
to the husband or the wife (in dual-headed households). In addition, 137 households
in the treatment group were randomly chosen to receive “large” transfers of KES
95,200 (USD 1,525 PPP, USD 1,000 nominal) per household, while the remaining
366 treatment households received “small” transfers of KES 25,200 (USD 404 PPP,
USD 300 nominal) per household. Finally, we randomly assigned the transfer to be
delivered either as a lump-sum amount or as a series of nine monthly installments.
The randomization of transfer magnitude and timing is not the focus of the present
paper; results have been reported elsewhere (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016). We
instead focus on the randomization of recipient gender.
22

We conducted a baseline survey with all treatment and spillover households
before they received the first transfer, and an endline after the end of transfers.
Households received the first transfer an average of 9.3 months before endline, the
last transfer an average of 4.4 months before endline, and the mean transfer an
average of 6.9 months before endline.18 The order in which villages were surveyed
at baseline was randomized, and at endline it followed the same order. In a small
number of households, the endline survey was administered before the final transfer
was received. These households are nevertheless included in the analysis to be
conservative (intent-to-treat).
Control villages were surveyed only at endline; in these villages, we sampled
432 “pure control” households from among eligible households. Because these
pure control households were selected into the sample just before the endline, the
thatched-roof criterion was applied to them about one year later than to households
in treatment villages. This fact potentially introduces bias into the comparison of
households in treatment and control villages; however, we showed in our previous
paper (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016) that this bias was negligible, amounting to
5 households, or 1.1 percent of the sample. For this reason, and because the
IPV variables, in contrast to most others studied in our previous paper, show
within-village spillover effects, we use across-village treatment effect estimates for
the direct treatment effect in this paper.
At endline, we observe responses to the IPV questions from women in cohabitating households in 349 treatment households, 349 spillover households, and
312 pure control households. These 1,010 households form the core analysis sample
for this paper, and we restrict our analysis to this sample for all outcome variables.
We observe responses from husbands in 881 (87 percent) of these households.

3.3

Design and timing: Survey effects study

In the main study, the treatment and spillover households were surveyed both
at baseline and endline, while the pure control households were surveyed at endline only. This difference could introduce bias in the estimation of across-village
18

The mean transfer date is defined as the date at which half of the total transfer amount
to a given household has been sent.

23

treatment and spillover effects if the first survey affects subsequent reports. To
address this potential confound, we conducted a separate “survey effects” study
in 2015, in which we directly test for the presence of such survey effects in this
sample. Specifically, in 2015, we returned to administer a second endline survey
to the households that originally participated in the endline survey; in addition, we
used our original 2012 census of pure control villages to identify households that
had been eligible to participate in the 2012 survey, but that had not previously
been surveyed. There were 428 such households. We administered the same survey
to this set of households in 2015 as to households involved in the original endline,
with a similar temporal delay. Neither of these two groups of households received
an intervention; the only difference between them is the number of surveys they
completed, and comparison of the two groups therefore allows us to identify the
effect on outcomes of interest of having previously been surveyed.

3.4

Data and variables

In each surveyed household, we collected two survey modules: a household module, which collected information about assets, consumption, income, food security,
health, and education; and an individual module, which collected information about
psychological wellbeing, intra-household bargaining and domestic violence, and
economic preferences. The two surveys were administered on different (usually
consecutive) days. The household survey was administered to any household
member who could give information about the outcomes in question for the entire
household; this was usually one of the primary members. The individual survey was
administered to both primary members of the household, that is, husband and wife,
for double-headed households; and to the single household head otherwise. During
individual surveys, particular care was taken to ensure privacy; respondents were
interviewed by themselves, without the interference of other household members,
especially the spouse.
In this study, we focus on the female empowerment and IPV outcomes, which
were collected during the individual survey. Impacts on other outcome categories
have been reported in our previous paper (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016). In addition,

24

the previous paper reported the reduced-form impacts on the female empowerment
index described below. The IPV module was adapted from the Demographic &
Health Survey (DHS). Our outcomes of interest are reports by the woman in the
household about violence perpetrated against her by the man, since most violence
occurs in this direction, and reports by the woman are least likely to be subject to
reporting bias. We report both individual outcome variables, as well as summary
indices. These indices are created and grouped as follows:
The physical violence index is the weighted standardized average (Anderson
2008) of dummy variables indicating if in the preceding six months the woman was
pushed or shaken; slapped; punched; kicked, dragged, or beaten by the husband;
whether he twisted her arm or pulled her; tried to choke or burn her; or threatened
to attack her. In the tables in the paper, we report the index and a subset of the constituent variables. Higher values of the index denote higher levels of physical violence.
The sexual violence index is the weighted standardized average of dummy
variables indicating if in the preceding six months the husband forced the woman
to have sexual intercourse or perform sexual acts. Higher values denote higher
levels of sexual violence.
The female empowerment index is the weighted standardized average of a
violence index and an attitude index, which in turn are constructed as follows.
The violence index is a weighted standardized average of the physical and sexual
violence indices described above, and an additional emotional violence index.19 The
attitude index is a weighted standardized average of a male-focused attitudes index
and a justifiability of violence index.20 These indices are not all presented separately
19

The emotional violence index is the weighted standardized average of dummy variables indicating if in the preceding six months the man was jealous if the woman talked to other men; accused
her of being unfaithful; forbade her meeting friends; limited contact with her family; didn’t trust
her with money; or threatened to hurt her. We do not analyze outcomes for this index separately
because we trust it somewhat less than the physical and sexual violence indices, which are mostly
based on tangible events such as beatings, while emotional violence may be more diffuse in nature.
20
The justifiability of violence index is the weighted standardized average of dummy variables
indicating if the woman or man deem it justified for the man to hit the woman if she goes out
without telling him; neglects the children; argues with him; refuses to have sex with him; or
burns the food. The male-focused attitudes index is the weighted standardized average of dummy
variables indicating if the woman or man think that “the important decisions in the family should
be made only by the men of the family”; “the wife has the right to express her opinion even
when she disagrees with what her husband is saying”; “a wife should tolerate being beaten by

25

because the focus of this paper is on physical and sexual violence. When combining
these variables into the female empowerment index, we sign them such that higher
values denote higher female empowerment. Note that the reduced-form impacts
on the female empowerment index were reported in Haushofer and Shapiro (2016).
To measure psychological wellbeing, we use a number of standard questionnaires which are described in more detail in our original paper (Haushofer and
Shapiro 2016). Higher values of the psychological well-being index denote higher
psychological well-being.
To measure norms related to violence, we survey wives about whether they
believe husbands have the right to beat their wives under different circumstances.
The violence norms index variable is a weighted standardized average of these
variables. Higher values denote stronger pro-female norms.
Finally, to measure consumption, we use total monthly household expenditure,
in USD PPP. In addition, the survey module contained questions about private
the consumption of both spouses. We report total private consumption for each
spouse separately, which consists of the sum of variables measuring private clothing
expenditure; medical expenditure; and other private expenditure.

3.5

Integrity of experiment

In this paper we focus on across-village comparisons between the treatment and
pure control groups, and the spillover and pure control groups. Because we have
no baseline data from pure control villages, we cannot run the standard baseline
balance checks for these comparisons. However, the comparison of male and female
recipient households is within treatment villages, and for this comparison we therefore do have baseline data. We find no significant imbalance in this comparison
(Table C2). In addition, in our previous within-village analysis, we found that our
study had good baseline balance on most outcomes of interest, including female
empowerment (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016).
Due primarily to registration issues with M-Pesa, 18 treatment households had
not received transfers at the time of the endline, and thus only 485 of the 503
her husband in order to keep the family together”; “a husband has the right to beat his wife”;
and “it is more important to send a son to school than it is to send a daughter”.

26

treatment households were in fact treated. We deal with this issue by using an
intent-to-treat approach.
We had low levels of attrition; overall, 940 of 1,008 baseline households (93.3
percent) were surveyed at endline. We have shown previously that our results are
unlikely to be affected by this attrition (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016).
We wrote a pre-analysis plan (PAP) for this study, which is published and
time-stamped at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/19. In the PAP, we
specify the variables to be analyzed, the construction of indices, our approach to
dealing with multiple inference, the econometric specifications to be used, and the
handling of attrition. The analysis here follows this PAP, except that it focuses
on one sub-group of variables for which we observed an overall treatment effect
(across villages) in the main analysis reported in Haushofer and Shapiro (2016).

3.6
3.6.1

Econometric approach
Direct and spillover effects of cash transfers

Because we found a positive spillover effect on the female empowerment index in
our previous paper, we here focus on across-village treatment effects. The main
specification to capture the direct impact of cash transfers on recipient households,
and the village-level spillover effect, is
yvhiE =β0 +β1Tvh +β2Svh +εvhiE

(5)

Here, where yvhiE is the outcome of interest for household h in village v, measured at endline (t = E); index i is included for outcomes measured at the level
of the individual respondent, and omitted for outcomes measured at the household
level. Tvh is a treatment indicator that takes value 1 for households which received
a cash transfer (“treatment households”) and 0 otherwise. Svh is a dummy variable
that takes value 1 for spillover households and 0 otherwise. εvhiE is the error term.
The omitted category is pure control households. Thus, β1 identifies the treatment
effect for treated households relative to pure control households, and β2 identifies
within-village spillover effects by comparing spillover households to pure control
households. To account for possible correlation in outcomes within villages, the
27

error term is clustered at the village level. Because of the focus of this paper, the
sample is restricted to co-habitating couples.
To analyze the across-village treatment effect for households in which the
transfer was received by the wife vs. the husband, we estimate:
F
M
W
SINGLE
+β2Tvh
+β3Tvh
+β4Svh +β5P Cvh
+εvhiE
yvhiE =β0 +β1Tvh

(6)

x
F
M
Here, Tvh
indicates whether the transfer recipient is female (Tvh
), male (Tvh
), or
that the gender of the recipient could not be randomized because the household only
W
SINGLE
). P Cvh
is
had one head (most commonly in the case of widows/widowers) (Tvh
an indicator for pure control households with a single head. Thus, the omitted
category is cohabiting pure control households. β1 identifies the treatment effect
when the wife in the household receives the transfer, and β2 identifies the treatment
effect when the husband receives the transfer. Standard errors are again clustered at
the village level. The randomizations on monthly vs. lump-sum transfers and large
vs. small transfers are not the focus of this paper and are therefore not shown here.

3.6.2

Survey effects

Our basic specification to capture the effect of having been previously surveyed is:
yvhiE2 =αv +β0 +β1Dvh +εvhiE2

(7)

Here, yvhi is the outcome of interest for household h in village v, measured in the
second endline (t=E2). The sample is restricted to households in control villages.
Dvh is a dummy variable that takes value 1 for pure control households that were
surveyed in the first endline, and 0 for control village households that were not
surveyed in the first endline. αv is a village fixed effect. Thus, β1 identifies the effect
of having been previously surveyed. The error term is clustered at the household
level when the outcomes are measured at the individual level.

28

4.

Results

4.1

Effect of cash transfers on physical and sexual violence

The main results are shown in Table 1. In all results tables, each row corresponds
to one outcome variable, listed on the left. Column 1 shows the pure control
group mean and standard deviation of that variable. The remaining columns
present results from the following estimations: the main treatment effects analysis;
separate regressions comparing transfers to women vs. men, and the p-value for
the within-village difference between transfers to the female vs. the male. The final
column shows the number of observations in the main sample, i.e. excluding the
survey effects sample.
We find high baseline levels of domestic violence: Column 1 shows that large
proportions of women in the pure control group report that their partner pushed or
shook (26 percent), slapped (33 percent), punched (15 percent), or kicked, dragged,
or beat (15 percent) them. Similarly, we find high baseline levels of sexual violence;
12 percent of women report having been forced to have sexual intercourse in the preceding six months, and 9 percent report having been forced to perform sexual acts.
4.1.1

Treatment vs. pure control households

Column 2 shows a 0.17 SD increase in female empowerment in treatment relative
to pure control households. This effect is mainly driven by a reduction in physical
violence by 0.21 SD; and by a reduction of 0.16 SD in sexual violence. Among the individual variables, we find a decrease in being pushed or shaken by the husband by 7
percentage points relative to a control group mean of 27 percent (a 26 percent reduction); being slapped by the husband (11 percentage point decrease relative to 33 percent control group mean, a 33 percent reduction); being punched (6 percentage point
decrease relative to 15 percent control group mean, a 39 percent reduction); and
being kicked, dragged, or beaten (8 percentage point decrease relative to 15 percent
control group mean, a 51 percent reduction). For sexual violence, we observe a reduction in the incidence of forced sexual intercourse by 5 percentage points relative to a
control group mean of 12 percent (a 39 percent decrease), significant at the 10 percent

29

level, and a 5 percentage point reduction in the incidence of being forced to perform
sexual acts relative to a control group mean of 9 percent (a 52 percent reduction).
4.1.2

Male vs. female recipient households

Distinguishing between male and female recipient households, the treatment effect
on female empowerment is driven by female recipient households, which experience a
0.29 SD increase in female empowerment relative to pure control households (column
3). The coefficient is positive (0.10 SD) even in male recipient households, but not
significantly different from zero (column 4). We cannot reject equality of the male
and female recipient coefficients (column 5). The physical violence index in female
recipient households shows a significant reduction of 0.26 SD, and the sexual violence
index by 0.22 SD. Male recipient households show no significant decrease in sexual violence (−0.10 SD), but we observe a significant 0.18 SD reduction in physical violence
in these households. The individual variables for physical violence show highly significant reductions in female recipient households. In male recipient households, the
reduction in physical violence is driven by a 10 percentage point reduction in being
slapped by the husband relative to a control group mean of 33 percent (a 32 percent
reduction), and a 9 percentage point reduction in being kicked, dragged, or beaten
relative to a control group mean of 15 percent (a 59 percent reduction). In female
recipient households, rape is reduced by 7 percentage points or 56 percent, and the incidence of other sexual acts is reduced by 6 percentage points or 66 percent. Male recipient households show reductions as well, but these are not statistically significant.
Thus, we find a large and highly significant increase in female empowerment in
female recipient households, and no significant decrease in male recipient households.
In fact, the individual coefficients in male recipient households largely point in the
direction of a decrease in IPV, and the decrease in physical violence is significant
at the 5 percent level. These results are broadly consistent with the view that
transfers to the woman increase the woman’s bargaining power (Almås et al. 2018).

30

4.2

Effects on consumption

Table 2 shows the impact of transfers to either spouse on overall household consumption, as well as the husband’s and wife’s private consumption. We find large
and statistically significant increases in household consumption both for transfers
to the husband (15 percent) and to the wife (15 percent), with no significant
difference between the two effects. Rows 2 and 3 show that the wife’s private
consumption increases both after transfers to herself (91 percent) and after transfers
to the husband (30 percent), although the latter effect is not statistically significant.
The husband’s private consumption does not show a significant treatment effect
regardless of which spouse receives the transfer.
Together, the crucial insight from these results is that they are not consistent
with a model in which transfers decrease the wife’s consumption. This would be
the prediction of a model in which within-household transfers play a role. The fact
that we do not observe such evidence suggests that such transfers are not important
in our setting.

4.3

Effects on psychological wellbeing

As an additional test of the relationships described above, we investigate whether
and how changes in domestic violence are reflected in psychological wellbeing.
Before doing so, two caveats are in order. First, this question cannot be answered
causally here; instead, we simply ask whether treatment effects on IPV are mirrored
in treatment effects on wellbeing in either partner. Second, psychological wellbeing
correlates with other variables than IPV (e.g. consumption), and therefore changes
in wellbeing may also reflect changes in these other variables.
With these caveats in place, we can consider treatment effects on psychological
wellbeing. Tables 3 and 4 show effects of transfers on psychological well-being of
the wife and the husband, respectively.
Recall that transfers to women reduce both sexual and physical violence. Are
these changes reflected in the wife’s psychological well-being? Indeed, for female
respondents who received transfers, we find a large and significant direct treatment
effect of 0.44 SD on the index of psychological well-being, driven by a reduction
31

in stress and increases in happiness, life satisfaction, and optimism. Recall further
that we observe a decrease in physical violence when husbands receive transfers.
This effect, too, is mirrored in women’s psychological wellbeing, with a 0.40 SD
increase in the index of psychological wellbeing among women whose husbands
received transfers.
Our model suggests that husbands may derive negative utility from violence.
If psychological wellbeing is closely linked to IPV, this claim makes the somewhat
counterintuitive prediction that husbands should experience an increase in psychological wellbeing when transfers are made to their wife, because these transfers
reduce IPV to the greatest extent. Indeed, we observe a 0.24 SD increase in the
husband’s overall psychological wellbeing when his wife receives a transfer. In
contrast, we observe no significant effects of transfers to the husband on his level of
psychological wellbeing. One possible reason for this result is that, to the extent the
husband’s psychological wellbeing decreases in IPV, the effect on IPV of transfers
to the husband is much smaller than that of transfers to the wife.

4.4
4.4.1

Spillover and survey effects
Reduced-form effects

Column 2 of Table 5 shows that the positive effects on female empowerment we
observe after cash transfers are not restricted to treatment households: compared
to pure control households, spillover households show a 0.19 SD increase in female
empowerment, significant at the 5 percent level and equal in magnitude to the
direct effect on treatment households (0.17 SD). The result is driven by a reduction
in physical violence by 0.16 SD. Thus, strikingly, the receipt of cash transfers by
a subset of households in the village appears to have a similarly large overall effect
on neighboring households which did not receive transfers.
As described above, one potential concern about this result is that both the
treatment and spillover households were surveyed twice, while the pure control
households were only surveyed once (at endline). To rule out that being surveyed
affects responses in a subsequent survey, we compare pure control households
which were surveyed twice to pure control households which were surveyed once
32

in column 3 of Table 5. We find no significant effects on any outcomes, except
for an increase in reporting sexual violence as a result of being surveyed twice in
the pure control group. Note, however, that this effect is only significant at the
10 percent level, and goes in the conservative direction, i.e. it shows a decrease in
female empowerment as a result of more than one survey round. In addition, the
overall female empowerment index is not significant. We thus conclude that survey
effects are unlikely to have affected the findings on female empowerment reported
above, and that they can therefore be attributed to the cash transfers.
4.4.2

Mechanisms for spillover effects: Norm change?

A prominent possibility to explain the large spillover effect on IPV is that the
transfers changed social norms. Our survey measured norms by asking both
husbands and wives whether husbands have the right to beat their wives in general,
and in response to particular events, such as neglecting the children. Results on
these variables are reported in Table 6. We find no significant direct or spillover
effects on the index variable. Some individual coefficients point in the direction
of a change towards less permissive norms around violence, and women in spillover
households are 7 percentage points less likely to think that men have the right to
beat them for going out without telling them, a 22 percent reduction relative to
a control group mean of 32 percent; and are 6 percentage points less likely to think
men have the right to beat them for refusing sex, a 22 percent reduction relative to
a 28 percent control group mean. Thus, we observe some evidence that prescriptive
norms among women around the husband’s right to violence change in favor of the
woman, but we emphasize that these results only occur for a small subset of outcome
variables and not for the main index variable and should therefore be interpreted
with great caution. Appendix Table C3 shows that husbands do not show a change
in prescriptive norms, suggesting that if norms partly drive our empirical effects,
they are more likely to do so by entering the wife’s participation constraint.

33

5.

Conclusion

Intimate partner violence is a widespread phenomenon with significant welfare
costs. It has previously been shown that cash transfers can be effective in reducing
domestic violence, suggesting that IPV responds to income changes (Rivera-Rivera
et al. 2004; Angelucci 2008; Bobonis, Gonzalez-Brenes, and Castro 2013; Hidrobo
and Fernald 2013; Hidrobo, Peterman, and Heise 2016). We study the effects of an
unconditional cash transfer program in Kenya in which transfers are made to either
the husband or the wife on IPV. We present a theory which nests several possible
determinants of violence, including resource extraction, a distaste or liking for
violence, and the wife’s resources and empowerment. We show that when transfers
are made only to the wife, this is not sufficient for determining the underlying
motives for violence based on the effects of income changes on violence. In contrast,
when transfers are randomly allocated to either the husband or the wife, the resulting
changes in IPV can be used to determine which motives determine equilibrium
violence. We find empirically that transfers to women and men both reduce the
incidence of physical IPV. Our theory shows that this result implies that violence
is extractive, but also distasteful. In contrast, sexual violence is only reduced after
transfers to the wife, suggesting that it may be pleasurable for the husband.
In addition, while previous studies have focused on the direct impact of transfers
on recipient households, we also study non-recipients to quantify spillover effects.
We find large and significant spillover effects of cash transfers on IPV, strengthening
the evidence that transfers are a promising intervention to reduce IPV. Because
we observe few economic spillovers (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016), this finding
suggests that cash transfers may have affected social norms around IPV. In line
with this view, we find suggestive evidence of changes in social norms regarding the
justifiability of violence. These effects are weak, however, and require replication.
From a policy perspective, these findings have implications for the targeting
of cash transfers and the development of IPV reduction programs. First, in terms
of targeting, they suggest that although cash transfers can reduce IPV regardless
of who receives the transfer, transfers to female recipients are likely to be more
effective, at least from the point of view of reducing IPV. In our previous work, we

34

found few differences between male and female recipient households on other outcome dimensions; it is thus possible that transfers to the woman weakly dominate
transfers to the man from the social planner’s perspective. The spillover effects
also have implications for targeting: they suggest that to maximize impacts on IPV
per dollar spent, it may be optimal to not treat all households in a given location
with cash transfers. Of course due to the large positive direct impacts and lack of
spillovers of cash transfers on other dimensions, such selectivity also has a welfare
cost; future studies might vary the proportion of households treated in a particular
location to find the optimal targeting density for a given set of policy preferences.

References
Aizer, Anna. 2010. “The gender wage gap and domestic violence.” American Economic Review
100 (4): 1847–1859.
Almås, Ingvild, Alex Armand, Orazio Attanasio, and Pedro Carneiro. 2018. “Measuring and
Changing Control: Women’s Empowerment and Targeted Transfers.” The Economic
Journal 128 (612): F609–F639.
Anderson, Michael. 2008. “Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early
intervention: A reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
Projects.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 103 (484): 1481–1495.
Angelucci, Manuela. 2008. “Love on the rocks: domestic violence and alcohol abuse in rural
Mexico.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 8, no. 1.
Bloch, Francis, and Vijayendra Rao. 2002. “Terror as a Bargaining Instrument: A Case Study of
Dowry Violence in Rural India.” American Economic Review 92 (4): 1029–1043 (September).
Bobonis, Gustavo J. 2009. “Is the allocation of resources within the household efficient? New
evidence from a randomized experiment.” Journal of Political Economy 117 (3): 453–503.
Bobonis, Gustavo J., Melissa Gonzalez-Brenes, and Roberto Castro. 2013. “Public transfers
and domestic violence: The roles of private information and spousal control.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (1): 179–205.
Buller, Ana Maria, Amber Peterman, Meghna Ranganathan, Alexandra Bleile, Melissa Hidrobo,
and Lori Heise. 2018. “A Mixed-Method Review of Cash Transfers and Intimate Partner
Violence in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” The World Bank Research Observer 33
(2): 218–258 (August).
Eswaran, Mukesh, and Nisha Malhotra. 2011. “Domestic violence and women’s autonomy
in developing countries: theory and evidence.” Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue
canadienne d’économique 44 (4): 1222–1263 (November).
Farmer, Amy, and Jill Tiefenthaler. 1997. “An economic analysis of domestic violence.” Review
of Social Economy 55 (3): 337–358.

35

Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. “The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional
Cash Transfers to the Poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, July, qjw025.
Heath, Rachel, Melissa Hidrobo, and Shalini Roy. 2018. “Cash Transfers, Polygamy, and
Intimate Partner Violence: Experimental Evidence from Mali.” IFPRI Working Paper.
Hidrobo, Melissa, and Lia Fernald. 2013. “Cash transfers and domestic violence.” Journal
of Health Economics 32 (1): 304–319 (January).
Hidrobo, Melissa, Amber Peterman, and Lori Heise. 2016. “The Effect of Cash, Vouchers, and
Food Transfers on Intimate Partner Violence: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment
in Northern Ecuador.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics (forthcoming).
Hindin, Michelle J., Sunita Kishor, and Donna L. Ansara. 2008. “Intimate partner violence
among couples in 10 DHS countries: Predictors and health outcomes.”
Pollak, Robert A. 2004. “An Intergenerational Model of Domestic Violence.” Journal of
Population Economics 17 (2): 311–329.
Rivera-Rivera, Leonor, Eduardo Lazcano-Ponce, Jorge Salmerón-Castro, Eduardo SalazarMartínez, Roberto Castro, and Mauricio Hernández-Avila. 2004. “Prevalence and
determinants of male partner violence against Mexican women: a population-based study.”
Salud Pública de México 46 (2): 113–122.
Roy, Shalini, Melissa Hidrobo, John Hoddinott, and Akhter Ahmed. 2018. “Transfers, Behavior
Change Communication, and Intimate Partner Violence: Post-Program Evidence from
Rural Bangladesh.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, November, 1–45.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2006. “Bargaining in the shadow of the law: Divorce
laws and family distress.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1): 267–288.
Tankard, Margaret. 2016. “Saving Money on Your Own or in Solidarity: An Experiment on
Women’s Empowerment and Intimate Partner Violence.” PhD Dissertation, Princeton
University.
Tankard, Margaret E., and Elizabeth Levy Paluck. 2016. “Norm Perception as a Vehicle for
Social Change.” Social Issues and Policy Review 10 (1): 181–211 (January).
Tauchen, Helen V., Ann Dryden Witte, and Sharon K. Long. 1991. “Domestic violence: A
non-random affair.” Working Paper 1665, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Zwane, A., J. Zinman, E. VanDusen, W. Pariente, C. Null, E. Miguel, M. Kremer, D. Karlan,
R. Hornbeck, X. Gine, E. Duflo, F. DeVoto, B. Crepon, and A. Banerjee. 2011. “Being
Surveyed Can Change Later Behavior and Related Parameter Estimates.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (5): 1821–1826.

36

Table 1: Effects of cash transfers on violence
(1)
(2)
Control
Treatment
mean (SD) (across village)
Female empowerment index
Physical violence index
Pushed or shook you
Slapped you
Punched you

37

Kicked, dragged, or beat you
Sexual violence index
Forced sexual intercourse
Forced sexual acts

0.00
(1.00)
−0.00
(1.00)
0.27
(0.45)
0.33
(0.47)
0.15
(0.36)
0.15
(0.36)
−0.00
(1.00)
0.12
(0.33)
0.09
(0.29)

0.17∗∗
(0.07)
−0.21∗∗∗
(0.07)
−0.07∗∗
(0.03)
−0.11∗∗∗
(0.04)
−0.06∗∗
(0.03)
−0.08∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.16∗∗
(0.08)
−0.05∗
(0.03)
−0.05∗∗
(0.02)

(3)
Female
recipient
0.25∗∗∗
(0.08)
−0.26∗∗∗
(0.08)
−0.09∗∗
(0.04)
−0.13∗∗∗
(0.04)
−0.08∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.08∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.22∗∗∗
(0.08)
−0.07∗∗
(0.03)
−0.06∗∗∗
(0.02)

(4)
Male
recipient
0.09
(0.10)
−0.18∗∗
(0.09)
−0.05
(0.04)
−0.10∗∗
(0.04)
−0.05
(0.03)
−0.09∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.10
(0.10)
−0.03
(0.03)
−0.03
(0.03)

(5)
(6)
Female vs.
N
male p-value
0.10

1010

0.39

1010

0.29

1010

0.48

1010

0.51

1010

0.67

1010

0.23

1010

0.29

1010

0.21

1010

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. Outcome variables are listed on the left. For each outcome variable,
we report the coefficients of interest and their standard errors in parentheses. Column (1) reports the mean and
standard deviation of the control group for a given outcome variable. Column (2) reports the basic treatment
effect calculated across villages, i.e. comparing treatment households to pure control households. Columns
(3) and (4) report the effect of transfers to the husband and wife in the household, respectively, compared
to pure control. Column (5) reports p-values for the difference between transfers to the husband and wife,
using village-level fixed effects. Column (6) reports the sample size. The unit of observation is the individual;
we analyze the responses of the wife. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

Table 2: Effects of cash transfers on consumption
(1)
(2)
Control
Treatment
mean (SD) (across village)
Total household expenditure (USD PPP, monthly)
Wife’s private expenditure (USD PPP, monthly)

38

Husband’s private expenditure (USD PPP, monthly)

176.88
(89.75)
3.76
(8.58)
3.04
(7.77)

26.28∗∗∗
(9.24)
2.39∗∗∗
(0.82)
−0.13
(0.63)

(3)
Female
recipient
25.75∗∗
(10.09)
3.44∗∗∗
(1.15)
−0.49
(0.67)

(4)
(5)
(6)
Male
Female vs.
N
recipient male p-value
26.86∗∗
(12.37)
1.12
(1.01)
−0.09
(0.74)

0.81

1010

0.14

1010

0.76

1010

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. Outcome variables are listed on the left. For each outcome variable, we report the
coefficients of interest and their standard errors in parentheses. Column (1) reports the mean and standard deviation of the
control group for a given outcome variable. Column (2) reports the basic treatment effect calculated across villages, i.e. comparing
treatment households to pure control households. Columns (3) and (4) report the effect of transfers to the husband and wife
in the household, respectively, compared to pure control. Column (5) reports p-values for the difference between transfers to the
husband and wife, using village-level fixed effects. Column (6) reports the sample size. The unit of observation is the household.
The sample is restricted to co-habitating couples. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

Table 3: Effects of cash transfers on psychological wellbeing (female reports)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Control
Treatment
Spillover
mean (SD) (across village)
effect
Psychological well-being index
Depression (CESD)
Stress (Cohen)
Happiness (WVS)
Life satisfaction (WVS)

39

Trust (WVS)
Locus of control
Optimism (Scheier)
Self-esteem (Rosenberg)

0.00
(1.00)
26.54
(8.87)
−0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
−0.00
(1.00)
−0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
−0.00
(1.00)

0.42∗∗∗
(0.10)
−1.16
(0.79)
−0.21∗∗
(0.10)
0.34∗∗∗
(0.08)
0.35∗∗∗
(0.11)
−0.15∗
(0.09)
−0.03
(0.08)
0.17∗
(0.09)
−0.13
(0.10)

0.15
(0.09)
0.42
(0.86)
−0.01
(0.09)
0.12
(0.08)
0.14
(0.11)
−0.18∗∗
(0.09)
−0.19∗∗
(0.09)
0.07
(0.09)
−0.08
(0.09)

(4)
Survey
effect
−0.06
(0.08)
0.15
(0.83)
0.07
(0.08)
−0.11
(0.08)
0.05
(0.08)
−0.22∗∗∗
(0.08)
−0.01
(0.09)
−0.02
(0.08)
0.09
(0.08)

(5)
Female
recipient
0.44∗∗∗
(0.10)
−1.04
(0.89)
−0.21∗
(0.11)
0.33∗∗∗
(0.10)
0.25∗∗
(0.11)
−0.15
(0.10)
0.04
(0.10)
0.20∗
(0.12)
−0.01
(0.10)

(6)
Male
recipient
0.40∗∗∗
(0.12)
−1.21
(0.98)
−0.19
(0.12)
0.30∗∗∗
(0.11)
0.43∗∗∗
(0.14)
−0.17∗
(0.10)
−0.11
(0.10)
0.15
(0.10)
−0.23∗∗
(0.11)

(7)
(8)
Female vs.
N
male p-value
0.54

1010

0.79

1010

0.74

1010

0.77

1010

0.09∗

1010

0.92

1010

0.21

1010

0.65

1010

0.07∗

1010

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment, spillover, and survey effects. Outcome variables are listed on the left. For each outcome variable,
we report the coefficients of interest and their standard errors in parentheses. Column (1) reports the mean and standard deviation of
the control group for a given outcome variable. Column (2) reports the basic treatment effect calculated across villages, i.e. comparing
treatment households to pure control households. Column (3) reports the spillover effect, i.e. comparing control households in
treatment villages to control households in control villages. Column (4) reports survey effects comparing control households in
control villages to a new sample of households in control villages who had not previously been surveyed. Note that this comparison
uses results from endline 2. Columns (5) and (6) report the effect of transfers to the wife and husband in the household, respectively,
compared to pure control. Column (7) reports p-values for the difference between transfers to the husband and wife, using village-level
fixed effects. Column (8) reports the sample size. The unit of observation is the individual; we analyze the responses of the wife.
The sample is restricted to co-habitating couples. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

Table 4: Effects of cash transfers on psychological wellbeing (male reports)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Control
Treatment Spillover Survey Female
Male
Female vs.
N
mean (SD) (across village) effect
effect recipient recipient male p-value
Psychological well-being index
Depression (CESD)
Stress (Cohen)
Happiness (WVS)
Life satisfaction (WVS)

40

Trust (WVS)
Locus of control
Optimism (Scheier)
Self-esteem (Rosenberg)

0.00
(1.00)
25.79
(9.63)
0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
−0.00
(1.00)
−0.00
(1.00)
0.00
(1.00)
−0.00
(1.00)
−0.00
(1.00)

0.12
(0.11)
−1.22
(1.15)
−0.15
(0.11)
0.14∗
(0.08)
0.08
(0.12)
0.07
(0.11)
−0.10
(0.10)
0.17
(0.11)
0.03
(0.10)

−0.17
(0.11)
−0.14
(1.18)
0.26∗
(0.13)
0.10
(0.09)
−0.17
(0.12)
0.06
(0.10)
−0.01
(0.10)
0.06
(0.11)
0.02
(0.09)

−0.02
0.24∗
(0.09) (0.12)
−0.14 −2.05
(0.86) (1.26)
−0.10 −0.17
(0.09) (0.13)
−0.08
0.18∗
(0.09) (0.11)
−0.08
0.11
(0.09) (0.12)
−0.00
0.17
(0.09) (0.13)
0.05 −0.15
(0.10) (0.11)
0.03
0.19
(0.10) (0.12)
0.11
0.10
(0.09) (0.13)

−0.01
(0.12)
−0.28
(1.26)
−0.16
(0.12)
0.11
(0.11)
0.05
(0.14)
0.00
(0.13)
−0.02
(0.11)
0.07
(0.13)
−0.04
(0.12)

0.13

881

0.11

881

0.92

881

0.48

881

0.82

881

0.11

881

0.48

881

0.35

881

0.41

881

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment, spillover, and survey effects. Outcome variables are listed on the left. For each
outcome variable, we report the coefficients of interest and their standard errors in parentheses. Column (1) reports the
mean and standard deviation of the control group for a given outcome variable. Column (2) reports the basic treatment
effect calculated across villages, i.e. comparing treatment households to pure control households. Column (3) reports the
spillover effect, i.e. comparing control households in treatment villages to control households in control villages. Column
(4) reports survey effects comparing control households in control villages to a new sample of households in control
villages who had not previously been surveyed. Note that this comparison uses results from endline 2. Columns (5)
and (6) report the effect of transfers to the wife and husband in the household, respectively, compared to pure control.
Column (7) reports p-values for the difference between transfers to the husband and wife, using village-level fixed effects.
Column (8) reports the sample size. The unit of observation is the individual; we analyze the responses of the husband.
The sample is restricted to co-habitating couples. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

Table 5: Effects of cash transfers on violence: spillover and
survey effects

Female empowerment index
Physical violence index
Pushed or shook you
Slapped you
Punched you
Kicked, dragged, or beat you
Sexual violence index
Forced sexual intercourse
Forced sexual acts

(1)
(2)
Control
Spillover
mean (SD)
effect

(3)
Survey
effect

(4)

0.19∗∗
(0.08)
−0.16∗∗
(0.07)
−0.06∗
(0.03)
−0.09∗∗
(0.03)
−0.04
(0.03)
−0.04
(0.03)
−0.11
(0.08)
−0.03
(0.03)
−0.03
(0.02)

−0.04
(0.09)
0.00
(0.09)
−0.22
(0.24)
0.12
(0.16)
−0.28
(0.28)
−0.14
(0.17)
0.20∗
(0.10)
0.26
(0.19)
0.18
(0.21)

1010

0.00
(1.00)
−0.00
(1.00)
0.27
(0.45)
0.33
(0.47)
0.15
(0.36)
0.15
(0.36)
−0.00
(1.00)
0.12
(0.33)
0.09
(0.29)

N

1010
1010
1010
1010
1010
1010
1010
1010

Notes: OLS estimates of spillover and survey effects. Outcome variables
are listed on the left. For each outcome variable, we report the coefficients
of interest and their standard errors in parentheses. Column (1) reports
the mean and standard deviation of the control group for a given outcome
variable. Column (2) reports the spillover effect, i.e. comparing spillover
households to pure control households. Column (3) reports survey effects
comparing pure control households to a new sample of households in
control villages who had not previously been surveyed. Note that this
comparison uses results from endline 2. Column (4) reports the sample size.
The unit of observation is the individual; we analyze the responses of the
wife. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

41

Table 6: Effects of cash transfers on violence norms (female reports)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Control
Treatment
Spillover
mean (SD) (across village)
effect
Violence norms index
Wife should tolerate being beaten
Husband has the right to beat
Right to beat: Going out without telling him
Right to beat: Neglecting the children

42

Right to beat: Arguing with him
Right to beat: Refusing to have sex
Right to beat: Burning the food

−0.00
(1.00)
0.27
(0.44)
0.48
(0.50)
0.32
(0.47)
0.53
(0.50)
0.54
(0.50)
0.28
(0.45)
0.15
(0.36)

0.07
(0.08)
−0.05
(0.04)
−0.00
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.04)
0.05
(0.04)
−0.05
(0.04)
−0.05
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)

0.11
(0.08)
−0.06
(0.04)
−0.01
(0.04)
−0.07∗∗
(0.04)
0.02
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.04)
−0.06∗
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Survey Female
Male
Female vs.
N
effect recipient recipient male p-value
0.09
(0.09)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.05)
0.02
(0.04)
−0.06
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.04)

0.13
(0.09)
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.02
(0.05)
−0.06
(0.04)
0.03
(0.05)
−0.08∗
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.04)

0.02
(0.10)
−0.04
(0.05)
0.03
(0.06)
−0.01
(0.05)
0.07
(0.05)
−0.00
(0.05)
−0.06
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.03)

0.53

1010

0.50

1010

0.20

1010

0.47

1010

0.98

1010

0.20

1010

0.78

1010

0.26

1010

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment, spillover, and survey effects. Outcome variables are listed on the left. For each outcome variable,
we report the coefficients of interest and their standard errors in parentheses. Column (1) reports the mean and standard deviation of
the control group for a given outcome variable. Column (2) reports the basic treatment effect calculated across villages, i.e. comparing
treatment households to pure control households. Column (3) reports the spillover effect, i.e. comparing control households in treatment
villages to control households in control villages. Column (4) reports survey effects comparing control households in control villages to
a new sample of households in control villages who had not previously been surveyed. Note that this comparison uses results from endline
2. Columns (5) and (6) report the effect of transfers to the wife and husband in the household, respectively, compared to pure control.
Column (7) reports p-values for the difference between transfers to the husband and wife, using village-level fixed effects. Column (8)
reports the total sample size, including all treatment, spillover and pure control households. The unit of observation is the individual;
we analyze the responses of the wife. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

Appendix
A.

Theoretical Appendix

In this appendix we go into more detail about how we can use the relative magnitudes, on top of the signs, of the impact of cash transfers to H and W on IPV to
further dissect the underlying motives of violence. In particular, do transfers to H
and W reduce violence because they reduce H’s overall demand for it, or because
they reduce W ’s tolerance of it?
There are two cases for the equilibrium level of violence: (i) the husband’s
preferred level of violence is greater than the wife’s maximally tolerated violence,
vH > vW ; and (ii) vH ≤ vW . In case (i), equilibrium violence is disciplined by W ’s
(in)tolerance of it, so that v∗ =vW , PW binds, and W is left with no rents, while in
case (ii), equilibrium violence is disciplined by H’s distaste for it, net of extractive
value, so that v∗ =vH and PW is slack: W is left with some rents because the utility
gains to H from extracting more of his wife’s income for private consumption are
outweighed by his distaste for violence. Observe that the more sharply H’s distaste
increases in violence (g0(v)<<0), the more H is disciplined by his own distaste for
violence, rather than by his wife’s (in)tolerance of it, and the more likely we are to
be in case (ii). Thus, to characterize how transfers to H and W affect violence in
equilibrium, we must first characterize how they affect H and W 0s preferred and
maximally tolerated levels of violence, vH and vW .

A1

Effect of transfers on husband’s preferred and wife’s
maximally-tolerated violence

H’s unconstrained maximizer vH is characterized by the first-order condition for
H’s utility with respect to v:
∂uH
∂f
∂g
(yH +f(vH ,yW )) (vH ,yW )=− (vH )
∂c
∂v
∂v

(A1)

W ’s maximum tolerance vW is characterized by her binding participation
constraint PW :
43

uW (yW −f(vW ,yW ))−h(vW ,yW )= ūW (yW )

(A2)

We now examine how vH and vW move with respect to yH .
Implicitly differentiating the condition characterizing vH , we see that:
∂vH
=
∂yH ∂2u2H

2

− ∂∂cu2H

∂f 2 ∂ 2 f
+ ∂v2
∂v

∂uH
∂c



∂ u ∂f ∂f
∂vH − ∂c2H ∂v ∂yW −
=

∂yW ∂2u2H ∂f 2 + ∂2f2

∂uH
∂c



∂c

2

∂c

∂v

∂v

∂uH
∂c

2

∂ g
+ ∂v
2

∂f
∂v∂yW



2

∂ g
+ ∂v
2

(A3)

(A4)

Note that the denominator is the same in both expressions, and is negative due
to risk aversion, weak concavity of f(v,yW ) in v, and concavity of g(v). Clearly,
H’s most preferred level of violence is always decreasing in his income yH , while
∂f
the impact of an increase in yW is determined by the sign of ∂v∂y
, that is, the
W
strength of complementarity or substitutability between the use of violence and
the wife’s wealth in how much income can be extracted from her.
Because yH does not appear in W ’s participation constraint, it’s clear that a
transfer to yH cannot affect the level of violence at which PW binds. Implicitly
differentiating the condition characterizing vH with respect to yW , we see that:
W

∂v
=
∂yW

∂uW
∂c

h
i
∂ūW
∂h
1− ∂y∂fW − ∂y
w − ∂yw
 ∂h
∂uW ∂f
+ ∂v
∂c
∂v

(A5)

This yields Appendix Results 1 and 2.
Appendix Result 1. (i) A transfer to the husband always decreases his preferred level of violence vH .
(ii) A transfer to the husband never affects the wife’s maximally tolerated violence
W
v .
The intuition behind Appendix Result 1(i) is the following. A transfer to the
husband leaves the wife’s income unchanged, so the profitability of violence is
unchanged, and H’s own income (and therefore private consumption) has increased.

44

Because violence is costly (distasteful), H’s ideal level of violence falls.21
Appendix Result 1(ii) is explained as follows: When H’s income increases, this
does not affect W ’s maximal tolerance, since her participation only depends on
her private consumption (which is just a portion of her own income), her inherent
intolerance of IPV, and her outside option, where her ability to leave the marriage
is a function of her own income.
Appendix Result 2 describes how vH and vW respond to yW .
Appendix Result 2. (i) A transfer to the wife increases the husband’s preferred level of violence vH if violence and income are complements in the extractive
∂f
technology (i.e. ∂v∂y
> 0): the amount of income H can extract from W for a
W
given level of violence increases in her income.
(ii) A transfer to the wife decreases the wife’s maximally tolerated violence vW
if violence and income are complements in the extractive technology, W ’s intolerance h(v,yW ) increases strongly in her income, and/or her outside option ūW (yW )
increases strongly in her income.
The intuition for Appendix Result 2(i) is as follows: if the extractive return
to violence is much higher when the wife is wealthier, then H’s utility gains from
increased consumption will outweigh his distaste for violence, and vH increases.
Moreover, under strong complements, a given level of violence extracts much
more from a wife with higher income yW . This means that the wife’s utility at the
pre-income-increase level of violence is now lower, reducing her tolerance. Further,
a transfer to the wife reduces her maximally-tolerated violence if the increase in
income exposes her to norms that are less tolerant of IPV, or empowers her to feel
less tolerant of IPV. Again, this is because she has less utility at the pre-incomeincrease level of violence. Finally, if the increase in income gives her more resources
to leave a bad marriage, W ’s maximal tolerance vW will also fall.
To sum up: the husband’s demand for violence always decreases in his own
income, while an increase in the wife’s income may increase his demand if the
returns to extractive violence are much higher for wealthier wives. The wife’s max21

A concrete interpretation of this result is that an increase in H’s consumption that is not
obtained through violence may decrease his stress and thereby decrease his impulse to release
stress through violence.

45

imal tolerance for violence decreases in her own income if her income is sufficiently
empowering, and is unaffected by a change in her partner’s income. However, since
equilibrium violence is the minimum of the husband’s demand for violence and the
wife’s maximal tolerance for violence, it is not enough to understand the effect of
spousal transfers on the level of vH and vW . The next step is to characterize the
effect of spousal transfers on the conditions under which vH or vW is the minimum,
and under which equilibrium violence goes up or down following these transfers.

A2

Effect of transfers on equilibrium violence

To understand when transfers to H and W decrease or increase equilibrium violence,
however, we also need to understand how increases in yH and yW affect whether
vH is greater than vW (so that v∗ =vW ), or whether vW is greater than vH (so that
v∗ =vH ). In other words, equilibrium violence balances H’s demand for violence
with W ’s tolerance of it, and changes in spousal income affect violence by affecting
this balance.
Table A1 presents the four theoretical possibilities for the effect of an increase
in yH or yW (pre and post refer to before and after an increase in either spouse’s
income, respectively).
Table A1: Effect of transfers on violence in equilibrium: Possibilities
vH,pre >vW,pre

vH,pre <vW,pre

vH,post >vW,post
(A) v∗,pre =vW,pre
v∗,post =vW,post
pre
post
PW binds,PW
binds

vH,post <vW,post
(B) v∗,pre =vW,pre
v∗,post =vH,post
pre
post
PW binds,PW
slack

(C) v∗,pre =vH,pre
v∗,post =vW,post
pre
post
PW slack,PW
binds

(D) v∗,pre =vH,pre
v∗,post =vH,post
pre
post
PW slack,PW
slack

Appendix Results 3 and 4 show how we can determine which of these cases
we are dealing with, and through which channel(s) the spousal transfers affect
equilibrium violence. To this end, we have to examine the presence of violence in
the status quo, as well as the relative magnitudes of the impact of transfers to the
husband and to the wife on violence.
46

Appendix Result 3. If violence is high in the status quo, and an increase in
yH reduces violence more than an equivalent increase in yW , then the world is in
Case B and transfers to the husband reduce equilibrium violence by decreasing his
demand for violence.
The proof for this is as follows. Recall from Appendix Result 1 that a change in
yH does not affect the wife’s maximally tolerated level of violence, vW . If we were
in Case A, where v∗,pre =vW,pre and v∗,post =vW,post, then an increase in yH would
lead to no change in equilibrium violence: v∗,pre =v∗,post =vW . This rules out Case
A. The only way for Case C to arise is if the increase in yH caused the husband’s
preferred level of violence vH to increase (because pre-treatment, vH <vW , while
post-treatment, vH >vW , where vW remains unchanged by Result 1). But we know
from Appendix Result 1 that an increase in yH always decreases vH . This rules
out Case C.
Finally, Case D only arises when H has a high distaste for violence: v∗,pre =vH,pre
means that H is demanding strictly less violence than W tolerates in the status quo.
Thus, baseline levels of violence would be low, and there wouldn’t be much room for
violence to be reduced. This contradicts high incidence of violence in the status quo.
This leaves Case B, where the wife’s participation constraint binds in the status
quo and her intolerance of violence determines the equilibrium level. A transfer
to the husband reduces the husband’s demand for violence so that his demand now
determines the equilibrium level, and the wife’s participation constraint slackens
and she is left with some rents.
Appendix Result 4. If violence is high in the status quo, an increase in yW
reduces violence more than an equivalent increase in yH , and violence and income
are complements in the extractive technology, then the world is in Case A and
transfers to the wife reduce equilibrium violence by decreasing her tolerance of it,
through empowerment and/or resources.
Cases C and D contradict a high baseline level of violence (since pre-treatment,
H’s preferred level of violence leaves W with rents). In Case B, v∗,pre =vW,pre but
v∗,post =vH,post. Thus, for an increase in yW to lead to a decrease in violence in Case
B, it must be that vW,pre >vH,post, and vW,pre <vH,pre. However, Appendix Result
2(i) tells us that if violence and income are complements in the extractive technology,
47

then an increase in yW causes H’s preferred level of violence to increase, so that
vH,post >vH,pre >vW,pre. This rules out Case B and leaves Case A: an increase in yW
reduces violence because the wife’s intolerance of it determines the equilibrium level,
and an increase in her wealth decreases her tolerance, through empowerment and/or
through an increase in resources which enable her to leave an abusive marriage.
Thus, if we found that a cash transfer to W reduces IPV by more than a cash
transfer to H, we might infer that the policy-relevant determinant of violence in
the setting is the wife’s tolerance for it, rather than the husband’s demand. This
would imply that policy should focus on increasing women’s empowerment and
perception of violence as “normal”, as well as on strengthening women’s ability to
leave violent marriages.

A3

An Example

We offer a numerical example to illustrate how equilibrium violence is an outcome
of an interaction between instrumentality, distaste, and the participation constraint
of the wife, with empowerment (norms) and her outside option as key elements
of this constraint.
1. Utility: uH (c)=uW (c)=log(c), yH ,yW >>1
2. Extraction (instrumental violence), parametrized by ε: f(v,yW ) = εvyW ,
ε∈[0,1], v ∈[0,1]
3. Distaste (expressive violence), parametrized by δ: g(v)=log(1−δv)], δ ∈[0,1]
4. Empowerment, parametrized by π: h(v,yW )=log(v+πvyW +1), π ∈[0,1]
5. Resources/Outside Option, parametrized by r: ūW (yW )=uW (r(1−v)yW ),
r ∈[0,1]
Assume that the wife is poorer than the husband: yW <yH .
Then the constrained maximization problem is:

48

maxv log(yH +εvyW )+log(1−δv)

(A6)

s.t.log((1−εv)yW )−log(v+πvyW +1)≥log(r(1−εv)yW )

(A7)

The unconstrained maximizer for H and the binding level of violence for W are:
H

v =

vW =

H
1−δ yyW

δ(1+ε)

1−r
∈[0,1]
r(1+πyW )

Observe that the husband’s preferred level of violence vH decreases in his income,
yH , increases in his wife’s income, yW , decreases in the extractive efficiency of violence, ε, and decreases in his distaste for violence, δ. The wife’s maximally-tolerated
level of violence decreases in her income, yW , in empowerment, π, and in resource
strength, r. It is unaffected by changes in her husband’s income, yH .
The condition under which the wife’s participation constraint PW binds and
v∗ =vW =min{vH ,vW } is:


(1−r)
δyH
+π(yW −δyH )>δ(1+ε)
1−
yW
r
Observe that a cash transfer to H makes this inequality less likely to hold:
it slackens the wife’s participation constraint, which means that the husband’s
demand for violence is lower than the wife’s maximal tolerance for it, and v∗ =vH .
Thus, a transfer to the husband increases his consumption and thereby reduces
his demand for violence, and this is what leads to a fall in equilibrium violence.
By contrast, a cash transfer to W makes this inequality more likely to hold:
this increases the wife’s empowerment and resources, causing PW to bind at a lower
level of violence, so that it is the wife’s decreased tolerance for violence that leads
to a fall in equilibrium violence.
The numerical exercise is as follows. We consider different strengths of each of the
four channels: distaste δ, extractiveness ε, empowerment π, and resource strength

49

r, for different levels of husband and wife income (the relative income is what
matters). We plot vH (yH ,yW ) and vW (yH ,yW ) given the parameter environment.
The lower envelope of the husband’s preferred and the wife’s maximally tolerated
level of violence is equilibrium violence. We seek the parameter environment that
best matches our empirical patterns:
1. Empirically, an increase in yH reduced violence. Hence, equilibrium violence
must be strictly decreasing over some range of yH .
2. An increase in yW reduced violence. Hence, equilibrium violence must be
strictly decreasing over some range of yW .
3. An increase in yW qualitatively reduced violence by more than an equivalent
increase in yH .
Requiring the patterns from the theory to be consistent with our empirical observations yields Figure B1, a parameter environment where the husband has moderate
distaste for violence (δ =0.2), violence is highly extractive (ε=1), and an increase
in the wife’s income increases her empowerment and outside option (π =1, r = 13 ).
The blue line is the husband’s demand for violence vH (yH ,yW ), the red line is the
wife’s maximal tolerance for violence vW (yH ,yW ), and the black line is the lower
envelope v∗ =min{vH ,vW }.22
The top panel shows how equilibrium violence changes when yW =1 and the husband’s income yH ranges from less than to more than his wife’s. Observe that when
the husband’s income is less than about 4, he wishes to use violence to extract income
from his wife, but her participation constraint binds and her tolerance determines
the equilibrium level. Thus, we know from Result 1 that changes in yH will not affect
violence in equilibrium. When the husband is wealthier (yH &5), he has “enough”
private consumption, and his moderate distaste for violence outweighs the amount he
could extract from his relatively poor wife. Thus, his demand determines the equilibrium level of violence, and when the husband is much wealthier, his demand is zero.
The bottom panel shows how equilibrium violence changes when yH =3 and
the wife’s income yW ranges from less than to more than her husband’s. Observe
22

Note that we cap the husband’s demand for violence at 1 in our figure when it exceeds
the wife’s tolerance, for better presentation.

50

that as the wife becomes relatively wealthier, her husband’s demand for violence
increases, because the value of extracting from her increases. However, at the
same time, her tolerance for violence decreases – her higher income means she is
more empowered and has a higher outside option. Thus, equilibrium violence is
determined by the husband’s (low) demand when the wife is relatively poor, but is
then determined by the wife’s (decreasing) tolerance. Thus, violence in equilibrium
falls as the wife’s income increases beyond yW ≈1.
The example also illustrates that a transfer to the wife may reduce violence
by more than an equivalent transfer to the husband. If yH = 3 and yW = 1, the
top panel shows that a unit increase in the husband’s income leads no reduction in
equilibrium violence, while the bottom panel shows that a unit increase in the wife’s
income leads to a reduction in equilibrium violence. This is because, at these initial
income levels and in this parameter environment, a transfer to the wife increases her
empowerment by more than the same transfer to the husband reduces his demand.
The numerical example also illustrates a suggestive insight from our theory
regarding the impact of small versus large cash transfers in settings where the
husband and wife are both poor but the wife is even poorer, violence is extractive
but distasteful, and an increase in the wife’s income increases her empowerment.
Based on our theory (see ??), we suggest that in this setting, large cash transfers
may actually increase IPV, and to a greater degree when given to the husband. This
is because giving a large transfer to the wife will also make her a more profitable
source of extraction through violence. However, transfers to the husband always
weakly reduce his demand for violence, because of his distaste for it. On the other
hand, if only small transfers are feasible, they may reduce IPV to a greater degree
when given to the wife. These transfers empower her and decrease her tolerance
for violence, without causing the husband’s demand for violence to overwhelm this
empowerment by making her a target for extraction.

51

B.

Figures

.5

Wife’s income: yw = 1
0

Violence (v)

1

Figure B1: Numerical example of the impact of changes in husband’s or wife’s
income on preferred and equilibrium levels of violence

0

2

4

6

8

10

8

10

.5

Husband’s income: yh = 3

0

Violence (v)

1

Husband’s income (yh)

0

2

4

6

Wife’s income (yw)
Husband’s preferred level of violence
Wife’s maximally tolerated level of violence
Equilibrium level of violence

Figure B2: Timeline of study

302 villages in Rarieda
120 villages with highest
proportion of thatched roofs
chosen for study, April 2011

60 villages randomly chosen
to receive transfers
Research census: 1123 HH
March-November 2011
Baseline: 1097 HH
April-November 2011
GiveDirectly census: 1034 HH
April-November 2011
Final treatment sample:
1008 baseline HH
Treatment rollout
June 2011-January 2013

Pure control census: 1141 HH
(464 targeted) April-June 2012

Endline: 1372 HH

Treatment: 503/471 HH

Spillover: 505/469 HH

Male recipient: 185/174 HH
Female recipient: 208/195 HH
Monthly transfer: 173/159 HH
Lump-sum transfer: 193/184 HH
Large transfer: 137/128 HH
Small transfer: 366/343 HH

Pure control: 0/432 HH

C.

Additional Tables
Table C1: Effect of cash transfers to the husband on violence

Not instrumental
(fv =0)
Instrumental
(violence
extracts) (fv >0)

Expressive distaste:
husband dislikes violence
(gv <0)
no effect
(no violence)

Not expressive

increase or decrease

no effect

(gv =0)
no effect
(no violence)

Expressive pleasure:
husband likes violence
(gv >0)
no effect

no effect

54

Table C2: Baseline balance: Violence
(1)
(2)
(3)
Control
Female vs.
N
mean (SD) male recipient
Female empowerment index
Physical violence index
Pushed or shook you
Slapped you
Punched you
Kicked, dragged, or beat you
Sexual violence index
Forced sexual intercourse
Forced sexual acts

−0.00
(1.00)
0.96
(1.72)
0.20
(0.40)
0.24
(0.43)
0.14
(0.35)
0.16
(0.37)
0.25
(0.63)
0.13
(0.34)
0.12
(0.32)

0.07
(0.11)
0.10
(0.20)
0.02
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.03
(0.04)
−0.08
(0.08)
−0.04
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.04)

709
707
707
707
706
706
705
705
705

Notes: OLS estimates of baseline balance. Outcome variables,
measured at baseline, are listed on the left. For each outcome
variable, we report the coefficients of interest and their standard
errors in parentheses. Column (1) reports the mean and standard
deviation of the within-village control group for a given outcome
variable. Column (2) reports p-values for the difference between
transfers to the husband and wife, using village-level fixed effects.
Column (3) reports the sample size. The unit of observation is
the individual; we analyze the responses of the wife. * denotes
significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

55

Table C3: Effects of cash transfers on violence norms (male reports)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Control
Treatment Spillover Survey Female
Male
Female vs.
N
mean (SD) (across village) effect
effect recipient recipient male p-value
Violence norms index
Wife should tolerate being beaten
Husband has the right to beat
Right to beat: Going out without telling him
Right to beat: Neglecting the children

56

Right to beat: Arguing with him
Right to beat: Refusing to have sex
Right to beat: Burning the food

0.00
(1.00)
0.13
(0.33)
0.26
(0.44)
0.15
(0.35)
0.32
(0.47)
0.35
(0.48)
0.08
(0.28)
0.06
(0.23)

−0.05
(0.09)
0.01
(0.03)
0.04
(0.04)
0.00
(0.03)
0.01
(0.04)
0.00
(0.04)
0.02
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.02)

−0.10
(0.09)
−0.01
(0.03)
0.04
(0.04)
0.02
(0.03)
0.06
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
0.03
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)

−0.06
(0.10)
0.05
(0.04)
0.09∗
(0.05)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.05)
−0.00
(0.05)
0.04
(0.04)
0.01
(0.03)

−0.06
(0.11)
0.01
(0.04)
0.03
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.04
(0.05)
0.02
(0.05)
0.02
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.02)

−0.02
(0.10)
0.00
(0.04)
0.06
(0.04)
0.02
(0.04)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.02
(0.05)
0.02
(0.03)
0.01
(0.02)

0.78

881

0.66

881

0.84

881

0.39

881

0.13

881

0.27

881

0.70

881

0.66

881

Notes: OLS estimates of treatment, spillover, and survey effects. Outcome variables are listed on the left. For each outcome variable,
we report the coefficients of interest and their standard errors in parentheses. Column (1) reports the mean and standard deviation of the
control group for a given outcome variable. Column (2) reports the basic treatment effect calculated across villages, i.e. comparing treatment
households to pure control households. Column (3) reports the spillover effect, i.e. comparing control households in treatment villages to
control households in control villages. Column (4) reports survey effects comparing control households in control villages to a new sample of
households in control villages who had not previously been surveyed. Note that this comparison uses results from endline 2. Columns (5) and
(6) report the effect of transfers to the wife and husband in the household, respectively, compared to pure control. Column (7) reports p-values
for the difference between transfers to the husband and wife, using village-level fixed effects. Column (8) reports the sample size. The unit of
observation is the individual; we analyze the responses of the husband. * denotes significance at 10 pct., ** at 5 pct., and *** at 1 pct. level.

