                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  REAL OPTION EXERCISE:
                                   EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

                                          Paul Décaire
                                          Erik P. Gilje
                                       Jérôme P. Taillard

                                      Working Paper 25624
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25624


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2019




We thank seminar and conference participants at Babson College, ITAM, USF, Wharton, 2018
Texas Finance Festival, 2018 IDC Finance Conference, 2018 Northeastern University Finance
Conference, 2018 European Finance Association Conference, 2019 American Finance
Association, as well as Jules van Binsbergen, Jonathan Berk, Gustavo Grullon, John Hund,
Evgeny Lyandres, Ohad Kadan, Michael Roberts, Sheridan Titman, and Pavel Zryumov for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Paul Décaire, Erik P. Gilje, and Jérôme P. Taillard. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Real Option Exercise: Empirical Evidence
Paul Décaire, Erik P. Gilje, and Jérôme P. Taillard
NBER Working Paper No. 25624
February 2019
JEL No. G30,G31,G32

                                          ABSTRACT

We study when and why firms exercise real options. Using detailed project-level investment data,
we find that the likelihood that a firm exercises a real option is strongly related to peer exercise
behavior. Peer exercise decisions are as important in explaining exercise behavior as variables
commonly associated with standard real option theories, such as volatility. We identify peer
effects using localized exogenous variation in peer project exercise decisions and find evidence
consistent with information externalities being important for exercise behavior.


Paul Décaire                                     Jérôme P. Taillard
University of Pennsylvania                       Babson College
3620 Locust Walk, Suite 2400                     323 Tomasso Hall
Philadelphia, PA, 19104                          Babson Park, MA 02457
pdecaire@wharton.upenn.edu                       United States
                                                 jtaillard1@babson.edu
Erik P. Gilje
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gilje@wharton.upenn.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25624
Introduction
Every investment decision made by a firm is both a decision about which capital project to
pursue as well as when to pursue it. The flexibility associated with the timing of investment
decisions has value to the firm; this value is commonly referred to as real option value (Myers
(1977)). Real options are a central component of models of the macro economy (Bernanke
(1983)), and their exercise has received ample attention in the corporate finance theory liter-
ature (e.g., Dixit and Pindyck (1994), Kellogg (2014)). Moreover, existing corporate finance
theories hypothesize the importance of peer exercise decisions and information revelation in
determining exercise behavior.1 However, despite the importance of real options, micro-level
empirical evidence on exercise behavior remains limited.2 In this study, we provide novel
evidence on the real option exercise behavior of firms; and directly assess the role that peer
effects and information externalities can have on exercise decisions.
       Characterizing firms’ real option exercise behavior is empirically challenging. First, de-
tailed data on the timing flexibility associated with capital projects is typically unavailable.
Second, in order to understand a firm’s exercise behavior, one would need data on both the
projects that a firm decides to undertake, as well as those it decides not to pursue. This
level of disclosure is often not available. Third, being able to observe key inputs that might
drive option exercise decisions is necessary in order to characterize exercise behavior; these
would include expected project cash flows, costs, and volatility of project cash flows. Fourth,
in a competitive setting where peer firms’ exercise behavior can have an influence, one needs
to be able to precisely measure the actions taken on peer firm projects in order to gauge
their potential impact. Lastly, one needs to develop an empirical framework to appropriately
identify the effect of peer behavior and mitigate potential endogeneity concerns.
       This study focuses on a setting which allows us to make significant progress on each
   1
     See Grenadier (1996), Grenadier (1999), Grenadier (2002), Novy-Marx (2007), Grenadier and Wang
(2005), Grenadier and Malenko (2011), and Scharfstein and Stein (1990).
   2
     Kellogg (2014) studies oil drilling activity and finds that oil price volatility affects investment decisions
in a manner consistent with real option models. However, the study does not assess the importance of
information externalities across firms as it focuses on fields operated by a single firm. Moel and Tufano
(2002) study mine opening and closing decisions relative to what real option theories would imply, however,
their setting is also not conducive to assessing the importance of peer effects and information externalities.


                                                        2
of these challenges. We analyze $107.9 billion in capital projects composed of exercised
and unexercised natural gas infill well drilling projects in major shale developments in North
America. First, the institutional structure of this setting allows us to have clear visibility into
the timing flexibility firms have in making drilling decisions. Second, due to the institutional
structure of lease contract terms we are also able to observe both exercised and unexercised
options at any given point in time. Third, because the key determinant of project cash flow is
the price of natural gas, a commodity whose expected price and implied volatility are readily
observable to the econometrician from financial derivatives, we have the inputs necessary to
characterize investment behavior. Fourth, due to the regulatory environment of the shale
fields in our setting, we are able to observe and precisely measure neighboring activity from
peers.3 Lastly, we develop an empirical framework which uses novel quasi-exogenous variation
in peer activity to mitigate some of the challenges in identifying peer effects.
       Our empirical design to assess the exercise behavior of firms is based on a duration analysis
using a hazard model. The objective of using this empirical framework is to compute how
different factors affect the probability of exercising an option at time t, conditional on the
option having not been exercised up to time t. The data in our sample is conducive to this
type of analysis because each option has a well-defined starting point, we can clearly observe
when an option is exercised, and we have detailed data on how covariates vary during and
up to the time of exercise. This empirical specification is consistent with others that have
modeled drilling decisions (Kellogg (2014)).
       We find that the likelihood that a firm exercises its real option is strongly related to peer
exercise behavior. Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in adjacent peer project
exercise activity is linked with between a 10.9% and 38.2% increase in exercise likelihood.
These magnitudes imply that peer behavior can be as economically important as baseline real
option inputs, such as commodity prices and volatility, in determining exercise decisions.4 We
show that our baseline peer effect result holds after mitigating endogeneity concerns linked
   3
     This is a key distinction from Kellogg (2014) who focuses on single operated fields, where there is only
one firm operating in each area.
   4
     As in Kellogg (2014), we find that commodity price and implied volatility are linked with exercise decisions
in our setting.



                                                       3
with peer exercise decisions as well as across a series of robustness tests.
       Corporate finance theory provides a rich set of extensions to baseline real option models
highlighting the importance of peer behavior and information revelation for exercise decisions
(e.g., Grenadier (1999), Grenadier and Wang (2007), Grenadier and Malenko (2011), Novy-
Marx (2007)). Our empirical framework is well suited to assess these theories. In most
other settings, even the task of defining the set of peers can be a challenge.5 In our setting,
geographical proximity of real options to one another provides a natural way to define peer
sets. Specifically, we are able to precisely observe how firms respond to adjacent competitor
project exercise decisions because our data is granular enough that we can observe the specific
drilling units (real options) a firm has, as well as the adjacent drilling units operated by
competitors. The grid pattern of drilling units in the shale fields in our setting are such
that every six square mile township is divided in 36 sections and for each section in our
sample, we have eight adjacent sections to it (see Figure 3). We can take advantage of the
significant variation in neighboring activity to evaluate two possible channels through which
peer exercise could affect exercise decisions.
       First, as Grenadier (1996) highlights, firms may face a common pool problem, in which
case they may decide to exercise early because the common pool of resources could be drained
by neighboring competitors and hence unravel any option value to wait. However, this
phenomenon is unlikely to explain exercise behavior because shale rock lies deep underground
and traps hydrocarbons tightly. It is only under very intense pressure (hydraulic fracturing or
“fracking”) that the highly non-permeable rock releases hydrocarbons, with minimal impact
on neighboring non-fracked shale rock. If shale gas were a significant common pool, one would
likely see only a few wells being drilled to extract natural gas, which is in sharp contrast to
the dense drilling that one actually observes in shale gas extraction (see Figure 3).
       Second, we evaluate the role that competitor exercise behavior has in providing potentially
important information externalities. As Grenadier (1999) points out, information revelation
   5
    In a broad cross-section of firms, defining peer sets, often through industry classification, can be chal-
lenging (see Hoberg and Phillips (2016)). Defining geographic proximity at the firm level represents another
challenge; for instance, headquarter location (easily observable) might act as a poor proxy for where firm
operations actually take place.



                                                      4
through real option exercise decisions is a key dimension through which real option exercise
behavior differs from financial option exercise behavior.6 However, micro-level empirical
evidence attempting to quantify the potential importance of information revelation remains
limited. We find direct evidence that information externalities linked with peer behavior are
important. Specifically, we find that firm exercise activity is most strongly linked to peer
exercise decisions when peers have more experience in drilling shale infill projects. Firms with
the most experience in a field are higher up the learning curve in terms of how to extract
natural gas, so the information revealed from their exercise is likely more valuable.
      What is the nature of the information firms obtain from adjacent exercise activity? Ad-
jacent exercise activity could inform a firm on how to better extract reserves from its own
project. Specifically, adjacent exercised projects reveal detailed information on the “tar-
get” depths at which the formation was drilled, which helps firms target their own drilling
prospects better. Further, public disclosures require information to be disclosed on the mix
of fracking chemicals and techniques applied to drill and complete a well; this information
can then be used by peer firms to determine which approach will allow them to extract
natural gas most efficiently from their own reservoir (e.g., Covert (2015)).7 Lastly, adjacent
exercise activity by peer firms could also be a reflection of some private information about
rock quality a firm has which is not yet publicly known, so that observing a peer firm ex-
ercise could cause a firm to update positively on the rock quality of a project. All of these
reasons highlight how neighboring peer exercise activity can lead to economically important
information externalities that can result in upward project NPV revisions.
      A central concern when evaluating the effect of peer exercise decisions is endogeneity.
For example, common characteristics (e.g., shared geology or technology) may be driving the
exercise behavior of both the firm and its neighboring competitors. This common unobserved
factor is a well-established source of endogeneity that leads to the reflection problem (Manski
(1993)). To mitigate this endogeneity concern we develop novel quasi-exogenous variation in
peer firm exercise activity.
  6
      A notable potential exception is the exercise of financial options by insiders or executives.
  7
      See fracfocus.org for examples of the types of disclosures that are made public.



                                                        5
       Our primary identification strategy relies on the idea that beyond the Net Present Value
(NPV) of a project, the relative rank of a given project in a firm’s portfolio of capital projects
may also matter for investment exercise decisions.8 Therefore, two peer firms with adjacent
projects of similar NPVs could undertake exercise decisions differently due to the relative
rank of their project within each firm’s portfolio of projects. For each real option in our
sample, we construct the average relative rank percentile of adjacent projects within the
peer firms’ portfolio of projects at each point in time. We use this variable to instrument
for adjacent peer project exercise activity. We find evidence, using both instrumented and
reduced form versions of this measure of quasi-exogenous variation in peer exercise activity,
that the adjacent exercise behavior of peer firms affects the exercise behavior of a firm.
       The identification assumption of our empirical design is that the relative rank of the NPV
of an adjacent real option in a peer firm’s portfolio affects a firm’s own exercise decision only
through its effect on the likelihood that the peer firm will exercise that adjacent option,
and not through another channel. While this assumption is not directly testable, we can
provide several pieces of evidence that support it. First, if a common characteristic affected
both the relative rank of a peer firm’s real option as well as the exercise of a firm’s own
real option, then the exclusion restriction would be violated. In such circumstances, one
might expect highly ranked projects by different firms would tend to cluster in the same area
and we show that this is not the case. Specifically, we show that after controlling for local
geography fixed effects, which essentially controls for the absolute (but not relative) NPV
of a project, the relative rank of adjacent projects owned by peer firms is uncorrelated with
the relative rank of a given project within a firm’s own portfolio.9 Second, we show that
our results hold when we limit our sample only to the real options with low relative rank
within a firm’s portfolio, while its peer firms’ adjacent projects’ relative rank is high. Third,
we find that firms still respond to peer exercise decisions on units that are directly adjacent
   8
      It is well established that firms cannot pursue all positive NPV projects at the same time due to opera-
tional, labor, or capital constraints. Hence project ranking is a commonly used tool to select only the most
profitable projects (see Berk and DeMarzo (2014) as an example).
    9
      The relationship is not statistically significant, and, if anything, is slightly negative. Further, throughout
all specifications, we control directly for the absolute quality of peer firm projects by using the production
from the first well of each adjacent peer units as a proxy for the NPV of the peers’ adjacent infill wells.


                                                         6
to theirs, even after controlling for peer exercise decisions on projects elsewhere. Fourth,
we find that firms’ response to adjacent peer exercise decisions is concentrated around the
activity from peers with substantial experience in extracting shale in the area of interest.
Taken together, these tests make significant progress in addressing the primary endogeneity
concerns in measuring responses to peer real option exercise decisions, and set a high bar for
alternative explanations. Specifically, an alternative explanation would need to reconcile why
the relative NPV rank of a given project in a peer firm portfolio would have a direct effect
on a firm’s exercise decision for a reason other than peer exercise activity, when that relative
rank is uncorrelated with any metric that is linked with the absolute NPV of a project ex
ante.
   As a final set of analysis, we estimate the optimal stopping (exercise) time based on
baseline real option models (e.g., Paddock et al. (1988), Dixit and Pindyck (1994)). After
incorporating all of the detailed granular inputs our setting affords into these baseline mod-
els, we find that differences exist between actual exercise behavior and predicted exercise
behavior. However, we find that the predictions from the baseline model are closer to the
actual observed behavior once we take into account information externalities due to adjacent
peer exercise decisions. Specifically, if we model beliefs about the value of unexercised infill
options to be a function of both the production of the first well on a drilling unit and the
adjacent peer exercise activity, we find that exercise decisions are significantly closer to those
predicted by theory.
   By analyzing peer effects and social learning in the context of real option exercise behav-
ior, our study contributes to two important strands of the literature. First, we contribute to
the real option literature by empirically evaluating the importance of a broad set of theories,
which hypothesize that information revelation and externalities may be an important compo-
nent of exercise decisions (Grenadier (1996), Grenadier (1999), Grenadier (2002), Novy-Marx
(2007), Grenadier and Wang (2005) and Grenadier and Malenko (2011)). In particular, we
show that peer exercise is important relative to the predictions from standard real option
models (e.g., Dixit and Pindyck (1994), and Kellogg (2014)). To understand why this may
be the case, we focus on a setting where we can directly identify peer effects and the role

                                                7
of information externalities in option exercise behavior (Grenadier (1999)). Using a hazard
model framework we show that information externalities from peer effects can have economic
effects on the same order of magnitude as natural gas prices and volatility. Second, our novel
micro-level evidence of the effect of peer activity on option exercise helps us contribute to the
literature on learning from peers. That literature documents that peer effects are important
for a variety of corporate decisions, such as those on investment policy (Foucault and Fre-
sard (2014), Bustamante and Fresard (2017)), capital structure policy (Leary and Roberts
(2014)), and dividend policy (Greenan (2018)). The economics literature provides evidence
on social learning and the adoption of new technologies (e.g., Foster and Rosenzweig (1995),
Thompson and Thompson (2001), Conley and Hudry (2010), and Covert (2015)). Covert
(2015) in particular relates to this study because it documents social learning on decisions
related to what technology to use to drill and complete wells. The evidence Covert (2015)
provides is precisely the type of information externality that can make social learning im-
portant for real option exercise decisions. However, similar to Covert (2015), much of the
existing literature related to social learning is focused on how firms learn and invest (see
Conley and Hudry (2010), Covert (2015)). Our contribution is to show that this peer learn-
ing also has an important impact on the timing of investment decisions, that is within a real
options context, peer learning affects when firms invest.
   The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1, we provide the institutional background on
the natural gas industry and our setting. In Section 2 we discuss our data, and in Section
3 we report our main empirical results based on survival analysis. In Section 4 we compare
actual vs. predicted exercise time where predicted exercise time is derived from optimal
stopping time theory. Section 5 concludes.




                                               8
1     Real Options in the Context of Shale Drilling

1.1    Project Overview: Natural Gas Shale Drilling

Our setting exploits the institutional features of natural gas shale development to study real
option exercise behavior of firms. To extract shale natural gas, firms must first drill a well with
a horizontal leg into shale rock (typically more than a mile below the surface), then complete
the well by hydraulically fracturing (“fracking”) it. The process of drilling a well may take
a few days to a few weeks, while fracking is done as a separate process after drilling, and
takes another few days. Both drilling and fracking entail substantial upfront capital costs of
$4.7 million per well on average in our sample. Once a well is completed, it produces natural
gas, and declines over time. The critical features determining the profitability of the cash
flows are natural gas prices and the volume extracted. Costs include lease operating costs
and royalty costs, and typically comprise less than 40% of a well’s revenues after the well is
drilled. Cash flows are at their highest level at the beginning of a well’s life, then decline
over time as pressure from the well declines. Once a well starts producing there is little that
a firm can do to cause the production to go up or down outside of a wells natural decline
without risking damage to a well. Figure 1 plots the cash flows and capital expenditures
associated with drilling a well (see Gilje and Taillard (2016) for more details).


1.2    Infill Drilling

One of the key features of our setting is the unique ability to observe the flexibility and
maturity that firms have on their investment options. As in Kellogg (2014), we focus on
“infill” drilling projects in order to have well defined maturity assumptions. An “infill” project
corresponds to the decision to drill additional wells on a drilling unit (section) that a firm
already operates. The first (or existing well) on a unit contractually holds the operatorship
of the acreage as long as the first well produces; in this case the lease is said to be “held
by production” or HBP. A firm has the option to drill additional wells at any point in the
future so long as the initial well is still producing. This provides firms with options that


                                                9
have very long maturities as the life of the first well can range anywhere from 20 to 40
years. In all the natural gas shale developments that we study in Oklahoma, a single drilling
unit (section) of 640 acres can support up to 8 shale wells (or roughly up to $37.8 million
in capital expenditures). With 2,853 units representing up to $107.9 billion in potential
capital commitments, the infill options in this study represent capital investments that are
economically meaningful, with a significant degree of flexibility on when to exercise these
options. Figure 2 plots a timeline of the infill drilling decision.
   A key advantage of focusing on infill drilling is that, unlike most studies of investment
decisions, we can observe both exercised and unexercised options. Indeed, drilling units with
only one existing well effectively contain many unexercised options as no additional (infill)
wells have been drilled in the unit yet. Our study focuses on the timing of the first infill well
in a unit. It is important to note that a firm could delay the exercise of the second, third, and
follow-up infill wells. However, we find that 90.2% of all infill wells are drilled concurrently
to the first infill well. As such, infill drilling does not seem to be exploratory by nature; but
rather, a decision to extract significantly more resources from a unit that has been held by
production with the first well up to that point.


1.3    Measuring Peer Activity

The ability to analyze firm’s investment responses to competitors’ actions is a key novelty
of our study. We focus on the development of major natural gas fields across multiple
operators, a setting where information and other externalities may be more relevant. This
is a key distinction from Kellogg (2014) who focuses on single operated fields, where there is
only one firm drilling a field.
   The regulatory and land environment in Oklahoma lends itself well to further our un-
derstanding of how firms might react to adjacent drilling activity. Specifically, every drilling
unit in our setting conforms to Jeffersonian survey, and lies on a grid system with squares
that are one mile by one mile. Every 6 by 6 group of squares (36 “units” in total) rolls up
to a township survey (township level). This is attractive for several reasons. Every drilling


                                                10
unit, by construction, has eight clearly delineated adjacent units. We observe every natural
gas well drilled in Oklahoma so we can observe the exact timing and nature of all adjacent
activity throughout our sample period. Second, we will use the township survey information
to control for potential geography or area specific effects in our econometric specifications.
Figure 3 plots the shale drilling activity in a township. The lines represent the horizontal
wellbores of shale wells. Sections in the grid are the drilling units, sections with one wellbore
have not yet been infill drilled, while sections with multiple wellbores have been infill drilled.


1.4    Real Option Framework

The firm’s option to infill drill corresponds to the choice it has to spend capital to further
develop its proven natural gas reserves. As noted in the introduction, the timing flexibility
related to the investment decision to drill a well on proved reserves can be viewed as an
American call option (e.g., Paddock et al. (1988)). Infill drilling maps nicely into the real
option framework: The capital needed to develop the reserves can be viewed as the strike
price of the option. The value of the reserves after capital has been expended, that is,
the producing proved developed reserves, corresponds to the underlying asset. The timing
flexibility a firm has to infill drill can be viewed as the time to maturity. Because the first
well on the section holds by production (HBP) the section as long as it is economically viable,
the option to infill drill has a long maturity attached to it; at least 20 years on average. And
as the decision to infill drill (exercise the option) can be made at any time over this period, it
can be viewed as an American call option. The cash flow volatility of infill wells corresponds
to the volatility of the underlying asset used in standard option pricing model. Firms in
our setting all produce the same commodity, natural gas, and the market provides indicators
of expected futures prices and volatility, both of which can be used as inputs for an option
pricing model, along with other inputs described in more details in Section 4.




                                               11
1.5       Optimal Exercise Time and Peer Effects

It is well established that American call options on dividend paying underlying assets have
an optimal exercise time that can occur prior to maturity. As Dixit and Pindyck (1994)
point out dividends can be viewed as either explicit or implicit in the context of real options,
and broadly speaking can be viewed as the benefit a firm obtains from exercising an option
sooner rather than later. In our setting, a straightforward way of viewing the cost a firm
incurs by waiting is that future cash flows get discounted by a firm’s cost of capital. The
longer a firm waits to exercise, the more discounting will be applied to the underlying cash
flows generated by the well. Conversely, waiting (delaying drilling) confers the ability to drill
in future states of the world that exhibit higher natural gas prices. Therefore one can view
early exercise as the result of a tradeoff between the value of early exercise from having to
discount cash flows less relative to delaying the exercise in order to get better natural gas
pricing in the future.10
       All else equal, higher cash flow volatility tends to result in delayed investment, due to
the increased prospects of higher cash flows, while a higher cost of capital tends to result
in investment occurring sooner. The classic derivations of the optimal stopping time (see
Section 4 for more details) lead to a trigger rule, whereby a trigger value can be computed
such that it is optimal to exercise the option when the value of the underlying asset (natural
gas reserves) exceeds the trigger value from below for the first time. When natural gas prices
rise, it is more likely that the value of the underlying asset will exceed the trigger value.
Hence, commodity price increases will lead to earlier exercise of the real option all else equal.
       Natural gas prices and natural gas price volatility have clear predictions as to how they
might affect exercise based on a standard options framework, with volatility being negatively
correlated with exercise (more valuable to delay when volatility is high) and natural gas
prices being positively correlated with likelihood of exercise. We also include information on
nominal interest rates in our initial tests. Typically a decrease in interest rates decreases the
discount rate and hence makes projects more valuable and hence more likely to be undertaken.
  10
    As we will see in Section 4, in our context, a firm’s cost of capital will correspond to the dividend rate
on a stock.


                                                     12
However, in the context of real options, the effect of interest rates is more ambiguous because
a decrease in interest rates makes waiting more appealing, as cash flows in the future are
valued more today.11
       Assessing how peer effects alter option exercise behavior is the central focus of this study.
There are a broad set of theoretical papers that claim that informational spillovers from
peer activity can be of first order importance in understanding real option exercise behavior.
The mechanism underpinning these peer effects relate to the information content that is
revealed by the exercise of infill drill options on the eight adjacent drilling units (see Figure
6). Specifically, the more infill wells being drilled nearby, the more information there is
on the depths and porosity of the formation, which will in turn inform a firm on how to
most efficiently extract natural gas from its own infill wells. Additionally, public disclosures
require information to be disclosed on particular chemical mixes and techniques of hydraulic
fracturing of “fracking” a well (see Covert (2015)). This reveals information on techniques
that might work well for fracking a particular reservoir as well as those that might not work
as well.12 It is important to note that, even seeing a negative outcome in terms of production
in an adjacent section, that is knowing which “fracking” techniques do not work, will allow a
firm to learn how to better extract from its own section. Lastly, adjacent exercise activity by
peer firms could also be a reflection of some private information about rock quality a peer firm
has which is not yet publicly known; as such, observing adjacent exercise may lead a firm to
update positively on the rock quality of a project. Grenadier (1999)’s develops a theoretical
framework of real option exercise to assess the potential impact of information externalities
from peer exercise activity. All of the reasons listed above justify why we could see positive
information externalities from neighboring activity in our setting and thus validate the use
of our setting to empirically assess Grenadier (1999)’s main prediction that peer exercise
activity will lead firms to exercise early. Within the context of a classic Dixit and Pindyck
(1994) framework, the information externalities from peer effects result in higher project
  11
     The effect depends somewhat on whether a movement in interest rates (r) will have a commensurate
impact on the firm’s cost of capital (δ). See Section 5.4 of Dixit and Pindyck (1994) for a more detailed
discussion on the topic.
  12
     See fracfocus.org for examples of the types of disclosures that are made public.



                                                   13
NPV, pushing firms closer to the optimal “trigger” rule, all else equal.



2        Data

2.1       Construction of Panel for Hazard Model

Our sample period begins in January 2005 and ends in December 2016. We construct a
panel of all units (sections) in Oklahoma with one horizontal natural gas well in production.13
This first well confers the operator the option to infill drill the unit with additional wells as
described above. The number of these outstanding available options gradually increases over
the sample period as shown in Figure 4C. By the end of our sample in 2016, there is a total
of 2,853 infill drilling options, 680 of which have been exercised (~24%). The number of firms
(operators) corresponds to 159. Table 1 reports the summary statistics for the panel we use
in the hazard model. In total our data is composed of wells in 442 townships across every
natural gas shale development in Oklahoma.
       Our empirical analysis is based on the panel data of exercise decisions to infill drill on
sections that are held by production with the existing well (first drilled) on the section. The
unit of observation in this panel is at the drilling unit-month level, in total there are 162,905
drilling unit-months prior to exercise in our sample. To test some of the key predictions of
the real option framework outlined in the previous section, we include the 18-month natural
gas futures price from Bloomberg and 18 month implied volatility of natural gas prices as
in Kellogg (2014). We also include the 5 year nominal risk free rate on U.S. Treasury bond
to capture the impact of interest rate movements. All these variables are computed at the
monthly frequency.
       To proxy for the expected value of the reserves that will be unlocked by exercising the
option to infill drill, we compute the present value of future cash flows generated by the infill
well using the futures curve for pricing, and an expected production profile based off the
  13
    Oklahoma contains both oil and gas. We focus only on wells that are designated as natural gas shale
wells on their drilling and completion reports, meaning the primary economic rationale for drilling the well is
the recovery of natural gas, not oil. Therefore, natural gas prices and natural gas price volatility are directly
related to the investment decision to drill a well in our sample.


                                                       14
unit’s first horizontal well’s production in its first year.14 Production data is reported by the
Oklahoma Corporation Commission and Oklahoma Tax Commission at the well level. Lastly,
we compute the expected drilling and completion costs for each well based on regulatory
disclosures of well costs filed with the Oklahoma Corporation commission.
       The final set of variables relate to adjacent activity from the firm itself (own) and its
peers (competitors). Recall that each section can have up to eight neighboring infill options
exercised. We find that on average, over the entire sample period, there are 0.34 adjacent
options exercised by its peers and 0.40 by itself. Throughout our regression specifications, to
aid the economic interpretations in the tables, we standardize all variables related to adja-
cent activity (adjacent peer exercise, adjacent firm exercise, and associated relative ranking
variables) to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. This scaling does not affect
the statistical significance of any variables, but does provide an attractive economic inter-
pretation of these variables such that the Hazard Impact factors relate to a one standard
deviation change relative to the mean. Table 1, also highlights that the medians are at zero
reflecting the fact that many units do not have any infill wells during our sample period, the
standard deviations do signal heterogeneity in neighboring activity. We exploit this hetero-
geneity in our main econometric specifications. To address potential endogeneity concerns,
we also compute the ranking of each infill well based on the portfolio of options an operator
has at any given point in time. This variable can only be computed on a subset of observa-
tions (103,451) and is defined as the relative rank of an infill option based on the quality of
the first horizontal well drilled on a drilling unit at a given point in time (see Section 3 for
details).
       The key event that we use to determine whether an option is exercised is the “spud date”
of the first infill well. This is the date when drilling capital expenditure is initiated and
the drilling of a second well in the section begins and is directly observable from regulatory
  14
    There are many potential ways to model for expected production of a well. We settled on the simplest
specification based on the 1st well in the drilling unit. Our results are robust to modeling different types of
technological improvements over time. Using the simple approach, we find that using the 1st well’s production
explains (R-squared) 64% of the variation in the 2nd well’s production in the drilling unit (the first infill well
exercised).




                                                       15
filings from the Oklahoma Corporation Commission. From this data we know precisely the
date, time, firm, location (drilling unit) of the infill exercise decision. Figure 4A plots the
number of options exercised over time, while Figure 4B plots the amount of time firms wait
to exercise an option for the subset of options that are exercised. Because an option only
becomes available to exercise after the first well has been drilled on a drilling unit, the number
of options during the sample period is not the same across time. Figure 4C plots the number
of options over time, as well as the number of options exercised at any given point in time.



3     Results

3.1    Peer Effects and Option Exercise

To assess the factors that might affect real option exercise behavior, we perform a duration
analysis based on hazard functions. The objective of using a hazard function is that it
allows us to compute the probability of exercising an option, within an interval, conditional
on having not exercised the option up to the time of the interval. Specifically, the hazard
function is defined as:
                                           P r(t ≤ T < t + s|T ≥ t)
                              h(t) =lim
                                     s→0              s
We parametrize the hazard function using a commonly-used semi-parametric approach:


        h(t) = h0 (t) exp(β1 N GP ricet + β2 N GV olt + β3 DrillingCostst + β4 IntRatet




          +β5 F irstW ellP rodi + β6 AdjExercisedOwni,t + β7 AdjExercisedP eeri,t )


    This parametrization corresponds to the well-established Cox Proportional Hazard Model,
whereby the unit of observation is at the drilling unit-month level. This empirical design
determines the factors that make it more (or less) likely that the option to drill the 1st infill
well on a unit (section) gets exercised. Once an option is exercised on a drilling unit it is


                                                16
dropped from our sample. Specifically, our duration model specification models the infill
drilling decision as a “single-spell” dataset, whereby each individual unit (section) enters the
dataset when the 1st well in the section is drilled and exits either when the 1st infill well is
exercised (drilled) or is (right) censored if no infill wells are exercised prior to the end of our
sample period.15
       We cluster standard errors at the township level in every specification and provide further
robustness tests in terms of econometric specifications in the Appendix. A useful baseline
when conducting hazard analysis is to plot the survival function; this allows us to observe
the rate at which options are being exercised in the sample, we do this in Figure 5. The plot
begins at 1 and then declines as time passes (in months) and options are exercised (and no
longer survive). By the end of the time period available 23.8% of all options are exercised.
Having established this baseline hazard rate, we can then assess which covariates may cause
a shift up or down in the curve in Figure 5, that is, what are the factors that might lead
firms to exercise options sooner or later.
       The focus of our study is on how neighboring peer project activity affects the baseline
hazard rate. To do this, we test the effect of neighboring peer activity on the decision to
exercise by calculating the number of adjacent drilling sections (as many as eight) that have
infill options exercised by peer firms at each point in time. We include this new variable as
well as a measure of the firm’s own adjacent activity in the parametrization of the hazard
function. To provide context for this peer effect, we include in our baseline specifications
the same set of variables as those found in Kellogg (2014). These include natural gas prices,
natural gas volatility, drilling costs and interest rates. Recall from Section 1 that standard
option theory makes prediction on these variables. For instance, as higher volatility makes
the option to delay more valuable, all else equal an increase in volatility should push firms
to delay investment. By including volatility of natural gas as a covariate (N GV olt ), we can
  15
     90.2% of all infill wells are exercised (drilled) concurrently with the first infill well. That is, when firms
exercise their first real option to do infill drilling, they typically exercise many infill options at once. Because
infill options tend to get exercised together, modeling the time to exercise of the first infill well is capturing the
main economic decision associated with infill real option exercise for the firms in our sample; this modeling
decision also allows us to maintain a tractable modeling framework.




                                                         17
assess whether this theoretical relationship holds in the data.
   Results are shown in Table 2. We find a strong positive relationship between the likelihood
of exercising and peer real option exercise activity. To facilitate the interpretation of the
adjacent real option exercise variables, we standardize the variables to have mean of zero and
standard deviation of one, so that each coefficient/Hazard Impact factor can be interpreted as
a one standard deviation change relative to the mean. Specifically, a one standard deviation
increase in adjacent peer infill exercise activity increases the likelihood that a firm will exercise
its infill option by between 10.9% and 38.1% depending on the specification. This result
is supportive of Grenadier (1999)’s main prediction that information externalities play an
important role in the exercise decisions of firms.
   As in Kellogg (2014) we find that natural gas prices and natural gas volatility affect real
option exercise decisions. Namely, we find that higher volatility reduces the hazard rate
(the rate at which options are exercised). Conversely, natural gas prices (N GP ricet ) have
a positive effect on the hazard rate, as an increase in the natural gas price increases the
value (NPV) of the project and makes the option to delay less valuable. In economic terms,
based on the Hazard Impact percentage in specification (1) of Table 2, we find that a one
standard deviation increase in natural gas price volatility decreases the likelihood of exercising
an option by 14.0% (-3.23*4.32) relative to the baseline hazard rate. Alternatively, a one
standard deviation increase in the price of natural gas increases the likelihood of exercise
by 26.1% (14.77*1.77) relative to the baseline hazard rate. These results hold across the
three specifications of Table 2. They suggest that firms’ behavior is directionally consistent
with these key predictors of option exercise activity. Furthermore, these magnitudes provide
important context for our peer effect results. Specifically, peer effects have an economic
impact on the same order of magnitude as baseline real option model inputs such as natural
gas price and volatility.
   Lastly, we also control for the quality of the first horizontal well drilled in the unit as well
as the estimated cost of the infill well in specifications (2) and (3) of Table 2. The intuition
behind the first of these controls is that the first well is an indicator of the quality of the
geology in an area: the more it produces, the higher the NPV of the additional infill projects,

                                                 18
and hence the more likely the option to infill drill will be exercised. Results in Table 2 support
this hypothesis. Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in the quality of the first well
results in an 88.5% (51.48*1.72) increase in the likelihood of exercise. Drilling costs will
vary over time; for instance wages for qualified workers were rising over our sample period
(e.g., Bartik et al. (2018)). These time-varying costs could affect option exercise behavior
by changing the strike price over time, so controlling for time-varying drilling costs is also
important. Results from Table 2 show no significant impact of drilling costs on the likelihood
of exercising early, similar to Kellogg (2014)’s finding.


3.2     Endogeneity: Peer Effects and Option Exercise

A potential concern with the interpretation of Table 2 is that the correlation between a
firm’s exercise behavior and its competitors’ adjacent exercise activity cannot necessarily
be attributed to a reaction to adjacent activity (Manski (1993)). For example, a common
factor, such as shared technology or similar reserve quality, could affect both the adjacent
competitors’ decisions to exercise as well as a firm’s own decision to exercise. To address this
concern, we need to identify the exogenous component of adjacent exercise activity.


3.2.1   Defining the Instrument for Peer Activity

For the construction of our measure of exogenous variation of peer activity, we start from
the observation that firms typically face operational, labor, or capital constraints and thus
are unlikely to undertake all positive NPV projects at once. As such, they make decisions
to invest not just based on the absolute NPV of a project, but also on the relative NPV or
rank of a project in a firm’s portfolio of capital projects.
   The measure we construct can best be illustrated with an example. Figure 7 shows the
real options of three firms. Firm A has two separate drilling units, each of which is adjacent
to drilling units owned by Firm B and Firm C. Now assume that the NPV of Firm A’s infill
projects and the infill project adjacent to it, owned by peers, is $1 million. However, let’s also
assume that Firm B has a portfolio of four additional real options with NPVs, if exercised


                                               19
today, of $2 million, $3 million, $4 million, and $5 million respectively. Alternatively Firm C
has a portfolio of real options with an NPV, if exercised today, of $0.90 million, $0.50 million,
$0.30 million, and $0.20 million. All firms have positive NPV projects, but for Firm B the
project adjacent to Firm A is ranked fifth among its portfolio of projects, while for Firm
C it is ranked first. Now assuming that these firms face some operational, labor, or capital
constraints, and firms can only undertake one project at a given point in time.16 Based on the
rankings of these projects, we would expect Firm B will not exercise its project next to Firm
A, while Firm C will, even though the projects have the same absolute NPV. When Firm C
exercises, Firm A benefits from the information on how to complete the well, and information
on the depths of the zone to target, while it has no new information for its project next to
Firm B. Therefore Firm A benefits from an information externality not due to any shared or
common characteristic of the specific real option in question, but due to the ranking within
the existing portfolio of the other real options that Firm C has. The identification assumption
is that the rankings of the projects in firm B and Firm C’s portfolios is exogenous relative to
the investment opportunities that Firm A has. We offer several tests in the next section to
document that the project value of a given firm’s option is unrelated to the relative ranking
of the adjacent options owned by peer firms.
       In Table 3, we empirically test whether rank ordering matters in option exercise decisions.
The variable we construct is the relative percentile of each infill project in a firm’s portfolio.
Our rank ordering is based on the production of the first horizontal well on a drilling unit.17
For every month in the sample, for every firm, we rank the total number of natural gas infill
real options the firm has across the entire state of Oklahoma as of that point in time, and
then map that rank ordering to percentiles.18 So, for example, if a firm has 20 real options
  16
      Our analysis assumes all projects have the same investment cost at a given point in time, a reasonable
assumption in our sample as Gilje and Taillard (2016) provide evidence that investment cost does not vary
significantly across firms in a given region for shale gas development.
   17
      We assessed the potential of several alternative measures for project ranking, including adjusting the
production of the first well by its vintage. We found that the unadjusted first well production had the highest
explanatory power over infill production, relative to any alternatives. Additionally, we find no variation in
the explanatory power of the first well production for infill productivity based on whether the well was drilled
early on or later in the shale development.
   18
      Ideally one would want to have visibility to all real options a firm has, including those outside of Ok-
lahoma. However, despite being limited to all infill options in Oklahoma we still obtain strong statistical


                                                      20
in its portfolio, the number one well would be in the 95th percentile (1-1/20). As can be
seen in Table 3, the higher the percentile rank in a firm’s portfolio, the more likely it is that
the project is exercised. To ease the interpretation of the relative rank percentile coefficients,
the data has been normalized to have mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. Therefore,
based on the different specifications found in Table 3, for a one standard deviation increase
in percentile, a firm is between 65.8% and 84.9% more likely to exercise an option.


3.2.2     Instrumental variable approach

Table 4 Panel A reports both the first stage and second stage estimations, where Adjacent
Peer Exercise Activity, defined as the number of infill options exercised by peers adjacent
to the drilling unit i at month t, is the variable that is instrumented.19 The instrument we
construct is the average relative percentile of all adjacent drilling units owned by peer firms
as of month t based on the relative rank of each adjacent infill project in a peer’s portfolio of
projects. The relative ranking of each infill project will fluctuate over time; for example, if a
peer firm adds real options with strong first wells elsewhere, then the relative percentile will
go down. If it adds real options with relatively poor first wells elsewhere, then the relative
percentile will improve. We include all control variables from the second stage of our model
in the first stage. The first stage regression is given by:


  #AdjacentExercisedOptionsP eeri,t =
                                                  β1 AvgRelativeRankP ercAdjacentP eerP rojectsi,t
                                                  +Controls + T ownshipF E + εi,t

    The second stage is given by the Cox proportional hazard model whereby the covariates
are comprised of our instrumented variable for neighboring peer activity from the first stage,
as well as a series of additional control variables. We correct for the estimation error in the
power from using the rankings of real options in our sample (see Table 3). This is consistent with the notion
that drilling decisions are typically made at the play/regional level and as such the portfolio ranking within
Oklahoma seems appropriate.
  19
     Table 4 has fewer observations than Table 3 because we can only use our instrument once some adjacent
peer infill options exist: if a firm’s real option to infill has no adjacent infill options then there is no relative
rank from an adjacent peer that can be used to construct the instrument.


                                                         21
first stage in our Cox two-stage IV model by bootstrapping the standard errors (MacKinnon
(2002)). The appropriateness of this approach has been supported in recent literature (see
Tchetgen et al. (2015)).20
       As can be seen across the different first stage specifications at the bottom of Table 4 Panel
A, the average relative rank of the adjacent real option peer projects has high predictive power
for the adjacent peer exercise activity. In our second stage estimations, we control directly for
the absolute NPV of adjacent peer infill projects by including the average production from the
first (pre-infill) well of adjacent infill peer options as a control. The underlying assumption
of this instrument is that the only dimension through which it affects our key dependent
variable of interest, the exercise decision of a firm, is through the exercise behavior of peers.
We provide a number of tests supporting this assumption in Section 3.2.4. Among the control
variables, the only one that loses significance in the instrumental approach (relative to Table
2) is the implied volatility of natural gas prices. We directly test whether our instrument
is correlated with implied volatility. The correlation between implied volatility and our
instrument is slightly negative, -0.0245, but not statistically different from zero. Further,
while the coefficient does lose its statistical significance, it remains firmly in the general
range of the baseline estimates. Given the economic channel through which the instrument
affects peer activity, this evidence does not suggest that our instrument is operating through
any effect on the implied volatility.
       Overall the results from Table 4 suggest that the economic interpretation from Table 2 still
holds when we use an exogenous source of variation in adjacent activity driven by the relative
rank of projects in peers’ portfolios. For ease of economic interpretation for our key variable
of interest, we report the coefficient on the standardized variable, so each coefficient/Hazard
Impact factor can be interpreted as a one standard deviation change relative to the mean.
As such, a one standard deviation increase in our instrument leads to between a 79.1% and
94.0% increase in the likelihood of exercising the option to infill drill.
  20
    We document the robustness of our main two-stage models by estimating both IV Probit and IV 2SLS
models on our data and obtain similar results to our main Cox model tests, see Appendix Tables 1, 2, 3, and
4 and related discussion in Section 3.2.3.




                                                    22
3.2.3   Robustness Tests

We first report the reduced form results in Table 4 Panel B for robustness. This regression
is still subject to the exclusion restriction, which in our case means that the relative ranks
of adjacent projects only affect a firm’s decision to exercise via the relative rank’s effect on
adjacent peer project exercise decisions. By not instrumenting we lose the economic inter-
pretation of the coefficient on the number of adjacent peer exercised options, but maintain
the overall intuition of the result reported in Table 4 Panel A: firms’ exercise decisions are
affected when a project has plausibly exogenous exposure to a variable that affects adjacent
exercise behavior (relative rank percentile of adjacent peer projects (β6 )).
   We retain the Cox model as the primary specification in the paper because we are studying
the motivation behind the decision to exercise real options, and this decision is dynamic by
nature: firms have to decide in each period whether to exercise or not, conditional on not
having exercised until then. A natural econometric specification for this is the duration
model (as in Kellogg (2014)). The hazard function allows us to approximate the probability
of exercising the option, conditional on having not exercised until then. This modeling has
been used in other contexts in corporate finance (e.g., Leary and Roberts (2014)) and has
several advantages. One of the main advantages in the context of our study being that the
hazard function can easily be made to depend on time-varying variables and has a natural
interpretation.
   Linear probability models and probit specifications both face several drawbacks. First,
even though the decision to exercise is binary, a linear specification implicitly assumes that
the outcome variable can be non-binary and even negative. This is one drawback of using the
linear probability model. Second, both the linear and probit models are not well suited to
capture the dynamic nature of the decision to exercise. Even for probit (or logit) models that
accommodate for the binary nature of the left-hand side variable, these modeling approaches
aim to explain the proportion of exercised options across the entire sample at any given point
in time, which is different from what the hazard models capture in terms of the variables
that influence the probability of exercise at time t, conditional on not having been exercised


                                              23
up to that time. Third, the censoring of the data is another impediment to implementing
traditional methods such as linear probability models or probit regressions. In our setting,
the censoring bias is caused by the fact that we only observe the data until the end of the
sample (right censoring); for firms that do not exercise prior to the end of the sample period,
we only know that they did not exercise their option until that point in time. Although the
linear and probit specifications do not have a natural way of handling this right censoring
issue, the maximum likelihood estimations (MLE) of Cox hazard models are well suited to
handle this specific type of right censoring (see 20.3.2 of Wooldridge (2002)).
       That being said, estimating models using the IV-2SLS (two stage least squares) and IV-
probit frameworks is informative in assessing the robustness of our estimates to the choice
of estimation model. As such, we perform two other specifications for the IV approach
based on an IV-probit and IV-2SLS specification for which the statistical properties are well
established. Namely, in Appendix Table 1, we run an IV-probit specification where the
second stage is a probit modeling of the exercise decision instead of a duration model. The
coefficient on the instrumented adjacent drilling activity of peers is positive and significant.
Appendix Table 2 provide the results for the IV-2SLS specification. Again, we find a positive
and significant loading on the instrumented adjacent peer activity variable.
       Throughout all our main specifications, we have clustered the standard errors at the
township level. In Appendix Table 5 and 6, we re-run Table 4 Panel A and B, but this time
allowing for clustering at the township and year level (double clustering). Our results remain
robust to the double clustering approach.21 The double clustering results typically yield
smaller standard errors (i.e. higher t/z statistics) than one way clustering by township, hence
to be conservative we report township clustering for our main results.22 Taken together, the
evidence in this section suggests that our primary findings are robust across several different
econometric specifications.
  21
     Appendix Table 3 and 4 also provide further support for the results found in the context of the IV-
probit and IV-2SLS specification when clustering of standard errors at the township and year level (double
clustering).
  22
     We document in Appendix Table 7 that our main results are robust to including a control for the first
well being drilled (“purchasing an infill option) and in Appendix Table 8 we document that our main results
are robust to including operator fixed effects..


                                                    24
3.2.4   Internal Validity

In this subsection, we undertake several falsification tests to assess the validity of the in-
strument we outline above. While the exclusion restriction cannot be tested directly, we can
assess the plausibility of some potential explanations which would invalidate our instrument.
   One potential explanation which might be problematic for our instrument would be if
all firms had similar locations for their high percentile wells. For example, if all firms had
their 90th percentile wells in one township, and their 80th percentile wells in another, such
clustering would render inference problematic. Although our main tests include specifications
with township fixed effects and township level clustering, which would control for an overall
township effect; if there is clustering within townships of high percentile groups in some
areas and low percentile groups in other areas it would be problematic as one could argue
the instrument might proxy for the absolute value of the NPV of a project and not just the
relative NPV of a project. We also control directly for production from adjacent peer wells,
which should alleviate this concern to some extent. Nonetheless, we can also directly assess
the impact of this possibility when we regress the relative rank of a real option in a firm’s
portfolio on the relative rank of the real options owned by peers that are adjacent to it at a
given point in time, as in the below regression.


   RelativeRankP ercOwnP rojecti,t =
                                       β1 AvgRelativeRankP ercAdjacentP eerP rojectsi,t
                                       +T ownshipF E + εi,t

   The unit of observation is at the drilling unit i, month t level, and we estimate the OLS
regression in Table 5. As can be seen the coefficient is neither statistically nor economically
significant, suggesting that once township fixed effects are controlled for (as they are in
our main specifications in Table 4), there is no correlation between the percentile rank of a
given real option and the average percentile ranks from adjacent peer firms’ surrounding real
options. This test provides evidence against the idea that all firms have their 90th percentile
wells clustered together somewhere, and their 80th percentile wells clustered somewhere else


                                              25
in a way that would confound our tests.
       Conceptually, this makes sense as prior to any wells being drilled firms go out and lease
drilling acreage when not much information is known about the natural gas resource. Firms
thus end up with different portfolios which can be quite dispersed in terms of their potential
(see Figure 8); this is the variation that is being exploited with our instrument.
       An alternative way to test whether the clustering of relative project quality is driving our
results is to look at situations where a real option is ranked low in a given firm’s relative
percentile rank (below median) while the adjacent real options are ranked highly based on
peer relative rank (above median). We report results on this subsample of real options with
highly dispersed relative rankings in specifications (1) and (2) of Table 6, and as can be seen
from the table, our main result holds.23 Overall we find magnitudes higher in these tests
than our baseline regressions, which is consistent with the idea that information externalities
become more important when relative ranks are more dispersed.
       Another potential concern with our identification is whether a firm exercises its real
option because of the action of a competitor (adjacent exercise) or a characteristic of an
adjacent competitor as described in Manski (1993).24 For example, one might imagine that
a competitor exercising their option on an adjacent drilling unit might also be pursuing
significant drilling activity (exercising other real options) elsewhere in the play, which might
signal, for instance, an overall improvement in extraction technology going forward. In this
case, a firm and its competitor are both deciding to exercise options that are adjacent to
each other, but it is not because the firm is responding to information externalities from the
competitor’s actions taken on the neighboring drilling unit, but rather, due to the general
activity of the competitor taking place both nearby and elsewhere.
       To assess empirically whether our main coefficient of interest for peer effects is affected
by such characteristics, we look at competitors with adjacent drilling units and test whether
their drilling activity outside of the township also bears an influence on a firm’s decision to
exercise. We include this measure as an additional explanatory variable (“Play” activity) in
  23
    Township fixed effects for this model are not well identified due to the dramatically reduced sample size,
much of the sample is absorbed by township fixed effects.
 24
    Leary and Roberts (2014) articulate this issue in detail as it relates to their capital structure analysis.


                                                      26
our hazard regression in Table 7. We find that our main coefficient of interest for peer exercise
activity is unaffected by the inclusion of this control variable. Furthermore, we also find no
consistent direction in the effect of the “Play” activity variable across model specifications.
Overall, this evidence supports the view that firms are influenced by peers’ activity when it
occurs on the drilling units directly adjacent to them, consistent with the information channel
hypothesized.


3.3    The Information Content of Adjacent Exercise Activity

After having established that firms react to neighboring exercise activity when making their
own exercise decisions, we set out to investigate the possible channels behind this result.
To do so, we re-estimate the hazard model from Table 2 with adjacent exercise activity
as an explanatory variable, but this time, we decompose the adjacent exercise activity by
competitor type. In particular, we define experienced and inexperienced competitors as
those with above (respectively below) median drilling activity in the shale play at the time
of exercise.
   In an information transmission framework where agents do not have perfect information
on the value of their drilling prospects, operators will look for informational cues from more
experienced operators about the drilling opportunities in and around their own prospects
(e.g., Grenadier (1999)). Moreover, the type of information disclosed via well completion
and fracking reports is likely more useful when performed by more experienced firms that
are higher up the learning curve in a given resource development. Under this hypothesis, we
would expect firms to react strongly to adjacent exercise behavior from experienced operators.
   In Table 8, we show the results of our empirical decomposition of neighboring activity.
We standardize both of our inexperienced and experienced adjacent activity variables so that
we can more readily make a direct comparison between the two coefficients. Specifically we
normalize these variables to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. We find
that firms exhibit a strong reaction to the adjacent exercise activity of experienced competi-
tors. The economic magnitudes are similar to Table 2 results. These results are supportive of


                                               27
Grenadier (1999), whereby operators make specific inferences from their competitors’ exercise
of real options. In particular, their exercise behavior is influenced by the exercise activity of
experienced operators, and thus experienced operators seem to be creating positive informa-
tional spillovers when exercising their real options.



4        Real Option Modeling
In this section of the paper, we aim to relate the observed exercise behavior to the optimal
exercise behavior predicted by real options models. Our data provides us with the unique
ability to compute the inputs a firm would have if it were to follow real option decision rules
following the classic real options models of Paddock et al. (1988) and Dixit and Pindyck
(1994). We calibrate these models to our data in order to derive optimal exercise thresholds,
i.e. conditions to be satisfied if firms are to exercise in an optimal manner. We then adjust
the framework assuming that firms benefit from some positive information externality from
adjacent peer real option exercise activity and compare both approaches to the exercise
behavior we observe in the data. In Appendix, we provide results that extend those of
this section by calibrating the dynamic discrete choice model of Rust (1987), which was
first applied to the oil and gas industry in Kellogg (2014). Our main conclusions remain
unchanged.


4.1       Real Option Pricing and Optimal Exercise Time

As mentioned earlier, the option to expend capital in order to develop shale reserves (infill
drilling) corresponds to a real option. Firms can decide when to exercise these real options
and a large body of work has been developed to establish both the pricing of these real
options as well as their optimal exercise (stopping) time. We provide the resulting standard
pricing formula as well as the optimal “trigger” rule below.25
       It can be shown under rather general assumptions, that the value of an option F (V ) is
  25
    The derivations can be found in Paddock et al. (1988) and Chapters 5.2 (p. 140-143) and 12.1 (p.
396-403) in Dixit and Pindyck (1994).


                                                28
given by the following closed-form solution:


                                                F (V ) = AV β1


      where                                            v
                                                       u"                #2
                                  1 (r − δ)            u (r − δ)     1            2r
                              β1 = −        −          t
                                                                   −          +
                                  2   σP2                   σP2      2            σP2
      and
                                                 (β1 − 1)β1 −1
                                              A=
                                                 (β1 )β1 I β1 −1
      Whereby r is the risk free rate, δ is the dividend rate of the project and σP is the volatility
of the underlying project value.
      The optimal time to exercise a real option is similar to the optimal time to exercise an
American call option. It can be shown that the optimal stopping time is given by a trigger
rule under very general assumptions.26 Specifically, there exists V ∗ , a trigger value, such that
for when the underlying asset value crosses V ∗ from below for the first time, it is optimal to
exercise. Defining I as the drilling costs of the well, the trigger value is given by:

                                                         β1
                                                V∗ =          I
                                                       β1 − 1

      When exercising at the optimal threshold, the firm gets V ∗ −I where I is the infill drilling
capital expenditure. In the NPV framework, the NPV rule would state that one should drill
as soon as V = I or equivalently         V
                                         I
                                             = 1 . Given that β1 > 1, V ∗ > I, or equivalently         V
                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                           > 1,
i.e. there is a wedge between the NPV rule and the optimal exercise rule. Given the option
value to delay, the value of the underlying asset needs to exceed the investment cost (and in
some cases by a large margin) before it becomes optimal to exercise.
 26
      Certain conditions need to be met for this trigger value to exist and be unique (see Kellogg (2014)).




                                                       29
4.2    Data Sources for Real Option Input Variables

An attractive feature of our setting is that we are able to obtain all of the inputs needed to
compute the real option decision model for firms within the standard real option framework.
The critical components of this data include data on drilling costs, cash flows, natural gas
prices, and natural gas implied volatility.
   To obtain the cost of each well we collect data from the Oklahoma Corporation Com-
mission pooling regulatory documents. This data is disclosed by all firms who initiate the
drilling of the first well in a drilling unit, and is used by other firms with ownership stakes
in the drilling unit who are deciding whether to participate in the well or not. Drilling costs
fluctuate due to the supply and demand for drilling and completion services, and vary little
across operators and geography within a shale basin at any given point in time (Gilje and
Taillard (2016)), but they do vary substantially over time. We have detailed data on 996
wells to estimate the costs of the infill wells in our sample.
   Cash flows from wells are based on production, prices, lease operating costs, and royalty
costs. Production data at a monthly frequency on every well in our sample is available from
the Oklahoma Corporation Commission and Oklahoma Tax Commission. We also use this
detailed month-level data to derive the depletion rate, ω, a key parameter in standard real
option models. Natural gas prices and the implied volatility of natural gas are obtained
from Bloomberg data on natural gas price futures contracts. As in our main hazard model
specifications, we use the 18 month futures price of natural gas and 18 month implied volatility
of natural gas as estimates of the overall gas prices and implied volatility of natural gas
over the life of a well (consistent with Kellogg (2014)). Lease operating costs are based on
estimates obtained from 10-Ks. Specifically, we collected data on lease operating costs from
public firms in our sample, and found that on average during our sample time period lease
operating costs were 21.6% of cash flow. Royalty estimates are based on royalty percentages
obtained from DrillingInfo on 322,340 oil and gas leases signed in Oklahoma, the sensitivities
we report encompass a range that is covered by 87.7% of the royalty terms in the sample.
   Taken together, the institutional environment in Oklahoma allows us to calculate each


                                               30
of the key inputs that are needed to compute the trigger value (V ∗ ) and thus compare the
exercise decisions made in our sample relative to those predicted by standard real option
models such as those of Paddock et al. (1988).


4.3       Calculation of Real Option Exercise Thresholds

For every drilling unit, we need to determine first the expected value of the developed reserves
that can be tapped by the new infill well (V ), the optimal exercise threshold (V ∗ ), and the
value of the undeveloped reserves, i.e. the value of the option F (V ). We rely on the closed-
form formulas derived from option theory in Section 4.1.
       To obtain the expected value of the well’s developed reserves (V ), we rely on a set of
commonly used assumptions. First, we make the simplifying assumption that the 18 month
futures price of natural gas (P) can be used to compute the value of the stream of cash flow
over the entire life of the well and that firms’ discount their cash flows at the discount rate
µ. Second, the net profit per mcf is obtained by taking into account the operational cost
(φ), the royalty rate (ρ), the accounting depreciation rate (θ) and the corporate tax rate (τ ).
Then, we define the net profit (per mcf) as: Π = P [(1 − φ − ρ) − τ (1 − φ − ρ − θ)]. Finally, we
assume that the well’s reserves are being depleted at the exponential rate, ω, which enable
                                                                                R∞
us to model the value for one mcf of developed reserves as V0 = E0               0   ωΠe−(ω+µ)t dt =      ωΠ
                                                                                                         µ+ω
                                                                                                             .


4.3.1      Estimates of the Model Parameters

In the baseline scenario, we set the discount rate at 10%, in line with the SEC guidelines
in valuing reserves and recent empirical work estimates.27 Then, we estimated the reserves’
depletion rate, ω. From the exponential depletion rate formula of the reserves, we have that
the monthly production at a given point in time t is equal to P rodt = ωR0 e−ωt , where R0
is the initial available reserves. Since we only observe the monthly production, but not the
initial available reserves, we compute the ratio of monthly production such that              P rodt
                                                                                             P rodt−1
                                                                                                        = e−ω .
As such, for each well we empirically estimated ω from the ratio of monthly productions. In
  27
    See Kellogg (2014). In the sensitivity section, we run the calculation using discounting rate ranging from
7.5% to 12.5% on an annual basis.


                                                     31
our sample, the average well has an annual depletion rate of 27%. In a subsequent section,
we run a set of sensitivity analysis varying the ω parameters from 25% to 29%, roughly
representing the 90% confidence interval of the depletion rate distribution. For the royalty
rate, we obtain the lease data from all the wells in Oklahoma, and the median royalty rate
is equal to 18.75%.28 Finally, we set the depreciation rate to 40% and the effective tax rate
at 0%.29


4.3.2    Developed Reserves Value Calculation

We obtained above the value of developed reserves per mcf: V0 . To obtain the expected value
of the total reserves accessible by the infill well, V , we need to multiply the expected total
production of the developed reserves by the value of developed reserves per mcf (B0 ∗ V0 ).
For that, we need to compute the expected amount of natural gas produced by the infill well
(B0 ). We compute the expected total reserves of the infill well in three steps. First, using
realized data from past infill wells drilled in Oklahoma, we regress the first year of production
of the second well on the first year of production of the first well for each section. Second, we
use the estimated regression coefficient to obtain a prediction of the infill well’s first year of
production (P roductiont=1 ). Finally, under the assumption of geometric decline curves, we
                                                                                             P roductiont=1
obtain the expected total reserves tapped by the infill well by computing B0 =                     ω
                                                                                                            .


4.3.3    Optimal Threshold Calculation

To obtain the optimal threshold value of each wells, we need an estimate of the well drilling
cost (I). To allow for time varying drilling costs, we obtained well level drilling cost and
estimated the expected drilling cost for every month of our sample. We then compute the
optimal threshold value (V ∗ ) using the results derived in the previous sections. The com-
putation of V ∗ depends on δ, the implicit dividend a firm generates from a project. Dixit
and Pindyck (1994) show that δ equals a firms risk adjusted cost of capital (μ) minus the
  28
     In our sample, the average royalty rate is 19.05%, but the industry standard is 18.75%, and 79% of the
lease data has a royalty rate of 18.75%.
  29
     During the covered period, natural gas exploration firms benefited from multiple generous deduction and
tax credit. It enabled them to virtually pay no cash taxes.


                                                    32
expected appreciation of the project (α), δ =µ − α. The intuition behind this result is that
the effect of discounting can be offset by the expected appreciation of the asset. For the
purpose of our study we assume that expected appreciation of the asset (its drift) is zero.
This baseline assumption is reasonable given that the natural gas futures curve is relatively
flat throughout our sample. In this case δ simplifies to a firm’s cost of capital. From the
definition of V ∗ , the higher the cost of capital, the smaller the wedge between the NPV rule
and the optimal trigger rule. We explore a wide range for δ in the next section.


4.4     Exercise Behavior: Actual vs. Predicted

In this subsection we calculate the real option decision rules that firms would have if they
followed the behavior predicted by real option theory and compare this predicted exercise
behavior with their actual exercise behavior described earlier in the paper. Over the period
of interest, there are a total of 2,853 potential infill well real options available. Of these infill
well options, 680 are exercised. The objective of this section is to assess whether at the time
of exercise, the project expected values (V ) were above their trigger value (V ∗ ) implied by
the standard real option model of Dixit and Pindyck (1994), as outlined above.


4.4.1    Actual vs. Predicted: Full sample

In our baseline assumption case shown in Panel A of Table 9, we find that infill projects have
an average NPV of $1.92 million at the time of exercise. The distribution of NPVs at exercise
time is shown in Figure 9 and clearly shows that a majority of infill wells are positive NPV
projects at the time they are exercised. However, the estimated optimal threshold value V ∗
at exercise is higher than the estimated present value of the oil reserves V . For our baseline
assumption case, Table 9 shows that firms forgo on average $0.42 million ($0.42 = $7.08 -
$6.66), with a median forgone value standing at more than twice that number.30 Figure 10
plots the distribution of forgone value at exercise time. The histogram clearly shows that the
majority of the wells are exercised when V minus V ∗ is negative (i.e. V < V ∗ ), reflecting the
  30
    In Table 9, we report V ∗ − V to show positive numbers for the estimated forgone values. In the Figures,
we compute histograms of V − V ∗ , in which case values below zero represent forgone values.


                                                    33
fact that most exercise decisions result in forgone option value due to early exercise. This
conclusion is only reinforced by running a similar exercise with a more advanced model in
Appendix, whereby we estimate a dynamic discrete choice model (see Rust (1987)), that also
allows for both volatility and drilling costs to be stochastic (see Kellogg (2014)).
       Although we have actual project-level data to estimate inputs for our model parameters,
it is prudent to assess how sensitive the project values and trigger values are to changes in
model parameters. In Table 9 Panel B we report sensitivities across every major parameter
in the model: depletion rate, operational costs, discount rate, taxes, and royalties. As
expected, the NPV of the average (and median) well goes down as the (1) discount rate,
(2) operational costs, (3) tax rate, (4) depletion rate and (5) royalty rate increase. More
importantly, this sensitivity exercise informs us on how the forgone value (baseline mean
of $0.42M and median of $0.87M) changes due to changes in underlying parameters of the
model. In each case, both the average and median forgone option value in our sample remain
positive and statistically different from zero. It is important to note, however, that these
computations do not incorporate any updating from peer exercise behavior.


4.4.2      Actual vs. Predicted: With and Without Adjacent Activity

The previous sections did not consider the potential information externalities generated by
adjacent peer exercise activity. Specifically, the infill well’s expected production was sim-
ply a function of the unit’s first well’s realized production (see 4.3.2).31 We now compare
firms’ second well expectations with their actual realizations. Under rational expectations,
second well realizations should be, on average, close to the firms’ expectations. The goal of
this exercise is to identify the role that adjacent peer exercise decisions may play in firms’
expectations on second well recoveries.
       We break the sample into two groups: (1) the wells with no adjacent peer activity and
(2) the wells with adjacent peer activity.32 For both groups, we compute the deviations be-
  31
     I.e. predicted values for the second well (exercised infill option) are based on estimating second well
production on first well production in an OLS framework.
  32
     Out of a total of 680 exercised options, we have 635 infill wells (second well in unit) with at least one
year of realized production. Out of those 635 infill wells, 214 have adjacent peer exercise activity and 421


                                                     34
tween the realization of the second well and the expectation of the second well based only
on information conferred from the first well’s production. We find that for second wells
with no adjacent activity, forming the expectation based solely on the first well’s production
leads to deviations that are not statistically different from zero on average. However, for
the second wells with adjacent activity, we found that the first well’s production realiza-
tions do not adequately predict the second well realization. The deviations are positive and
statistically different from zero (p-value of 0.066). In other words, adjacent peer activity is
associated with significantly higher well productivity, after conditioning for the first well’s
realized productivity.
    Under the assumption that firms form appropriate expectations for their infill wells, such
evidence suggests that updating from operators takes into account the information conveyed
by peer activity. To incorporate updating of expectations based on adjacent peer activity,
expectations now stem from (1) the unit’s first well’s realized production and (2) the adja-
cent units’ peer exercise activity. We operationalize the updating on this second dimension
by using an indicator variable that takes the value of one if there is one or more adjacent
infill real options that have been exercised by peer firms.33 Specifically, we find a statisti-
cally and economically significant positive loading on adjacent peer activity when explaining
the realized production of second wells based on this augmented set of two variables. The
coefficient on the adjacent activity dummy variable is 119,323, which can be interpreted as
firms revising up production on the second well by 14.4% relative to the average forecasted
production based only on the first well’s production if adjacent peer activity occurs. This
effect is statistically significant at the 1.9% level.
    This result is consistent with one of Grenadier (1999)’s main assertion that real option
exercising from peers conveys an informative signal. Namely, units with more adjacent real
options activity are more likely to hold greater reserves. It is also consistent with the findings
from the broader literature that documents the importance of peers and “social learning” in
have no adjacent peer activity.
  33
     I.e. predicted values for the second well in the unit (exercised infill option) are based on estimating
second well production on first well production and an indicator variable for adjacent peer exercise activity
in an OLS framework.



                                                     35
technological adoption (see, for instance, Griliches (1957), Foster and Rosenzweig (1995),
Thompson and Thompson (2001), Conley and Hudry (2010), and Stoyanov and Zubanov
(2012)). Specific to the oil and gas industry, Covert (2015) shows that there is some degree
of technological sharing across peers in shale drilling techniques (e.g., optimal mix of sand
and water used in fracking). This finding could also be at work in our context as firms learn
how to improve extraction from reserves by observing how peers drill wells in leases adjacent
to theirs.
       The next logical step in our analysis is to assess whether incorporating information from
adjacent peer activity makes the decisions to exercise closer to those predicted by theory.
To do so, we compute V minus V ∗ under the two different information sets, one information
set that relies on the first well’s production exclusively and one information set which incor-
porates both the first well’s production and an indicator for adjacent peer exercise activity.
Recall that the optimal trigger threshold V ∗ is invariant to productivity expectations of the
infill well. However, the expected discounted value of the developed reserves of the infill well,
V , depends on its expected productivity. Figure 11 Panel A (respectively Panel B) plots the
histogram of V minus V ∗ for the subset of infill wells with (respectively without) adjacent
peer exercise activity.34
       Panel A of Figure 11 reveals significant differences between the distributions of V minus
V ∗ across the two different information sets used to form expectations. This difference can
be explained by the fact that V is revised upwards under the information set that takes into
account adjacent peer activity. Comparing the proportions of options exercised too early (i.e.
V < V ∗ at the time of exercise), we find that 57% of infill wells are exercised too early under
the first information set, relative to only 44% when the information set is augmented to take
into account adjacent peer exercise activity. These differences are statistically significant
at the 1% level. This evidence suggests that updating expectations for the productivity of
the infill well based on adjacent peer activity leads to an approximate 20% reduction in the
likelihood of exercising too early.35
  34
    Each bin represent a $1M interval.
  35
    For completeness, and as a falsification, we show Figure 11 Panel B that reveals no meaningful differences
between the distributions of V minus V ∗ across the two different information sets used to form expectations


                                                     36
    The results shown in this section allow us to show that through a basic updating frame-
work, incorporating information on adjacent peer exercise decisions helps to explain a portion
of the gap between V and V ∗ using a baseline Dixit and Pindyck (1994) framework. We do
not observe the full model that firms use for either updating of beliefs or real option decision
making, and there may be important additional components to such models, which we do
not include here. However, the objective of our exercise is to demonstrate that under a basic
set of assumptions on real option modeling and a plausible framework for updating, adjacent
peer exercise activity could play a first order role in explaining the gap between actual and
predicted behavior for real option exercise. Overall, this exercise provides useful context for
our empirical results in Section 3.



5     Conclusion
In this paper we exploit detailed data on a large set of real options to empirically characterize
the option exercise strategies employed by firms. We find that peer exercise behavior via an
information revelation channel is as important in explaining exercise activity as standard real
option inputs such as commodity prices and volatility. To date, the empirical real options
literature has been limited, largely by data constraints. Our paper provides important micro-
level evidence on both how real options are exercised, and which channels are important in
explaining exercise behavior. Our results provide novel empirical support for the importance
of information revelation from competitor exercise behavior in explaining how firms exercise
real options.
when looking at the subset of wells without adjacent peer exercise activity. This result should not come
as a surprise as we know from above that the big difference in expected productivity comes from observing
adjacent activity.




                                                   37
References
Bartik, A., J. Currie, M. Greenstone, and C. R. Knittel (2018). The local economic and
  welfare consequences of hydraulic fracturing.

Berk, J. and P. DeMarzo (2014). Corporate Finance. Pearson.

Bernanke, B. (1983). Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 98, 85–106.

Bustamante, M. C. and L. Fresard (2017). Does firm investment respond to peers’ investment?
  Unpublished Working Paper.

Conley, T. and C. R. Hudry (2010). Learning about a new technology: Pineapple in ghana.
  American Economic Review 100 (1), 35–69.

Covert, T. (2015). Experiental and social learning in firms: The case of hydrauling facturing
  in the bakken shale. Unpublished Working Paper.

Dixit, A. K. and R. S. Pindyck (1994). Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton, NJ:
  Princeton University Press.

Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig (1995). Learning by doing and learning from others: Human
  capital and technical change in agriculture. (103), 1176–1209.

Foucault, T. and L. Fresard (2014). Learning from peers’ stock prices and corporate invest-
  ment. Journal of Financial Economics 111, 554–577.

Gilje, E. and J. Taillard (2016). Do public firms invest differently than private firms? Taking
  cues from the natural gas industry. Journal of Finance 71, 1733–1778.

Greenan, G. (2018). Dividend payments as a response to peer influence. Journal of Financial
  Economics.

Grenadier, S. R. (1996). The strategic exercise of options: Development cascades and over-
  building in real estate markets. Journal of Finance 51, 1653–79.

                                              38
Grenadier, S. R. (1999). Information revelation through option exercise. Review of Financial
 Studies 12, 95–129.

Grenadier, S. R. (2002). Option exercise games: An application to the equilibrium investment
 strategies of firms. Review of Financial Studies 15, 691–721.

Grenadier, S. R. and A. Malenko (2011). Real options signaling games with applications to
 corporate finance. Review of Financial Studies 24, 3993–4036.

Grenadier, S. R. and N. Wang (2005). Investment timing, agency, and information. Journal
 of Financial Economics.

Grenadier, S. R. and N. Wang (2007). Investment under uncertainty and time-inconsistent
 preferences. Journal of Financial Economics 84, 2–39.

Griliches, Z. (1957). Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technological change.
 (25), 501–522.

Hoberg, G. and G. Phillips (2016). Text-based network industries and endogenous product
 differentiation. Journal of Political Economy 124, 1423–1465.

Kellogg, R. (2014). The effect of uncertainty on investment: Evidence from texas oil drilling.
 American Economic Review 104 (6), 1698–1734.

Leary, M. T. and M. R. Roberts (2014). Do peer firms affect corporate capital structure?
 Journal of Finance 69, 139–178.

MacKinnon, J. (2002). Boostrap inference in econometrics. Canadian Journal of Economet-
 rics (35), 615–645.

Manski, C. (1993). Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem. Review
 of Econonomic Studies 60, 531–542.

Moel, A. and P. Tufano (2002). When are real options exercised? an empirical study of mine
 closings. Review of Financial Studies 15, 35–64.

                                             39
Myers, S. C. (1977). Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics 5,
 147–175.

Novy-Marx, R. (2007). An equilibrium model of investment under uncertainty. Review of
 Financial Studies 20, 1461–1502.

Paddock, J. L., D. R. Siegel, and J. L. Smith (1988). Option valuation of claims on real
 assets: The case of offshore petroleum leases. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 103,
 479–508.

Rust, J. (1987). Optimal replacement of gmc bus engines: An empirical model of harold
 zurcher. Econometrica, 999–1033.

Scharfstein, D. and J. Stein (1990). Herd behavior and investment. American Economic
 Review 80, 465–479.

Stoyanov, A. and N. Zubanov (2012). Productivity spillovers across firms through worker
 mobility. (4), 168–198.

Tchetgen, E. J. T., S. Walter, S. Vansteelandt, T. Martinussen, and M. Glymour (2015).
 Instrumental variable estimation in a survival context. Epidemiology (26), 402–410.

Thompson, R. and P. Thompson (2001). Learning from experience and learning from others:
 An exploration of learning and spillovers in wartime shipbuilding. (91), 1350–1368.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2002). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT Press.




                                            40
Appendix
To confirm the robustness of the results presented in Section 4, we calibrated a dynamic
discrete choice model (see Rust (1987)), in the spirit of Kellogg (2014).36 In particular, the
model presented in this section incorporates more uncertainty by allowing both volatility and
well costs to be stochastic. To properly map our institutional setting into Kellogg’s model,
we had to recalibrate the entire model.
       First, we calibrated the nominal discount rate to follow the industry standard of 10%.
Then we used the time series for drilling costs and natural gas futures prices during our
sample period to estimate both processes. The average dayrate drilling cost is $49,638.98,
with a range between $25,850 and $74,671 in our sample. The average natural gas future price
is $4.56, with a range between $2.56 to $12.07 during our sample period. We then directly
follow Kellogg (2014)’s methodology and calibrate the process for natural gas futures prices
such that the expected drift of the natural gas futures price µ(Pt , σt2 ) is obtained by the OLS
                                      σt2
regression: E[ln(Pt+1 ] − ln(Pt ) +    2
                                            = κp0 + κp1 Pt + κp2 σt2 . During our sample period, we
find κp0 = 0.01526, κp1 = −0.00016 and κp2 = 0.343. Similarly, to calibrate the dayrate
process, we estimate the scaling dayrate-to-natural gas futures price parameter (α) and the
correlation parameter (ρ) such that α = 2.2500 and ρ = 0.04816. Our scaling parameter
is drastically higher than the one used in Kellogg (2014). The difference is driven by two
factors. First, our sample is comprised of horizontal wells, as opposed to vertical wells. The
horizontal well technology is much more expensive. Second, Kellogg’s focuses on oil wells as
opposed to natural gas wells. So his work refers to oil futures price, which are substantially
greater than the natural gas futures price we use. Thus, because the standard deviation
is not a normalized measure of dispersion, when we constructed the scaling measure, it is
normal to obtain substantially greater magnitude for α. Also, the correlation coefficient we
obtain is an order of magnitude smaller than the one presented in Kellogg paper. This can
be explained by the different periods covered by both our studies. Finally, for the volatility
process calibration, we followed the mean reverting calibration methodology and we estimated
  36
    Ryan Kellogg’s original matlab code is publicly available on the American Economic Review web site.
For technical details on the model properties, see Kellogg (2014).


                                                   41
that the volatility of the volatility process to be γ = 0.08852.
      Just as in the standard real options model from Dixit and Pindyck (1994), the dynamic
discrete choice model of Kellogg (2014) yields optimal exercise thresholds for different com-
binations of expected well production and natural gas futures prices, as a function of the
volatility of the underlying commodity. We proceed to replicate Figure 6 of Kellogg (2014)
in the context of our study, whereby we estimate the optimal exercise threshold curve under
two extreme scenarios of uncertainty: the lower and higher uncertainty bounds measured in
our sample (19% and 39%). The result of this exercise is shown in Appendix Figure 1A and
1B.
      Appendix Figures 1A/B show that in our sample, most wells are exercised in a price
range where the Rust-Kellogg model produces optimal threshold values that can hardly be
reconciled with the exercised patterns, even assuming the lowest volatility over our sample
period (Appendix Figure 1A). That is, the model fails to provide reasonable trigger estimates
in the price range we observe, as the trigger curves go “vertical,” i.e. head towards infinity
just below the $10 value per mcf in Appendix Figure 1A. Despite this, it is clear from
this exercise that relative to the optimal threshold, the conclusion that firms appear to be
exercising early is robust across the Dixit-Pindyck framework and Kellogg-Rust framework.
To highlight this, we undertake the next exercise, which is to reproduce those curves under
the Dixit-Pindyck framework of Section 4.
      Specifically, to compare the results obtained using the Dixit-Pindyck model from those
obtained by the Rust model, we generate the optimal exercise thresholds under the Dixit and
Pindyck (1994) model for those two scenarios also. In Figures 9, 10A and 10B, we evaluated
the optimal threshold for each well at the time of exercise, namely with prices and volatility
values given at the time of exercise. To map with the Kellogg approach applied in Appendix
Figure 1A and 1B, we plot the curves of expected production needed to trigger drilling (y-
axis) for the full range of expected futures prices (x-axis), at the two different volatility levels
described above (min and max volatility over our sample period) in Appendix Figures 2A
and 2B.
      Even under the Dixit-Pindyck model, we find that most options (infill wells) are exercised

                                                42
when they are to the left or below the exercise threshold curves; that is, firms tend to exercise
earlier than the optimal thresholds would suggest, even in the case where uncertainty is the
lowest (Appendix Figure 2A). Hence even when the option to delay has the lowest value, firms
seem to forgo the benefits associated with the option to delay drilling. Taken together, these
results suggest that firms appear to exercise earlier than what would be deemed optimal
by two of the most well-established real options models in the literature. In Section 4.4,
we take a first step in reconciling these findings of early exercise with optimal behavior
by distinguishing between exercise with and without observed prior adjacent peer activity.
We leave to future research the theoretical modeling of incorporating peer activity to the
computations of optimal exercise thresholds.




                                               43
        Production of
         natural gas



                                                       Cash Flow = Production * Price ‐ Lease Operating Costs ‐ Royalty Payments


Upfront Capex




                               0           1            2           3           4            5           6           7              Time (Years)

       Figure 1: Project Timeline
       This figure plots a typical production curve over time for a natural gas well, once production begins. It is based on similar figures found in Lake, Martin,
       Ramsey, and Titman (2012) as well as company investor presentations.




                                                                                    44
                                               3 year                        Long‐dated option ( > 20 years)
                                               lease

Time




                      Initial lease                1st well drilled                             Infill drilling
                      acquisition                                                         Up to 7 additional wells
                                                                                      (assuming 80 acres well spacing)

Figure 2: Infill Drilling Option Exercise Timeline
This figure plots the timeline associated with the option to infill drill.




                                                                               45
                                                                                                                                           Drilling unit with 1
                                                                                                                                           well = no infill option
                                                                                                                                           exercised
36 Drilling units =
1 Township




                                                                                                                                  Drilling unit with
  6 miles                                                                                                                         multiple wells = infill
                                                                                                                                  option exercised




            Figure 3: Map of Real Option Exercise Activity
            This figure provides a map of drilling activity in one township in the Arkoma Woodford shale. The area covers approximately 36 individual drilling units. The
            blue lines are the horizontal well-bores of the wells in the drilling units and the multiple horizontal lines in a drilling unit correspond to the real option to
            "infill" drill having been exercised. In some instances the wellhead (top of the well) may be in a different drilling unit than the horizontal wellbore, in this
            instance, the well will only drain the reservoir in the drilling unit with the horizontal wellbore. The colors of the wellhead correspond to different companies.




                                                                                          46
                                                              Number of Wells Exercised during Each Month
                                   16


                                   14


                                   12
  Number of Wells Infill Drilled

                                   10


                                    8


                                    6


                                    4


                                    2


                                   0
                                   1-Jan-05   1-Jan-06   1-Jan-07   1-Jan-08   1-Jan-09   1-Jan-10    1-Jan-11   1-Jan-12   1-Jan-13   1-Jan-14   1-Jan-15   1-Jan-16
                                                                                                          Date
Figure 4A: Number of Infill Well Exercised Over Time
This figure plots the infill drilling exercise activity, measured by the number of infill wells drilled in a given month, for the time period
2005 through 2016.




                                                                                                     47
 This chart isn't available in your version of Excel.
                                                Time to Exercise the Infill Drilling Option
 Editing this shape or saving this workbook into a different file format will permanently break the chart.
                   35.0%



                   30.0%



                   25.0%



                   20.0%
       Frequency




                   15.0%



                   10.0%



                   5.0%



                   0.0%
                           [0,0.8]     (0.8,1.6]        (1.6,2.4]   (2.4,3.2]   (3.2,4]       (4,4.8]        (4.8,5.6]   (5.6,6.4]   (6.4,7.2]   (7.2,8]   >8
                                                                                 Time Waiting (In years)

Figure 4B: Time to Exercise the infill Drilling Option
This figure plots the frequency distribution of the time that firms wait before exercising an infill drilling option, for the time period 2005
through 2016.




                                                                                     48
                                                         Infill Well Options and Exercise over Time
                      3000



                      2500



                      2000
  Number of Options




                      1500



                      1000



                       500



                         0
                        1-Jan-05   1-Jan-06   1-Jan-07    1-Jan-08   1-Jan-09   1-Jan-10    1-Jan-11   1-Jan-12   1-Jan-13   1-Jan-14   1-Jan-15   1-Jan-16
                                                                                            Date

                                                                      Options Available         Options Exercised

Figure 4C: Infill well options and exercise over time
This figure plots the number of infill drilling options available and the number of options that have been exercised, measured by the
number of infill wells drilled, for the time period 2005 through 2016.




                                                                                           49
                               Survival Estimates of Real Option Exercise Over Time
                     1.2



                      1



                     0.8
 Survival Function




                     0.6



                     0.4



                     0.2



                      0
                           0   20       40             60             80            100            120            140            160
                                                                Analysis Time

Figure 5: Survival Estimates for the full sample
This figure plots the survival function, measured by the proportion of infill drilling options that remain unexercised (i.e. that have
"survived") over our sample period from 2005 through 2016.




                                                                 50
  Peer Adjacent
  Infill Well
  Drilling Options

                                                                   Firm C              Firm B               Firm B
                                                                                                                                                                                                Firm A
                                                                   Well 8C             Well 8B             Well 10B
  Non Adjacent
  Infill Well
  Drilling Option                                                  Firm C              Firm A
                                                                                                                                                                                                Firm B
                                                                   Well 9C             Well 3A



                                              Firm C               Firm C              Firm A
                                                                                                                                                                                                Firm C
                                             Well 10C             Well 11C             Well 7A



                                                                   Firm C               Firm B
                                                                  Well 22C             Well 11B
                                                                                                                                                                       Own Adjacent
                                                                                                                                                                       Infill Well
                                                                   Firm B                                                                                              Drilling Option
                                                                  Well 22B



Figure 6: Peer Project Definition
This figure provides an illustrative example of the definition that is used for adjacent peer exercise activity. Specifically, the figure plots a 6 x 6 township which has 36 one mile by one mile
drilling units. Due to institutional features of the land survey in our empirical setting, all infill drilling options conform to the above grid layout, and each infill drilling option is linked to a one
mile by one mile drilling unit. We compute adjacent activity as the number of adjacent infill options that have been drilled by firms on the 8 adjacent drilling units, we further subdivide this
activity by whether peer firms or a firm itself has exercised. For example, for the infill option on well 3A, if Firm C exercised option 8C and 9C and no other options were exercised, the number of
adjacent peer options exercised would be 2. If Firm A exercised option 7A, then its own adjacent options exercised would increase to 1, while peer adjacent exercise would remain at 2.




                                                                                                   51
                     Firm B
                     Well 1B
                    NPV $5M                                                                                                                                                Firm A
                     Rank #1
                                            Firm B                           Firm C
                                            Well 2B                         Well 5C
                                           NPV $4M                         NPV $0.2M                                                                                       Firm B
                                            Rank #2                         Rank #5
                                                                                                    Firm C                        Firm C
                                                                                                   Well 4C                       Well 3C
                                                                                                  NPV $0.3M                     NPV $0.5M                                  Firm C
                                                                                                   Rank #4                       Rank #3




                     Firm B
                     Well 3B
                    NPV $3M
                     Rank #3
                                                                 Firm B
                                                                 Well 5B
                                                                NPV $1M
                                                                 Rank #5
                                 Firm B                          Firm A
                                 Well 4B                         Well 1A
                                NPV $2M                         NPV $1M
                                 Rank #4                         Rank #1




                                                                                                                                  Firm C
                                                                                                                                 Well 2C
                                                                                                                                NPV $0.9M
                                                                                                                                 Rank #2
                                                                                        Firm A     Firm C
                                                                                        Well 2A    Well 1C
                                                                                       NPV $1M    NPV $1M
                                                                                        Rank #1    Rank #1




             Firm B Infill Real Option Portfolio                   Firm C Infill Real Option Portfolio                    Firm A Adjacent Peer Project Percentile Ranks
                                                                                                                                Adjacent              Peer Rank     Peer
           Well       Rank     NPV ($M) Percentile                Well       Rank       NPV       Percentile             Well              Peer Rank
                                                                                                                                  Well                    %         NPV
            1B          1         5.0        0.80                  1C         1          1.0        0.80                 1A        5B          5         0.00        1.0
            2B          2         4.0        0.60                  2C         2          0.9        0.60                 2A        1C          1         0.80        1.0
            3B          3         3.0        0.40                  3C         3          0.5        0.40
            4B          4         2.0        0.20                  4C         4          0.3        0.20
            5B          5         1.0        0.00                  5C         5          0.2        0.00

Figure 7: Identification Strategy
This figure provides an illustrative example of the variation we are using for our primary identification strategy. The figure plots different infill well options
owned by Firm A, Firm B, and Firm C, along with NPVs and the relative rank of the options in a firm's capital project portfolio. Firm A has two different
infill options, one of which is adjacent to Firm B and one of which is adjacent to Firm C. As the example shows, the NPV of Firm A's options and the options
adjacent to it are $1 million. However, for infill option 1A the adjacent option owned by firm B (5B) is the fifth ranked option in Firm B's portfolio.
Alternatively for infill option 2A, the adjacent option owned by firm C (1C) is the top project in Firm C's portfolio. Our instrument relies on the idea that
because option 2A is adjacent to a peer project that is in the 80th percentile of that peer's portfolio (1C) and not the 0th percentile (5B), that 1C is more likely
to be exercised, even though the absolute NPVs 1C and 5B are similar.




                                                                                            52
                                                         Relative Rank Dispersion
            35.0%


            30.0%


            25.0%
Frequency




            20.0%


            15.0%


            10.0%


            5.0%


            0.0%




                                                                      Rank Difference

      Figure 8: Relative Rank Dispersion
      This figure plots the distribution of the difference in the relative rank percentile of the NPV of infill options in a given firm’s portfolio
      versus the relative rank percentile’s of the NPV of infill options that are adjacent to the project, but owned by peer firms. Positive
      numbers mean that the peer relative rank percentile is higher, while negative numbers mean that the peer relative rank percentile is
      lower. The rank of an infill option’s NPV is based on the quality of the initial test well that is drilled to hold the acreage by production
      (HBP) for the infill option. At every time period all initial wells in a firm’s project portfolio are ranked and percentiles are computed.
      The vertical bar in red marks a rank difference of zero.




                                                                           53
                                                Distribution of the Net Present Value ( V - I )
            16%


            14%


            12%


            10%
Frequency




            8%


            6%


            4%


            2%


            0%
                  [-4,-3]   (-3,-2]   (-2,-1]    (-1,0]   (0,1]   (1,2]   (2,3]   (3,4]     (4,5]     (5,6]     (6,7]     (7,8]     (8,9]    (9,9]

  Figure 9: Distribution of the Net Present value (V-I)
  This figure plots the distribution of the net present value (V-I) of an infill well at exercise time under the base case scenario, such that we
  set the depletion rate (ω) at 27%, the accounting depreciation rate (ϴ) at 40%, the operational cost (φ) at 20%, the royalty rate (ρ) at
  18.75%, the tax rate (τ) at 0% and the discount rate (μ) at 10%. The vertical dotted bar marks an NPV of zero.




                                                                          54
                                                 Distribution of the Forgone Value (V-V*)
            16%


            14%


            12%


            10%
Frequency




            8%


            6%


            4%


            2%


            0%
                  <-6[   [-6,-5[   [-5,-4[   [-4,-3[   [-3,-2[   [-2,-1[   [-1,0[   [0,1[   [1,2[   [2,3[   [3,4[   [4,5[   [5,6[   [6,7[   [7,8[   [>8

Figure 10: Distribution of the Forgone Value (V-V*)
This figure plots the distribution of the forgone value (V-V*) estimated using the Dixit-Pindyck framework under the base case scenario,
such that we set the depletion rate (ω) at 27%, the accounting depreciation rate (ϴ) at 40%, the operational cost (φ) at 20%, the royalty
rate (ρ) at 18.75%, the tax rate (τ) at 0% and the discount rate (μ) at 10%. The histogram is shown for all exercised real options in the
sample. A value to the left of the vertical line at zero corresponds to exercising too early as the trigger rule from optimal stopping time
theory prescribes that options are only exercised optimally if exercised the first time the underlying value (V) crosses from below the
trigger value (V*).




                                                                                    55
                                                           Distribution of the Forgone Value (V-V*)
             16%


             14%


             12%


             10%
 Frequency




             8%


             6%


             4%


             2%


             0%
                   (-8,-7]   (-7,-6]   (-6,-5]   (-5,-4]   (-4,-3]   (-3,-2]   (-2,-1]   (-1,0]        (0,1]   (1,2]   (2,3]   (3,4]   (4,5]   (5,6]   (6,7]   (7,8]   >8

                                                                                  No Updating             Updating
Figure 11A: Distribution of the Forgone Value (V-V*) for Wells with Adjacent Activity
This figure plots the distribution of the forgone value (V-V*) for all the wells with adjacent activity under the base case scenario, such that we set the
depletion rate (ω) at 27%, the accounting depreciation rate (ϴ) at 40%, the operational cost (φ) at 20%, the royalty rate (ρ) at 18.75%, the tax rate (τ) at
0% and the discount rate (μ) at 10%. Two histograms are plotted: the histogram in blue (non-solid) is computed using the wells' expected productivity
based on the first well realization, and the histogram in red (solid) augments the information set for expected productivity with the adjacent activity of
peers. A value to the left of the vertical line at zero corresponds to exercising too early as the trigger rule from optimal stopping time theory prescribes that
options are only exercised optimally if exercised the first time the underlying value (V) crosses from below the trigger value (V*).




                                                                                                  56
                                                          Distribution of the Forgone Value (V-V*)
            18%

            16%

            14%

            12%
Frequency




            10%

            8%

            6%

            4%

            2%

            0%
                  (-8,-7]   (-7,-6]   (-6,-5]   (-5,-4]   (-4,-3]   (-3,-2]   (-2,-1]   (-1,0]        (0,1]   (1,2]   (2,3]   (3,4]   (4,5]   (5,6]   (6,7]   (7,8]

                                                                                 No Updating             Updating
Figure 11B Distribution of the Forgone Value (V-V*) for Wells with no Adjacent Activity
This figure plots the distribution of the forgone value (V-V*) for all the wells with no adjacent activity under the base case scenario, such that we set the
depletion rate (ω) at 27%, the accounting depreciation rate (ϴ) at 40%, the operational cost (φ) at 20%, the royalty rate (ρ) at 18.75%, the tax rate (τ) at
0% and the discount rate (μ) at 10%. Two histograms are plotted: the histogram in blue (non-solid) is computed using the wells' expected productivity
based on the first well realization, and the histogram in red (solid) augments the information set for expected productivity with the adjacent activity of
peers. A value to the left of the vertical line at zero corresponds to exercising too early as the trigger rule from optimal stopping time theory prescribes that
options are only exercised optimally if exercised the first time the underlying value (V) crosses from below the trigger value (V*).




                                                                                                 57
Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table contains summary statistics for the data in our study. Panel A presents an overview of the sample of options on natural gas infill shale drilling
opportunities in Oklahoma, including how many real options there are, how many have been exercised, over which sample period, over how many townships
and the number of firms (operators) in the sample. Panel B presents summary statistics on the panel data we estimate our hazard models on. The unit of
observation in this panel is at the infill option-month level, that is, there is an observation for every infill option available for exercise every month. The
baseline variables are all variables used in the hazard model to assess whether exercise is directionally correlated with factors that standard real option
theories suggest are important; log(first well production) is a proxy for the underlying reserves in the unit where the infill well can be exercised. The number
of adjacent infill options exercised by competitors (peers) corresponds to the variable used to assess whether peer-related real option exercise activity in
adjacent drilling units can affect option exercise decisions. We compute a similar measure of adjacent exercise activity for the firm itself (own). The relative
rank percentile measures are used to instrument real option exercise activity.
Panel A: Sample Statistics

Time Period                                                       2005-2016
Total Number of Real Options                                        2853
Number of Exercised Options over Sample Period                        680
Number of Townships                                                   442
Number of Firms                                                       159
Panel B: Panel Data Summary Statistics
Baseline Variables                                                    N                      Mean                     Median                   Std Dev
Natural Gas Price                                                   162905                    4.56                     4.05                      1.77
Implied Volatility of Natural Gas                                   162905                   26.58                    25.44                      4.32
Interest Rates                                                      162905                    1.63                     1.51                      0.85
Log(First Well Production)                                          162905                   12.40                    12.68                      1.72

Peer Effect Variables                                                 N                      Mean                     Median                   Std Dev
Adjacent Competitor Options Exercised                               162905                   0.34                      0.00                      0.86
Adjacent Own Firm Options Exercised                                 162905                   0.40                      0.00                      0.88
Relative rank percentile (own infill option)                        103451                   0.46                      0.45                      0.29
Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer infill options)             103451                   0.57                      0.58                      0.29




                                                                            58
Table 2: Peer Effects and Real Option Exercise
This table reports coefficient estimates from a Cox hazard model of real option exercise. The time period of the sample is from 2005 to 2016. The unit of observation in the underlying panel is at the "infill
drill option" i , month t level. The number of adjacent exercised option (competitor) for an unexercised option i at time t is the number of the adjacent 8 drilling units owned by competitors in which the
"infill drill option" has been exercised by time t . The number of "own" adjacent options exercised for an unexercised option i at time t is the number of the adjacent 8 drilling units owned by the firm
itself in which the "infill drill option" has been exercised. The implied volatility of natural gas is the implied volatility based on option prices 18 months in the future, and the natural gas price is the price
of the natural gas futures contract 18 months out into the future. The five year risk free rate is the 5 year nominal risk free rate on U.S. Treasury bonds. The log of drilling costs is a time-varying estimate
of drilling costs for an infill well (analogous to the strike price of the real option). The log first well production variable is fixed for a given option, and is the logarithm of the first year of production of the
first well on the drilling unit, which corresponds to production prior to the exercise of the infill option. The following variables have been scaled to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, to facilitate
economic interpretations: Number of adjacent exercised options (own) and Number of adjacent exercised options (peer). The hazard impact percentage (HI), which is the percentage change in the hazard
rate per unit change of the covariate is reported next to the coefficient. z -statistics are reported in brackets below the coefficients. Standard errors are clustered by township. * indicates significance at the
10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.


                                                                                                                          Hazard model for infill option exercise
                                                                                                  (1)                                      (2)                                                  (3)
                                                                                  Estimates                HI (%)             Estimates            HI (%)                       Estimates                HI (%)


(β1) Implied volatility of natural gas (percent) t                                -0.0328**                 -3.23               -0.0337***                 -3.31               -0.0282**                  -2.79
                                                                                    [-2.47]                                       [-2.58]                                        [-2.22]
(β2) Natural gas price ($/mcf)t                                                  0.1378***                  14.77               0.1412***                  15.17               0.1839***                  20.19
                                                                                   [3.68]                                         [2.98]                                         [4.10]
(β3) Log drilling costt                                                                                                           -0.0079                  -0.79                 0.0667                   6.90
                                                                                                                                  [-0.03]                                        [0.24]
(β4) 5 years risk free interest rate t                                                                                            0.1382                   14.82                 0.0749                   7.77
                                                                                                                                  [1.50]                                         [0.78]
(β5) Log first well production i                                                                                                0.4153***                  51.48               0.3302***                  39.13
                                                                                                                                  [5.74]                                         [3.08]
(β6) Number of adjacent exercised options (own) i,t                               0.546***                  72.63               0.5263***                  69.26               0.3781***                  45.95
                                                                                   [15.22]                                        [14.24]                                        [8.83]
(β7) Number of adjacent exercised options (peer) i,t                             0.3233***                  38.17               0.2821***                  32.59                 0.1038*                  10.94
                                                                                   [8.75]                                         [7.58]                                          [1.96]
Township FE                                                                                       No                                             No                                            Yes

N                                                                                              162,905                                       162,905                                        162,905




                                                                                                          59
Table 3: Project Relative Rank Percentile and Option Exercise
This table reports the effect of the relative project rank percentile within the portfolio of a firm's infill drilling options on the decision to exercise the real option to infill drill. The time period of
the sample is from 2005 to 2016. The unit of observation in the underlying panel is at the "infill drill option" i , month t level. The relative project rank percentiles are based on the quality of
the project, as measured by the production from the first well on a drilling unit within a firm's portfolio. The percentile is computed as the rank of the project divided by the total number of
infill options a firm has, higher percentile projects can be viewed as having a higher relative NPV rank within a firm's portfolio. The variable "Relative rank percentile (own project) has been
scaled to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, to facilitate economic interpretations. The hazard impact percentage (HI), which is the percentage change in the hazard rate per unit change
of the covariate is reported next to the coefficient. z -statistics are reported in brackets below the coefficients. Standard errors are clustered by township. * indicates significance at the 10%
level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.



                                                                                                                            Hazard model for infill option exercise
                                                                                                               (1)                        (2)                             (3)
                                                                                                   Estimate          HI (%)      Estimate       HI (%)           Estimate                         HI (%)

(β1) Implied volatility of natural gas (percent)t                                                  -0.0252*            -2.49          -0.028**             -2.76            -0.0245*               -2.42
                                                                                                    [-1.92]                            [-2.07]                                [-1.77]
(β2) Natural Gas price ($/mcf)t                                                                   0.1751***            19.14         0.1692***             18.44           0.1631***               17.71
                                                                                                    [4.21]                              [3.28]                                [3.38]
(β3) Log drilling costt                                                                                                                0.1772              19.39             -0.0141               -1.40
                                                                                                                                        [0.62]                                [-0.05]
(β4) 5 years risk free interest ratet                                                                                                  0.0533              5.47              -0.0093               -0.93
                                                                                                                                        [0.60]                                [-0.10]
(β5) Log first well productioni                                                                                                        0.1273              13.57             -0.0974               -9.28
                                                                                                                                        [1.29]                                [-1.44]
(β6) Relative rank percentile (own project)i,t                                                    0.6147***            84.91         0.5059***             65.84           0.6014***               82.47
                                                                                                    [10.24]                             [4.70]                                [5.69]
Township FE                                                                                                    No                                  No                                   Yes

N                                                                                                            162,905                             162,905                               162,905




                                                                                                     60
Table 4: Real Option Exercise and Exogenous Peer Effects
This table reports the effects of peer real option exercise decisions based on an exogenous measure of peer exercise activity from an instrument. The time period of the sample is from 2005
to 2016. The unit of observation in the underlying panel is at the "infill drill option" i, month t level. The results in Panel A report coefficient estimates of a hazard model which uses the
average adjacent peer project relative rank percentile to instrument (Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects) in the table) for the number of adjacent peer infill options which have
been exercised. The bottom of Panel A reports the first stage regression of the two-stage estimation approach. Correction for estimation error in the first stage in our Cox two-stage IV
model is performed by bootstrapping the standard errors (MacKinnon (2002). The Cox IV two-stage approach follows Tchetgen et al. (2015). Panel B reports the direct effect of our
instrument in the Cox hazard model. The following variables have been scaled to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, to facilitate economic interpretations: Number of adjacent
exercised options (own), Number of adjacent exercised options (peer), Relative rank percentile (own project), and Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects). The hazard impact
percentage (HI), which is the percentage change in the hazard rate per unit change of the covariate is reported next to the coefficient. z -statistics are reported in brackets below the
coefficients. Standard errors are clustered by township. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.


Table 4: Panel A
                                                                                                                            Hazard model
                                                                                                      Instrumented - Number of adjacent exercised options (peer)
                                                                                                      (1)                       (2)                          (3)
                                                                                             Estimate      HI (%)      Estimate      HI (%)        Estimate      HI (%)

(β1) Implied volatility of natural gas (percent)t                                             -0.0245           -2.42          -0.0281            -2.77           -0.0166           -1.64
                                                                                              [-1.45]                           [-1.62]                            [-0.98]
(β2) Natural gas price ($/mcf)t                                                             0.2062***           22.90         0.1546***          16.72           0.2801***          32.33
                                                                                               [2.86]                           [2.62]                             [2.70]
(β3) Log drilling costt                                                                       0.0494            5.06           -0.0319            -3.14            0.4462           56.24
                                                                                               [0.17]                           [-0.10]                            [1.07]
(β4) 5 year risk free interest ratet                                                          0.1325            14.17           0.1564           16.93             0.2168           24.21
                                                                                               [1.07]                           [1.50]                             [1.29]
(β5) Log first well productioni                                                             0.2432***           27.54          -0.0064            -0.64           -0.0565           -5.50
                                                                                               [2.61]                           [-0.07]                            [-0.68]
(β6) Instrumented - Number of adjacent exercised options (peer)i,t                           0.595***           81.31         0.5825***          79.06           0.6623**           93.93
                                                                                               [2.72]                           [2.82]                             [2.16]
(β7) Average log first well production adjacent options (peer)i,t                             -0.0671           -6.49         -0.0746**           -7.18           -0.0236           -2.33
                                                                                              [-1.63]                           [-2.15]                            [-0.75]
(β8) Number of adjacent exercised options (own)i,t                                                                            0.3731***          45.22           0.7649***         114.88
                                                                                                                                [3.35]                             [4.25]
(β9) Relative rank percentile (own project)i,t                                                                                 0.311**           36.48             0.2563           29.21
                                                                                                                                [2.05]                             [1.63]
Township FE                                                                                              No                               No                                 Yes

N                                                                                                     103,451                          103,451                            103,451

                                                                                                                         First Stage Regression
First Stage Coefficients                                                                            Dependent Variable = Number of adjacent exercised options (peer)i,t

(β1) Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects)i,t                                           0.1306***                          0.121***                          0.1117***
                                                                                                      [3.28]                             [3.14]                            [2.93]

Township FE                                                                                             No                                No                                 Yes
Included Instruments/Controls                                                                           Yes                               Yes                                Yes




                                                                                            61
Table 4: Panel B
                                                                                                    Hazard model
                                                                            Reduced form - Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects)
                                                                             (1)                         (2)                           (3)
                                                                    Estimate     HI (%)       Estimate       HI (%)          Estimate        HI (%)

(β1) Implied volatility of natural gas (percent)t                    -0.0242            -2.39    -0.028*          -2.76      -0.0211           -2.09
                                                                     [-1.55]                     [-1.84]                     [-1.43]
(β2) Natural gas price ($/mcf)t                                     0.1838***           20.18   0.1301***         13.90     0.1588***          17.21
                                                                      [3.64]                      [2.71]                      [3.12]
(β3) Log drilling costt                                              0.1768             19.34    0.0805           8.39        0.2025           22.45
                                                                     [0.55]                      [0.26]                       [0.55]
(β4) 5 year risk free interest ratet                                 0.0704             7.30     0.1022           10.76       0.0441           4.51
                                                                     [0.75]                      [1.11]                       [0.45]
(β5) Log first well productioni                                     0.295***            34.31    0.0045           0.45       -0.0446           -4.36
                                                                      [3.40]                     [0.06]                      [-0.60]
(β6) Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects)i,t           0.3043***           35.57   0.2676***         30.69     0.2417***          27.34
                                                                      [3.31]                      [3.65]                      [2.90]
(β7) Average log first well production adjacent options (peer)i,t   0.0567***           5.84    0.0365**          3.72      0.0566***          5.82
                                                                      [3.46]                      [2.31]                      [3.06]
(β8) Number of adjacent exercised options (own)i,t                                              0.5002***         64.90     0.3985***          48.96
                                                                                                  [11.01]                     [7.67]
(β9) Relative rank percentile (own project)i,t                                                  0.4146***         51.37     0.4256***          53.05
                                                                                                  [3.86]                      [3.67]
Township FE                                                              No                        No                          Yes

N                                                                             103,451                   103,451                      103,451




                                                                    62
Table 5: Internal Validity - Correlation of Project Relative Rank Percentiles
This table reports the coefficient estimates of an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of the relative rank percentile of a firm's
own project on the relative rank percentiles of adjacent infill options owned by peer firms. The unit of observation in the
underlying panel is at the "infill drill option" i , month t level. t -statistics are reported in brackets below the coefficients. Standard
errors are clustered by township. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.

                                                                                                Dependent variable =
                                                                                        Relative rank percentile (own project)
                                                                                                         (1)
(β1) Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects) i,t                                                  -0.0359
                                                                                                             [-1.11]
Township FE                                                                                                    Yes

N                                                                                                          103,451




                                                                   63
Table 6: Internal Validity - Subsample Analysis
This table reports coefficient estimates from a Cox hazard model of real option exercise on a specific subsample to test instrument validity. The time period of the samples are from 2005
to 2016. The unit of observation in the underlying panel is at the "infill drill option" i, month t level. Specifications (1) and (2) report exercise behavior for the subsample of real options
where a project's relative rank percentile within a given firm's portfolio is below the median for that firm, but adjacent projects owned by peers have relative rank percentiles in peer
project portfolios that are above median. The following variables have been scaled to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, to facilitate economic interpretations: Number of adjacent
exercised options (own), Number of adjacent exercised options (peer), Relative rank percentile (own project), and Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects). The hazard impact
percentage (HI), which is the percentage change in the hazard rate per unit change of the covariate is reported next to the coefficient. z -statistics are reported in brackets below the
coefficients. Standard errors are clustered by township. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.


                                                                                                                               Hazard model
                                                                                                                        Low rank own project vs.
                                                                                                                      High rank adjacent peer project

                                                                                              Reduced Form Peer Effects                             Instrumented Peer Effects

                                                                                                             (1)                                                  (2)
                                                                                            Estimates                   HI (%)                   Estimates                   HI (%)

(β1) Implied volatility of natural gas (percent)t                                            -0.0107                     -1.06                    -0.0157                     -1.56
                                                                                              [-0.38]                                              [-0.56]
(β2) Natural gas price ($/mcf)t                                                              0.0584                       6.02                   0.1579**                     17.11
                                                                                             [0.66]                                                [2.03]
(β3) Log drilling costt                                                                      -0.0701                     -6.77                    -0.0328                     -3.23
                                                                                              [-0.15]                                              [-0.06]
(β4) 5 year risk free interest ratet                                                         0.1505                      16.25                     0.1107                     11.71
                                                                                             [1.01]                                                [0.78]
(β5) Log first well productioni                                                              0.0241                       2.44                     0.0308                      3.12
                                                                                             [0.27]                                                [0.29]
(β6) Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects)i,t                                  0.4345***                     54.42
                                                                                             [3.46]
(β7) Average log first well production adjacent options (peer) i,t                         0.0793***                      8.26                    -0.0936                     -8.93
                                                                                             [3.02]                                                [-1.17]
(β8) Number of adjacent exercised options (own)i,t                                          0.399***                     49.03                     0.0166                      1.67
                                                                                              [5.27]                                               [0.04]
(β9) Relative rank percentile (own project)i,t                                               0.1793                      19.64                    -0.2562                    -22.60
                                                                                             [0.83]                                                [-0.85]
(β10) Instrumented - Number of adjacent exercised options (peer)i,t                                                                              1.1038**                    201.57
                                                                                                                                                   [2.21]
Township FE                                                                                                  No                                                   No

N                                                                                                          43,686                                               43,686



                                                                                            64
Table 7: Actions vs. Characteristics
This table reports coefficient estimates from a Cox hazard model of real option exercise. The time period of the sample is from 2005 to 2016. The unit of observation in the underlying panel is at the "infill drill
option" i, month t level. The spell in the hazard model is defined as the time period from which an infill option becomes available (first well drilled) to when the infill option (two or more wells) are drilled.
The variable "Play activity" is computed in two steps. First, we compute the drilling activity intensity across Oklahoma for each adjacent competitor at a given point in time t , while excluding the wells they
drilled in the township of infill option i . Then, for each infill drill option in our sample, we define the variable "Play activity" as the sum of the adjacent competitor activity outside the township of the infill drill
option at each point in time. The following variables have been scaled to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, to facilitate economic interpretations: Number of adjacent exercised options (own), Number of
adjacent exercised options (peer), Relative rank percentile (own project), Play activity (peer), and Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects). The hazard impact percentage (HI), which is the percentage
change in the hazard rate per unit change of the covariate is reported next to the coefficient. z -statistics are reported in brackets below the coefficients. Standard errors are clustered by township. * indicates
significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.


                                                                                                                                               Hazard model
                                                                                                    Reduced Form Peer Effects                                              Instrumented Peer Effects
                                                                                                  (1)                               (2)                                (3)                                 (4)
                                                                                     Estimates          HI (%)          Estimates         HI (%)          Estimates           HI (%)          Estimates          HI (%)

(β1) Implied volatility of natural gas (percent)t                                     -0.0272*           -2.69           -0.0203            -2.01          -0.0289*            -2.85           -0.0168            -1.67
                                                                                       [-1.80]                            [-1.38]                           [-1.67]                             [-0.93]
(β2) Natural gas price ($/mcf)t                                                      0.1205**            12.81         0.1548***           16.75          0.1665***            18.12         0.2767***            31.88
                                                                                       [2.54]                            [3.08]                             [2.81]                             [2.96]
(β3) Log drilling costt                                                                0.0536             5.51           0.2035            22.57            0.0145             1.46            0.4603             58.45
                                                                                       [0.17]                            [0.55]                             [0.04]                             [1.30]
(β4) 5 year risk free interest ratet                                                   0.1052            11.09           0.0501             5.13            0.1471             15.85           0.2193             24.52
                                                                                       [1.13]                            [0.51]                             [1.39]                             [1.08]
(β5) Log first well productioni                                                        0.0048             0.48           -0.0413            -4.05           -0.0033            -0.33           -0.0564            -5.49
                                                                                       [0.06]                             [-0.55]                            [-0.04]                            [-0.56]
(β6) Relative rank percentile (adjacent peer projects)i,t                            0.2689***           30.85         0.2448***           27.74
                                                                                       [3.65]                            [2.94]
(β7) Average log first well production adjacent options (peer)i,t                    0.0307**             3.12         0.0535***            5.50          -0.0665**            -6.43           -0.0200            -1.98
                                                                                       [1.96]                            [2.91]                             [-2.17]                             [-0.57]
(β8) Number of adjacent exercised options (own)i,t                                   0.5106***           66.62         0.4066***           50.18           0.355***            42.62         0.7553***           112.83
                                                                                       [11.11]                           [7.93]                              [3.01]                            [4.07]
(β9) Relative rank percentile (own project)i,t                                       0.4107***           50.79         0.4207***           52.30           0.3062**            35.82           0.2527             28.75
                                                                                       [3.84]                            [3.63]                              [2.02]                            [1.26]
(β10) Play activity (peer)i,t                                                        0.0916***            9.60          0.0575**            5.92          -0.2544**           -22.46           -0.1165           -11.00
                                                                                       [4.24]                             [2.26]                            [-1.96]                             [-1.00]
(β11) Instrumented - Number of adjacent exercised options (peer)i,t                                                                                       0.7351***           108.58           0.6926*            99.89
                                                                                                                                                            [2.79]                              [1.76]
Township FE                                                                                       No                                Yes                                No                                 Yes
N                                                                                              103,451                           103,451                            103,451                            103,451




                                                                                                            65
Table 8: Real Option Exercise and Experienced Peers
This table reports coefficient estimates from a Cox hazard model of real option exercise. The time period of the sample is from 2005 to 2016. The unit of observation in the
underlying panel is at the "infill drill option" i , month t level. The signal quality variables (Adjacent Experienced / Adjacent Inexperienced) are constructed in two steps. First, we
identify if the adjacent firms exercising their drilling option are more (less) experienced than the median firm in the sample based on the number of wells drilled and, accordingly,
we define them as Experienced (Inexperienced). In the second step, we aggregate the wells that are drilled by experienced firms into the variable number of adjacent experienced
options (experienced peer) and those drilled by unexperienced firms into the number adjacent exercised options (inexperienced peer). The following variables have been scaled to
have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, to facilitate economic interpretations: Number of adjacent exercised options (own), Number of adjacent exercised options (experienced
peer), Number of adjacent exercised options (inexperienced peer). The hazard impact percentage (HI), which is the percentage change in the hazard rate per unit change of the
covariate is reported next to the coefficient. z -statistics are reported in brackets below the coefficients. Standard errors are clustered by township. * indicates significance at the
10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.


                                                                                                                                     Hazard Model
                                                                                                                   (1)                                          (2)
                                                                                                    Estimates               HI (%)               Estimates               HI (%)

(β1) Implied volatility of natural gas (percent)t                                                  -0.0339***                -3.33               -0.0282**                -2.78
                                                                                                     [-2.59]                                       [-2.22]
(β2) Natural gas price ($/mcf)t                                                                    0.1407***                 15.10               0.1842***                20.23
                                                                                                     [2.96]                                        [4.09]
(β3) Log drilling costt                                                                               0.0009                  0.09                 0.0669                  6.91
                                                                                                      [0.00]                                       [0.24]
(β4) 5 year risk free interest ratet                                                                  0.1398                 15.00                 0.0746                  7.74
                                                                                                      [1.51]                                       [0.77]
(β5) Log first well productioni                                                                    0.4144***                 51.35               0.3309***                39.22
                                                                                                     [5.72]                                        [3.08]
(β6) Number of adjacent exercised options (own) i,t                                                 0.525***                 69.04               0.3786***                46.03
                                                                                                     [14.32]                                       [8.89]
(β7) Number of adjacent exercised options (experienced peer) i,t                                   0.2658***                 30.45               0.1022**                 10.76
                                                                                                     [7.54]                                        [2.14]
(β8) Number of adjacent exercised options (inexperienced peer) i,t                                 0.0871***                  9.10                 0.0152                  1.53
                                                                                                     [3.03]                                        [0.30]
Township FE                                                                                                        No                                           Yes

N                                                                                                               162,905                                      162,905


                                                                                          66
Table 9: Real Option Value Estimates and Sensitivity Analysis
This table first reports in Panel A summary statistics on well costs (I), present value of cash flows (V), the optimal trigger value (V*), and the net present value
(NPV=V-I) at the time of exercise, as generated by a baseline real options model (see Paddock et al. (1988) and Dixit Pindyck (1994)). Panel B reports a
sensitivity analysis for the Net Present Value (NPV=V-I) and forgone value (V*-V) at time of exercise. The sensitivity analysis is performed on the different
assumptions for several model parameters. Depletion rate is the rate at which a well depletes its reserves, a rate of 27 can be interpreted as a wells production
declining at a rate of 27% a year. Operational Cost is the percentage of cash flows going towards lease operating expenses, a rate of 20 can be interpreted as
20% of cash flows going to pay for ongoing operating costs. The discount rate is the firm's cost of capital, and the tax rate is the rate used to compute after tax
cash flow.



Panel A: Summary statistics
             Well-Level Statistics at Time of Exercise                             N                    Mean                  Median                   Std Dev
Well Costs (I)                                                                    680            $       4,740,347       $      4,798,365       $           651,954
Present Value of Well Cash Flow (V)                                               680            $       6,656,654       $      6,146,015       $         3,390,738
Optimal Trigger Value (V*)                                                        680            $       7,079,647       $      7,307,629       $         1,407,007
Net Present Value (V-I)                                                           680            $       1,916,307       $      1,374,095       $         3,414,682

Panel B: Sensitivity Analysis

                     Depletion Rate Sensitivity                                  Mean                Pr(Mean = 0)             Median                Pr(Median = 0)
Net Present Value (V-I at Exercise)
Depletion Rate ( ω = 25)                                                      $2,101,214                 0.00                $1,540,539                  0.00
Depletion Rate ( ω = 27)                                                      $1,916,307                 0.00                $1,374,095                  0.00
Depletion Rate ( ω = 29)                                                      $1,574,940                 0.00                $1,078,187                  0.00
Forgone Value (V*-V at Exercise)
Depletion Rate ( ω = 25)                                                       $238,086                  0.07                 $702,787                   0.00
Depletion Rate ( ω = 27)                                                       $422,993                  0.00                 $866,943                   0.00
Depletion Rate ( ω = 29)                                                       $764,360                  0.00                $1,144,138                  0.00
                    Operational Cost Sensitivity                                 Mean                Pr(Mean = 0)             Median                Pr(Median = 0)
Net Present Value (V-I at Exercise)
Operational Cost ( φ = 15)                                                    $2,459,708                 0.00                $1,864,696                  0.00
Operational Cost ( φ = 20)                                                    $1,916,307                 0.00                $1,374,095                  0.00
Operational Cost ( φ = 25)                                                    $1,372,907                 0.00                 $903,057                   0.00
Forgone Value (V*-V at Exercise)
Operational Cost ( φ = 15)                                                     $259,973                  0.05                 $721,624                   0.00
Operational Cost ( φ = 20)                                                     $422,993                  0.00                 $866,943                   0.00
Operational Cost ( φ = 25)                                                     $694,693                  0.00                $1,078,926                  0.00
                     Discount Rate Sensitivity                                   Mean                Pr(Mean = 0)             Median                Pr(Median = 0)
Net Present Value (V-I at Exercise)
Discount Rate (μ = 7.5%)                                                      $2,398,674                 0.00                $1,811,878                  0.00
Discount Rate (μ = 10%)                                                       $1,916,307                 0.00                $1,374,095                  0.00
Discount Rate (μ = 12.5%)                                                     $1,495,000                 0.00                $1,008,892                  0.00
Forgone Value (V*-V at Exercise)
Discount Rate (μ = 7.5%)                                                       $857,331                  0.00                $1,346,908                  0.00
Discount Rate (μ = 10%)                                                        $422,993                  0.00                 $866,943                   0.00
Discount Rate (μ = 12.5%)                                                      $318,536                  0.01                 $760,092                   0.00
                        Tax Rate Sensitivity                                     Mean                Pr(Mean = 0)             Median                Pr(Median = 0)
Net Present Value (V-I at Exercise)
Tax Rate (τ = 0 %)                                                            $1,916,307                 0.00                $1,374,095                  0.00
Tax Rate (τ = 15 %)                                                           $1,569,890                 0.00                $1,073,808                  0.00
Tax Rate (τ = 30 %)                                                           $1,223,472                 0.00                 $772,849                   0.00
Forgone Value (V*-V at Exercise)
Tax Rate (τ = 0 %)                                                             $422,993                  0.00                 $866,943                   0.00
Tax Rate (τ = 15 %)                                                            $769,411                  0.00                $1,148,941                  0.00
Tax Rate (τ = 30 %)                                                           $1,115,829                 0.00                $1,470,295                  0.00
                      Royalty Rate Sensitivity                                   Mean                Pr(Mean = 0)             Median                Pr(Median = 0)
Net Present Value (V-I at Exercise)
Royalty Rate ( ρ = 13.75%)                                                    $2,459,708                 0.00                $1,864,696                  0.00
Royalty Rate (ρ = 18.75%)                                                     $1,916,307                 0.00                $1,374,095                  0.00
Royalty Rate (ρ = 23.75%)                                                     $1,372,907                 0.00                 $903,057                   0.00
Forgone Value (V*-V at Exercise)
Royalty Rate ( ρ = 13.75%)                                                     $259,973                  0.05                 $721,624                   0.00
Royalty Rate (ρ = 18.75%)                                                      $422,993                  0.00                 $866,943                   0.00
Royalty Rate (ρ = 23.75%)                                                      $694,693                  0.00                $1,078,926                  0.00




                                                                               67
