                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             MEASURING THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF SHAME AND PRIDE

                                        Luigi Butera
                                       Robert Metcalfe
                                      William Morrison
                                      Dmitry Taubinsky

                                     Working Paper 25637
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25637


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          March 2019, Revised August 2020




We are indebted to Ryan Johnson and Erik Daubert from the YMCA of the USA for their
invaluable guidance and expertise in setting up our research partnership, as well as to Maria-
Alicia Serrano for her continuing support. We wish to thank the YMCA of the Triangle Area,
particularly Tony Campione, Mark Julian, Brian Spanner, and Janet Sprague, for their
outstanding support in implementing our field experiments. We are grateful to Leonardo
Bursztyn, Gary Charness, Alain Cohn, Jonathan Davis, Stefano DellaVigna, Ray Fisman, Jana
Gallus, David Gill, Alex Imas, John List, Keith Ericson, Fatemeh Momeni, Ricardo Perez-
Truglia, Daniel Tannenbaum, as well as numerous conference and seminar participants for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the YMCA
of the USA or any other YMCA member association. The experiment was approved by
University of Chicago IRB, #IRB15-1647. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Luigi Butera, Robert Metcalfe, William Morrison, and Dmitry Taubinsky. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Welfare Effects of Shame and Pride
Luigi Butera, Robert Metcalfe, William Morrison, and Dmitry Taubinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 25637
March 2019, Revised August 2020
JEL No. D8,D9,H0,I0

                                           ABSTRACT

Public recognition is a frequent tool for motivating desirable behavior, yet its welfare effects are
rarely measured. We develop a portable money-metric approach for measuring the direct welfare
effects of shame and pride, which we deploy in a series of experiments on exercise and charitable
behavior. In all experiments, public recognition motivates desirable behavior but creates highly
unequal emotional consequences. High-performing individuals enjoy significant utility gains
from pride, while low-performing individuals incur significant utility losses from shame. We
estimate structural models of social signaling, and we use the models to explore the social
efficiency of public recognition policies.

Luigi Butera                                      William Morrison
Department of Economics                           University of California at Berkeley
Copenhagen Business School                        530 Evans Hall
Denmark                                           MC #3880
lbutera2@gmail.com                                Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                  wmorrison@berkeley.edu
Robert Metcalfe
Questrom School of Business                       Dmitry Taubinsky
Boston University                                 University of California, Berkeley
595 Commonwealth Avenue                           Department of Economics
Boston, MA 02215                                  530 Evans Hall #3880
and NBER                                          Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
rdmet@bu.edu                                      and NBER
                                                  dmitry.taubinsky@berkeley.edu




Randomized controlled trials registry entries are available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/4004
and
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5737
        “What do you regard as most humane? To spare someone shame.”
            – Friedrich Nietzsche, the Joyful Wisdom

        “A soldier will fight long and hard for a bit of colored ribbon.”
            – Napoleon Bonaparte1

The human desire to avoid shame and seek out pride is a powerful motivator (Loewenstein et al.,
2014; Bursztyn and Jensen, 2017). For instance, 89% of businesses use some form of public recog-
nition programs (WorldatWork, 2017), including examples like “employee of the month” (Kosfeld
and Neckermann, 2011). Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) find that 60% of manufacturing companies
publicly reveal and compare employees’ performance data. Governments use public recognition
programs to motivate citizens to pay their taxes (Bø et al., 2015; Perez-Truglia and Troiano, 2018),
to motivate bureaucrats to do a better job (Gauri et al., 2018), and to encourage teachers, doctors,
and managers in schools and hospitals to improve their performance.
       Recent field studies confirm that public recognition of individuals’ behavior has substantial
effects in a number of economically important domains. Examples include charitable and political
donations (Soetevent, 2005, 2011; Perez-Truglia and Cruces, 2017), tax compliance (Perez-Truglia
and Troiano, 2018), education and career choices (Bursztyn and Jensen, 2015; Bursztyn et al.,
2017b, 2019), employee productivity (Ashraf et al., 2014; Neckermann et al., 2014; Bradler et al.,
2016; Kosfeld et al., 2017; Neckermann and Yang, 2017), voter turnout (Gerber et al., 2008), blood
donation (Lacetera and Macis, 2010), childhood immunization (Karing, 2019), energy conservation
(Yoeli et al., 2013), and credit card take-up (Bursztyn et al., 2017a).2
       The financial costs of utilizing public recognition to motivate behavior are typically low, but
the emotional costs may not be. Although behavioral scientists sometimes refer to social-influence-
based interventions as light-touch, innocuous “nudges” (Halpern, 2015; Benartzi et al., 2017), such
a label would not be appropriate for a policy that leads to a significant number of individuals
experiencing shame (Bernheim and Taubinsky, 2018). Indeed, there is a vigorous debate about
the appropriateness of public policies that generate feelings of shame, with some political and legal
theorists arguing that such policies are an unjustifiable offense to human dignity and a form of
mob-justice (Massaro, 1991; Nussbaum, 2009).3 On the other hand, public recognition policies
that mostly generate warm feelings of pride are arguably a “win-win.”
       Unfortunately, psychological theories do not provide clear guidance about when shame or pride
will be the more prevalent consequence of public recognition (Leary, 2007; Tangney et al., 2007).
Developing quantitative methods for measuring the welfare effects of public recognition is therefore
crucial for both positive and normative progress.
   1
     We thank an anonymous referee for this quote.
   2
     Laboratory experiments also show that public recognition can enhance prosocial behavior. E.g., Andreoni and
Petrie (2004), Rege and Telle (2004), Andreoni and Bernheim (2009), Ariely et al. (2009), Jones and Linardi (2014),
Bernheim and Exley (2015), Exley (2018), and Birke (2020).
   3
     Others promote such policies as instruments for the internalization of community norms (Etzioni, 1999; Kahan
and Posner, 1999).




                                                        1
       In this paper, we develop a portable approach for directly quantifying the emotional effects
of public recognition, using a money-metric method that can be immediately incorporated into
welfare analysis. We deploy our approach in two different experimental designs conducted with
four different subject pools. In each experiment, we address three research questions. First, do
people have a significant willingness to pay to seek out or avoid public recognition of their behavior,
implying that public recognition has a direct emotional effect on people’s utility? Second, how does
utility from public recognition depend on people’s realized behavior? In particular, are individuals
choosing high levels of socially desirable behavior made better off through pride, and are individuals
choosing low levels of the desirable behavior made worse of through shame? Third, are the emotional
effects of shame and pride on net negative or positive? As we show, this third question relates to
both the curvature of the public recognition utility function (PRU), and to the reference standard
at which shameful behavior transitions to admirable behavior.
       Our first experiment was conducted in the field, in partnership with the YMCA of the USA
and the YMCA of the Triangle Area (YOTA) in Raleigh, North Carolina.4 We invited all members
of YOTA to participate in a newly designed one-month program called “Grow & Thrive.” This
program encouraged members to attend their local YMCA more often by having an anonymous
donor give $2 to the local YMCA for each day that an individual attended the YMCA. While
this charity incentive was provided to everyone, participants could also be assigned to a public
recognition program, which would reveal each participant’s attendance and donation raised to all
other participants in the program.
       Our second set of experiments was conducted online and builds on the Ariely et al. (2009) and
DellaVigna and Pope (2018) “Click for Charity” task. The online experiments complement our field
experiment by utilizing a design that gives us greater flexibility and control to address some open
issues from the field experiment. In this real-effort task, participants raise money for the American
Red Cross by repeatedly pressing two keys on a computer keyboard. Participants in our study
took part in three rounds. In the Anonymous Effort Round, participants’ scores were not shared
with anyone. In the Anonymous and Paid Effort Round, participants additionally received pay for
their effort. In the Publicly-Shared Effort Round, participants’ contributions to the Red Cross were
publicly shared with others in the experiment through a webpage that posted individuals’ photos,
amount raised, rank relative to other participants, and, for two of the subject pools, names.5
       We administered this online experiment simultaneously to three different subject pools that
differ in individuals’ familiarity with each other: (i) an online panel called Prolific Academic, where
participants almost surely do not know each other (henceforth Prolific sample); (ii) UC Berkeley’s
pool of subjects for economics and psychology experiments, where some participants might know
each other (henceforth Berkeley sample); and (iii) a section of Boston University’s statistics class
   4
     The YMCA of the USA is a national, non-profit, charitable organization that supports local communities with
a focus on youth development, healthy living, and social responsibility. The YMCA of the Triangle Area primarily
serves the Raleigh-Durham, North Carolina, and surrounding communities. It is one of 850 member association
YMCAs.
   5
     Birke (2020) utilizes a similar approach to public recognition of online participants. We thank him for his advice
and for kindly sharing his code.


                                                          2
for second- and third-year undergraduate business majors, where students are likely to know each
other (henceforth BU sample).
      Our revealed-preferences approach to estimating the effects of shame and pride utilizes the
incentive-compatible Becker-DeGroot-Marschak (BDM) mechanism to elicit participants’ (possibly
negative) willingness to pay (WTP) for public recognition at various possible realizations of their
performance. An advantage of this “strategy method” approach is that it is robust to possible mis-
forecasting of one’s future behavior. In the YMCA experiment, participants’ WTP to be publicly
recognized was elicited in an initial online survey before the start of the month-long period during
which incentives for attendance were provided. Participants were asked to state their WTP to be
publicly recognized for all levels of attendance ranging from 0 to 30 days. To generate random
assignment, as well as to minimize any negative inferences that could be drawn about participants
who are not publicly recognized, the BDM responses were used to determine assignment to public
recognition with only 10 percent chance. With 90 percent chance assignment was random.6
      In the charitable contribution experiments, we again used the BDM mechanism to elicit partic-
ipants’ WTP to have their contribution to the Red Cross publicly recognized. As in the YMCA ex-
periment, we elicited WTP for different possible levels of charitable contribution, and participants’
elicited preferences were implemented with 10 percent chance. With 90 percent chance participants
were randomly assigned to have their outcome based on one of the three rounds. In the 10 percent
of cases where participants’ preferences were implemented, participants’ contribution was based on
a randomly chosen score from one of the three rounds, and participants with a preference to be
recognized were listed alongside the participants randomly assigned to the Publicly-Shared Effort
Round.
      We present six sets of results. First, we find that public recognition substantially increased de-
sirable behavior. In the YMCA experiment, it significantly increased attendance by 17 percent, and
in the charitable contribution experiments, it significantly increased contributions by 13 percent,
14 percent, and 13 percent in the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples, respectively.
      Second, we find that a majority of participants have a non-zero WTP for public recognition.
The fraction of participants with positive WTP to either opt in or opt out of public recognition
at some level of performance is 93 percent, 73 percent, 78 percent, and 89 percent in the YMCA,
Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples, respectively. Participants’ eagerness to pay to avoid shame or
obtain pride is consistent with a long intellectual tradition of incorporating “psychic” or emotional
effects into otherwise standard economic models using money metrics (starting with, e.g., Becker,
1968; Ehrlich, 1973).
      Third, the WTP data allows us to examine how participants’ payoffs from public recognition
vary with their level of performance. We find that participants’ payoffs are strictly increasing in
performance in all experiments. Moreover, in all experiments, participants in the bottom quartile
of performance receive negative payoffs, on average, while participants in the top quartile of per-
formance receive positive payoffs, on average. The robust presence of negative payoffs from public
  6
      This information was common knowledge among participants.



                                                      3
recognition is consistent with leading economics models of social signaling (e.g., Bénabou and Ti-
role, 2006; Andreoni and Bernheim, 2009), but it is not an implication of psychological theories of
shame. From a psychological perspective, shame is an emotion that accompanies moral transgres-
sions (Tangney et al., 1996, 2007), and ex-ante it was unclear that any action in our experiments
could be labeled as such. For example, raising any amount of money for the Red Cross could have
been perceived as commendable prosocial behavior.
   Fourth, we estimate structural models of social signaling. We consider “action-signaling” models
in which individuals directly care about how their action compares to the population behavior (e.g.,
Becker, 1991; Besley and Coate, 1992; Blomquist, 1993; Lindbeck et al., 1999), and “characteristics-
signaling” models in which individuals care about what their action reveals about their character-
istics (e.g., Bénabou and Tirole, 2006; Andreoni and Bernheim, 2009; Ali and Bénabou, 2020). We
provide a key out-of-sample test of the validity of our methodology and modeling framework by
showing that data on (i) the treatment effect of public recognition and (ii) people’s WTP for public
recognition can be used to predict (iii) the effect of financial incentives on behavior. In the charita-
ble contribution experiments, the financial incentive was randomized, and we compare the models’
predictions to a direct estimate of the effect of the financial incentive. In the YMCA experiment,
we were not able to randomize a financial incentive, but we compare our models’ predictions to
individuals’ forecasts of how they would respond to a financial incentive. Across all four subject
pools we find that the models’ predictions only slightly overestimate the effects of the financial
incentives, and that this overestimation is not statistically significant at conventional levels. This
suggests that our monetization of social image incentives is accurately capturing the (presumably
nuanced) psychological effects of public recognition.
   Fifth, we study the shape of the PRU. In our models, whether the emotional effects of pride
and shame are on net negative or positive depends on the degree of concavity and the standard
for what constitutes pride-worthy versus shameful behavior. Intuitively, more concavity leads
individuals to be more sensitive to shame than to pride, while a higher standard increases the
fraction of individuals who experience shame. For example, if people derive pride if and only if they
are “better than average,” then, by Jensen’s Inequality, a concave PRU makes public recognition
negative-sum while a convex PRU would make public recognition positive-sum.
   Both the reduced-form analyses and the structural estimates imply significant concavity in
the YMCA and Prolific samples. We cannot reject linearity in the Berkeley and BU samples,
although we also cannot reject that those samples feature as much concavity as the YMCA and
Prolific samples. We also find that the standard at which shameful behavior transitions to pride-
worthy behavior is higher than the population average behavior in the YMCA and BU samples, is
equal to the average in the Berkeley sample, and is lower than the average in the Prolific sample.
Collectively, these results imply that public recognition is negative-sum in the YMCA and BU
samples, is zero-sum in the Berkeley sample, and is positive-sum in the Prolific sample.
   Sixth, we use our structural estimates to generate out-of-sample predictions about the welfare
and behavior effects of scaling up the public recognition intervention in the YMCA experiment to


                                                   4
all of YOTA. We find that at the parameters estimated for the YMCA sample, public recognition is
likely to be a less socially efficient means of generating behavior change than are financial incentives.
We precisely quantify this deadweight loss, and we numerically examine how it varies with the shape
of the PRU. If the shape of the PRU more closely resembled our estimate in the Prolific sample, then
public recognition would be a more efficient means of changing behavior than financial incentives.
    Collectively, our results illustrate the importance of directly measuring the welfare effects of
shame and pride, and the potential benefits of our methodology. Our findings about the prevalence
of shame imply that the appropriateness of public recognition in settings such as ours could be
legitimately debated. From a pure economic efficiency perspective, we find that public recognition
may be a socially inefficient tool for behavior change in the YMCA field setting despite the low
financial cost of the intervention and initial enthusiasm of our field partners. On the other hand,
our results from the Prolific sample also illustrate that public recognition could be an efficient tool
in other settings. While there are a number of reasons why caution is warranted in extrapolating
from our specific results, one lesson seems clear: it is inappropriate to judge the success of a public
recognition policy solely by its effect on behavior. Our methodology could help enrich the applied
work on public recognition and social signaling by helping researchers study both behavior and
welfare. We discuss possible extensions and additional applications in the concluding section.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 further reviews the related liter-
ature. Section 2 introduces our theoretical framework. Section 3 describes the YMCA experiment
and Section 4 reports the reduced-form results. Section 5 describes the charitable contribution
experiments and Section 6 reports the reduced-form results. Section 7 presents our estimates of
structural models of social signaling and welfare implications. Section 8 concludes by discussing
limitations, robustness, and questions for future research.


1    Discussion of related literature
Our research is related to several literatures. The most closely related is the large and growing ex-
perimental literature studying the effects of public recognition on individual behavior, summarized
above. However, this literature studies behavior, and does not assess the effects of experiencing
shame and pride on people’s wellbeing. We build on this literature by developing a portable ap-
proach for measuring the welfare effects of shame and pride, which can be productively incorporated
into future experiments on public recognition.
    Our work also relates to a recent literature that evaluates the welfare effects of scalable, non-
financial policy instruments such as reminders (Damgaard and Gravert, 2018), energy-use social
comparisons (Allcott and Kessler, 2019), calorie labeling (Thunstrom, 2019), and defaults (Carroll
et al., 2009; Bernheim et al., 2015). Our paper contributes to this literature by analyzing a different
and highly popular non-financial policy instrument, and by providing new methods for testing and
estimating models of social signaling. We also add several technical innovations to this important
literature. First, our experiments utilize a new design technique, grounded in “strategy method”


                                                   5
approaches typically only used in laboratory experiments, that eliminates the need to rely on the
assumption that individuals can correctly forecast their future behavior.7 We establish the need
to relax this assumption in our setting, and we discuss its relevance for other studies. Second, we
develop simple principles for comparing the economic efficiency of non-financial policy instruments
to that of financial incentives.
        Finally, our model-based design allows us to produce the first structural estimates of leading
models of social signaling such as those of Bénabou and Tirole (2006).8 We therefore also contribute
to a recent and growing literature in structural behavioral economics (see DellaVigna, 2018 for a
review). The work by DellaVigna et al. (2012) and DellaVigna et al. (2017) is closest in spirit to our
paper in this literature, although they do not study the scalable lever of revealing people’s behavior
to others, nor do they estimate the leading social signaling models. These two papers quantify the
social pressure effects of face-to-face interaction in charitable contributions and voting, respectively.9
They do this by using structural methods to infer the cost of social pressure from the degree to
which individuals avoid interaction with others. In contrast, we use conceptually different, and
more direct experimental techniques that leverage the richness of our action space and allow us
to directly observe the shape of utility from the social motives. The richer data provided by our
approach enables the estimation of structural models of social signaling.


2        Theoretical framework for analysis
2.1       The models
We consider individuals who choose the level of intensity a ∈ A ⊂ R+ to engage in some activity.
Choosing a generates material utility u(a; θ) + y, where y is the individual’s income and θ ∈ R
is the type of the individual, which we typically interpret as the individual’s intrinsic motivation
to engage in socially desirable behavior.10 We assume that u(a; θ) is single-peaked in a and that
 d
da u(a; θ)   is increasing in θ and is bounded. Thus, each individual has some optimal intensity level
    7
     See also Bernheim and Taubinsky (2018) for a more detailed discussion of the weaknesses assuming that people
can forecast their behavior when evaluating non financial policy instruments, as well as the “non-comparability
problem” that less theory-grounded approaches such as those of Allcott and Kessler (2019) are subject to.
   8
     Karing (2019), Bursztyn et al. (2019), Ariely et al. (2009), and Exley (2018) test comparative statics of the
Bénabou and Tirole (2006) model, and Karing (2019) quantifies the value of sending a positive (but not fully-
revealing) signal. These papers do not estimate the underlying public recognition utility function.
   9
     We delineate between social pressure and public recognition. Social pressure commonly refers to situations in
which individuals take actions to avoid the emotional agitation of another person’s pressure in typically face-to-face
interaction; an example is DellaVigna et al. (2012), where social pressure is a force layered on top of the information
already revealed by choosing to use a do-not-visit tag. Public recognition instead refers to situations in which
individuals take actions to influence others’ beliefs about them. In some settings both are in play; e.g., when telling
a surveyor whether or not one has voted, as in DellaVigna et al. (2017). The implicit assumption of the DellaVigna
et al. (2017) model that not answering the door to a pre-announced visit (an action most likely to be taken by those
who did not vote) generates no disutility beyond hassle costs is more consistent with a social pressure interpretation
and less consistent with leading social signaling models such as those of Bénabou and Tirole (2006) and Andreoni
and Bernheim (2009).
  10
     Assuming that utility is linear in income is a simplifying assumption that is not crucial for our theoretical
exposition, but that is realistic given the relatively small financial stakes of our experimental setting.



                                                          6
a∗ (θ), and higher types θ derive more benefit from choosing higher levels of a. In addition to
material utility, individuals also derive public recognition utility S, which we define below.
       Consistent with psychological theories, we recognize that people can derive shame and pride
either directly from their behavior a or from their characteristics θ (see, e.g., Leary, 2007). We
thus consider models of both of these mechanisms.
       To simplify exposition, in the body of the paper we consider fully-revealing equilibria in which
each individual’s choice of action a is perfectly observed, and in which there is a one-to-one mapping
between types θ and actions a. We present the models and solution concepts in full generality in
Appendix A.
       Formally, let S be an increasing function that satisfies S(0) = 0, and let ν ∈ R+ be the “visibility
parameter” (Ali and Bénabou, 2020), which might depend on the number of observers, or the extent
to which the observers are paying attention to an individual’s behavior. The action-signaling model
posits that when an individual’s action is made public, the individual cares about how his action
compares to a weighted average of behavior in the population (Becker, 1991; Besley and Coate,
1992; Blomquist, 1993; Lindbeck et al., 1999, 2003):

                                          u(a; θ) + y + νS (a − ρā)                                          (1)

where ā is the average action in the population, and ρā is the standard for what constitutes shameful
versus pride-worthy behavior. The characteristics-signaling model posits that individuals derive
utility from what their action reveals about their characteristics to the audience (e.g., Andreoni
and Bernheim, 2009; Bénabou and Tirole, 2006; Ali and Bénabou, 2020):


                                        u(a; θ) + y + νS(E[θ|a] − ρθ̄)                                        (2)

where E[θ|a] is the inference about a person’s type given their behavior, θ̄ is the average type in
the population, and ρθ̄ is the standard for what constitutes shameful versus pride-worthy charac-
teristics.11
       The parameter ρ determines how many individuals experience shame versus pride. When ρ = 0,
all individuals choosing a > 0 experience pride from public recognition. When ρ > 1, the standard
is particularly demanding, as individuals must perform better than average to experience pride.
       The generalizations in Appendix A imply that in the general case where behavior and/or types
are not fully revealed, the standard will depend on the information structure. In particular, in the
case where (almost) nothing is revealed about individuals’ behavior and characteristics, the general
model makes the sensible prediction that individuals incur neither shame nor pride. Roughly
speaking the parameter ρ tends to 1 as the information structure coarsens.
  11
    Note that there always exists a separating equilibrium in the characteristics-signaling model when u is smooth
and A is convex and compact (Mailath, 1987).




                                                        7
2.2      The net effects of shame and pride
Although theoretical work often makes the simplifying assumption that the net effect of shame and
pride is zero by assuming that S is linear and that ρ = 1 (e.g., Bénabou and Tirole, 2006, 2011),
it is well understood that both assumptions are not without loss of generality. Psychologically,
both assumptions can be legitimately challenged. Because shame and pride are separate emotions
of different valences (Tangney et al., 2007), people’s wellbeing may not be equally sensitive to
these two emotions, implying nonlinearity in S. And to the extent that shame is an emotion that
accompanies moral transgressions (Tangney et al., 1996, 2007), it is also not clear that ρ might
even be strictly positive for all behaviors. For example, raising any amount of money for charity
might always lead to pride.
   Plainly, both the curvature of S and the value of ρ determine the net utility effect of shame and
pride. In particular, let a(θ) denote individuals’ equilibrium action choices. Then the net effects of
shame and pride in the two models are, respectively, given by:

                                             E[S(a(θ) − ρā)]                                     (3)
                                        E[S(E[θ|a(θ)] − ρθ̄)]                                     (4)

If S is concave and ρ ≥ 1, then Jensen’s Inequality implies that the net effects of shame and pride
in the two models are given by:

                              E[S(a(θ) − ρā)] ≤ S(E[a(θ) − ρā]) ≤ 0
                                                                      
                          E[S(E[θ|a(θ)] − ρθ̄)] ≤ S E[E[θ|a(θ)] − ρθ̄] ≤ 0

Thus, the net emotional effect is negative when the function is concave and the standard for
behavior/characteristics is at least as demanding as the average. Conversely, the net emotional
effect is positive when ρ ≤ 1 and S is convex. In general, the net emotional effect decreases in ρ,
decreases in the slope of S(x) in the region x < 0, and increases in the slope of S in the region
x ≥ 0.
   As we show in Appendix A, the relationship between E[S] and the shape of S holds more
generally for any kind of public recognition scheme, such as two-tier public recognition schemes
that publicize only the behavior of the top performers. Thus, if, for example, S is concave and
people compare themselves to the average (ρ = 1), then the two-tier scheme will lead to a net
negative emotional effect as well. Intuitively, not being recognized as a top performer is worse
than not having any information revealed about oneself, and thus the two-tier scheme cannot avoid
inducing some amount of negative emotion among those in the lower tier. Thus, our findings about
the shape of S have implications beyond the fully-revealing public recognition schemes that we
study in this paper.
   In Appendix B we show that the net emotional effect E[S] connects to a key economic question:
whether public recognition is an efficient tool for behavior change relative to standard financial


                                                  8
incentives. We show that under some homogeneity assumptions, E[S] is the welfare effect of public
recognition relative to financial incentives. Intuitively, consider revenue-neutral financial incentive
schemes that penalize individuals for low levels of a and reward individuals for high levels of a. In
the appendix, we show that under some assumptions there exists a financial incentive scheme that
produces exactly the same distribution of behavior change as does public recognition. However, by
virtue of being revenue-neutral, this financial incentive scheme achieves this behavior change at a
net-zero cost or benefit to individuals. In fact, when E[S] is positive (negative), the revenue-neutral
scheme pareto dominates (is pareto dominated by) public recognition.

2.3      Structural versus reduced-form estimates of the PRU
Often, the economic questions of interest are about the effects of utilizing public recognition on a
whole population, not just the experimental sample. Answering this question requires an additional
step of analysis, because the equilibrium response of an individual in an experiment may differ from
the equilibrium response when public recognition is scaled up to the broader population.
       To formalize, call R : A → R the reduced-form public recognition function which assigns, for each
value a, a public recognition payoff R(a). Let Rexp denote the function elicited for the experimental
population during the experiment, and let Rpop denote the reduced-form public recognition function
that would result if public recognition was applied to the whole population of interest. These two
objects can be meaningfully different: when the public recognition lever is applied to the whole
population, population behavior changes, and thus the benchmark for what is considered relatively
good behavior may change as well.
       As a simple example, suppose that ρ = 1 and suppose that in our YMCA setting, an individual
is observed to have attended the YMCA four times during the month of the experiment, and that
average population attendance is 3.5 attendances. In the context of the experiment, an individual
attending four times would thus receive positive public recognition payoffs in the action-signaling
model. However, suppose that after applying the public recognition intervention to the whole
population, average attendance would increase to 4.5 attendances. Then an attendance of four
would actually generate negative public recognition utility.
       Moreover, the net emotional effect could be positive in the experiment even if ρ = 1 and S is
concave, illustrating the sense in which partial-equilibrium reduced-form results need to be supple-
mented with structural modeling. Our reading of existing literature studying social comparisons
and social pressure is that it often stops at Rexp .12
  12
     For example, suppose that individuals’ utility in Allcott and Kessler (2019) is a decreasing function of the
difference between their energy use and the energy use of the neighbors they are shown. Then the utility that they
receive from the information mailer depends on whether the mailer goes out to their neighbors as well. However,
since not everyone received the mailer in the experiment, the reduced-form effects that they estimate cannot be
used to directly evaluate the policy of sending out mailers to all households. To perform such an evaluation, it
would be necessary to take a stand on the structural utility function for social comparisons, to estimate it using
the experimental results, and to estimate the counterfactual equilibrium of sending the mailers to everyone in the
population.
   As another example, consider evaluating individuals’ utility from encountering a surveyor who asks about voting
behavior. DellaVigna et al. (2017) estimate the utility of doing so after votes have already been cast. But to evaluate


                                                          9
3     YMCA experiment design
3.1    Recruitment
The field experiment was conducted in collaboration with the YMCA of the USA and the YMCA
of the Triangle Area in North Carolina (YOTA), and was publicly called “Grow & Thrive.” YMCA
members of two large YMCA facilities from YOTA were invited via email to sign up for this program
by completing a survey. They were informed that for every day that they attended the YMCA
during the program month, an anonymous donor would make a $2 donation to their YMCA branch.
    The Grow & Thrive program ran from June 15, 2017 to July 15, 2017. On June 1, 2017, the
15,382 members of the two YOTA branches received an email from their local YMCA announcing
the launch of a new pilot program aimed at helping YMCA members to stay active and support
their community at the same time. The initial email informed participants about the Grow &
Thrive program and included a link to an online survey. YMCA members were told that they
could sign up for the program by completing the survey and agreeing to participate.13

3.2    Experimental protocol
The survey began by explaining the nature of the incentives during the program.14 Participants
were told that an anonymous benefactor with an interest in promoting healthy living and supporting
the broader community provided funds to incentivize YOTA members to attend their local YMCA
more frequently. During the month of the Grow & Thrive program, a $2 donation was made on
each participant’s behalf for each day they visited the YMCA, up to a total donation of $60 per
person (i.e., 30 visits).
    Participants were then told that they might also be randomly selected to participate in the
public recognition program. We explained that if a participant was selected into this program,
they would receive an email at the end of Grow & Thrive, which would: (1) list the names of
everyone in the program; (2) list their attendance during Grow & Thrive; and (3) list the total
donations generated by them during Grow & Thrive. We explained that only participants in the
public recognition program would receive and be listed in the email. Figure 1 provides a screenshot
of what this public recognition email entailed.
    We then elicited people’s willingness to pay for receiving (or avoiding) public recognition using
the equilibrium impact of increasing the visibility of one’s voting behavior, it is necessary to account for the fact that
visibility also changes voting behavior, which changes the payoffs one receives from telling a surveyor if one has voted
or not. Evaluating the equilibrium outcomes would thus require one to estimate the structural microfoundations of
why individuals like to tell others that they voted.
  13
     The “pilot” language was important for our field partner, but we recognize that in principle it could have affect
people’s perceptions about the longer-run consequences of their choices. However, recent work by DellaVigna and
Pope (2019) and de Quidt et al. (2018) suggests that framing effects of this sort seem have muted effects on behavior.
DellaVigna and Pope (2019) also put forward the provocative finding that academics seem to overestimate the extent
to which such framing matters (at least with respect to the specific but related issue of whether or not subjects are
told that they are part of an experiment).
  14
     The Experimental Instructions Appendix contains text and screenshots of the instructions and questions used in
the experiment.



                                                           10
a combination of the strategy method and the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak (BDM) mechanism. The
incentive-compatible method contained eleven two-part questions about possible numbers of visits:
0 visits, 1 visits, 2 visits, 3 visits, 4 visits, 5 or 6 visits, 7 or 8 visits, 9 to 12 visits, 13 to 17 visits,
18 to 22 visits, and 23 or more visits. For each of the eleven intervals, participants were first asked
whether they would want to be publicly recognized if their attendance during Grow & Thrive fell
in that interval. Participants were then asked how much they were willing to pay to guarantee that
their choice was implemented.
       Each of the eleven questions had the following structure: “If you go to the YMCA [X times]
during Grow & Thrive, do you want to participate in the public recognition program? ” Participants
were then asked to state, for each of the eleven levels of possible attendance, how much of an
experimental budget of $8 they would be willing to give up to guarantee that their decision about
public recognition was implemented. The question asked, “You said you would rather [participate]
[NOT participate] in the personal recognition program if you go [X times] to the Y. How much of
the $8 reward would you give up to guarantee that you will indeed [participate] [NOT participate] in
the personal recognition program? ” The details were then explained in simple and plain language,
and participants were told, in bold font, that “it is in your interest to be honest about whether you
want to participate in the personal recognition program, and how much of the $8 reward you would
give up to ensure that you will or will not participate in the personal recognition program.” Figure
2 provides a screenshot from the survey of one of the pairs of questions.
       To preserve random assignment, as well as to minimize any negative inferences that could
be drawn about those not in the public recognition group, we informed participants that their
responses would be used to determine assignment with 10 percent chance, and that with 90 percent
chance their assignment would be determined randomly. For participants in the 10 percent, a
computer would check their attendance during Grow & Thrive and match it with their answers.
With 50% chance they would receive an $8 Amazon gift card and they would be assigned to the
public recognition group if and only if they indicated a preference to be in that group. Otherwise,
with 50% chance, the BDM mechanism was used to determine the participant’s extra reward and
assignment to the public recognition group.15
       To obtain intuition for why truth-telling is incentive compatible with our mechanism, first
note that a participant’s chance of receiving public recognition is always higher if they indicate
a preference for it in the first part of the elicitation. Second, after a participant commits their
answer of whether or not they want public recognition, note that the bidding component of the
elicitation is just a standard second-price sealed-bid auction against the computer. In summary,
the procedure allowed participants to indicate a WTP for public recognition between -$8 and $8.
For the 10 percent of participants whose decisions would be used to determine assignment, a bid of
  15
    Specifically, the computer generated a random number between 0 and 8, and a participant’s preference for being
in the public recognition program would be implemented if and only if the participant’s WTP was higher than the
random number. In this case, the computer’s random number was subtracted form the participant’s budget. If
the computer chose a value greater than the participant’s WTP to implement their choice, then the participant’s
preferred choice for being part of the public recognition program would NOT be implemented, and the participant
would receive the $8.


                                                       11
$8 guaranteed that the participant would be in the public recognition group, a bid of $0 generated
a 50 percent chance of being in the public recognition group, and a bid of -$8 guaranteed that the
participant would not be in the public recognition group.16
       Because others’ behavior plays a role in the models summarized in Section 2, it was important
to help participants have accurate beliefs about others’ behavior. Prior to making their decisions
about being part of the public recognition program, participants were provided an estimate of the
average YOTA monthly attendance in the past year.
       In the last component of the survey we elicited participants’ beliefs about their future attendance
during Grow & Thrive with and without public recognition and under different levels of financial
incentives. In this part we also elicited participants’ preferences over different financial incentives,
which we describe later in the analysis. Finally, we reminded participants that a computer would
randomly determine whether they would be part of the public recognition group, and we asked
them to explicitly agree to participate in Grow & Thrive.
       All participants were notified via email about their treatment assignment on the morning of the
first day of Grow & Thrive. Participants assigned to the public recognition treatment received a
reminder summary of the public recognition treatment when they were notified of their assignment.
       All communications with YMCA members took place via email. We prepared an FAQ document
covering common questions YMCA members might have about the program. To guarantee the
consistency of the responses, and to minimize the burden on YMCA employees, we instructed
employees working at the front desk to encourage members to address their questions via email to
a specific contact person at the YMCA; the contact person would then use the answers provided
in the FAQ to respond.17

3.3       Attendance data
We received administrative attendance records from May 1, 2016 to July 15, 2017 for YMCA
members in the branches where we conducted the experiment, including those not in Grow &
Thrive. Attendances were recorded whenever a member accessed the YMCA facilities by swiping
their personal YMCA access card on a turnstile. Before a member could swipe in, a front desk
employee verified that the access card belong to the member.18 We utilize attendance data for
  16
     To formally see that this procedure is incentive-compatible, let v be denote a participant’s preferences to be
publicly recognized at a particular attendance level. Then if a participant indicated a preference for public recognition
and bid a value b, their expected payoff would be π1 (b) = $8 + 0.5v + 0.5(v − b/2)(b/8). Conversely, if the participant
indicated a preference for no public recognition and bids b to not get it, then the expected payoff is π2 (b) = $8 +
0.5v + 0.5(−v − b/2)(b/8). Clearly, π1 = π2 if and only if b = 0, with π1 ≥ π2 if and only if v ≥ 0. Conditional on
v ≥ 0, the bid that maximizes π1 is b = v. Conditional on v < 0, the bid b that maximizes π2 is b = −v.
  17
     The YMCA contact reported that only one participant contacted him, asking if he could be added to the public
recognition group. After the (negative) response, there were no further questions from the participant.
  18
     While YMCA members have to swipe in to access the YMCA, they do not have to swipe out to leave. Therefore
we do not have information about how much time participants spent at the YMCA. To account for the risk of
participants strategically swiping in and out without accessing YMCA programs and initiatives during their stay,
YMCA employees were told to track any unusual activities among YMCA members. YMCA employees did not report
any unusual pattern of access to the facilities during the experiment. Participants knew that multiple accesses during
the same day would only count as one attendance.



                                                           12
non-experimental participants in the out-of-sample predictions in Section 7.

3.4       Discussion of the design
What are individuals signaling?              Due to the nature of our setting and the wishes of the
YMCA, we were not able to implement a treatment in which participants received public recognition
without the Grow & Thrive incentive of raising $2 per attendance for YOTA. As such, we cannot
fully differentiate between whether YMCA members were motivated by the desire to be recognized
for being health-conscious, or for being charitable. However, like charitable giving, pursuing good
health through exercise is also perceived by many as a social and moral obligation (Conrad, 1994;
Whorton, 2014; Cederström and Spicer, 2015), and thus it is plausible that both motivations give
rise to PRUs of similar structure.

Preference for signaling versus preferences for information                       Although all participants
were given the average YOTA monthly attendance from the past year, only the public recognition
group received information about others’ behavior. To the extent that there was demand for
this additional information, our WTP data is an upper bound on demand for public recognition
alone. We chose to give any information to individuals only in the public recognition group to
better capture the reality of how such interventions are usually implemented. In practice, the
counterfactual to a public recognition scheme is not anonymized information provision—it is nothing
at all.

Anticipated versus realized emotions Although our approach does not require people to cor-
rectly forecast their future attendance, it does rely on the assumption that people can anticipate
the emotional effects of public recognition. Testing this assumption would require a design that
elicits people’s WTP for public recognition after their attendance is realized. This design is sig-
nificantly less well-powered as it elicits only one data point per person, and thus is left for future
work where larger samples can be acquired. However, because people experience shame and pride
often, it is likely that they can accurately anticipate the intensity of these feelings, as is consistent
with psychological evidence (Sznycer et al., 2016, 2017; Cohen et al., 2020).


4        Reduced-form results from the YMCA experiment
4.1       The experimental sample
A total of 428 YOTA members completed the survey and agreed to participate in Grow & Thrive.
192 participants were randomly assigned to participate in Grow & Thrive but not in the public
recognition program and 193 participants were randomly assigned to participate in both Grow &
Thrive and the public recognition program.19 43 participants were randomly assigned to receive
    19
    We randomized our 428 participants into the public recognition group by blocking and balancing over WTP
survey responses and attendance in the twelve months preceding the experiment. All participants were notified by


                                                      13
the extra $8 reward for themselves, which they were able to use to affect their likelihood of being
publicly recognized. These 43 participants for whom participation in the public recognition program
is endogenous are excluded from our empirical analysis.
    Unless otherwise noted, from the remaining 385 participants we also exclude 15 participants
who indicate a demand for public recognition that has no discernible relation to the number of
attendances, and are thus likely confused or disengaged from the study. The remaining coherent
sample includes individuals whose WTP for public recognition is monotonically increasing in at-
tendance, as well as individuals with preferences that are monotonically decreasing in attendance
(i.e., a desire to be recognized as not wanting to attend the YMCA), or individuals with preferences
that peak at intermediate levels of attendance (i.e., wanting to look “average”).
    In addition to the coherent sample, we also analyze the slightly smaller group of participants
whose preferences for public recognition are monotonically increasing in YMCA visits. This mono-
tonic sample is of particular interest because it is consistent with the typical monotonicity assump-
tions of the models in Section 2.
    Table 1 shows that all pre-experiment outcomes, as well as preferences elicited through our
online component, are balanced by whether participants were randomly assigned to be in the public
recognition group. One noteworthy property of our sample is the high average past attendance of
5.69, which is approximately twice as high as the past attendance of 3.02 of all YOTA members.
However, we show below that past attendance does not vary meaningfully with people’s preferences
over public recognition.

4.2    The effect of public recognition on behavior
Figure 3 displays the cumulative distribution functions of attendance by treatment, showing that
the impact of public recognition is positive across all levels of attendance. We quantify these
results in Table 2. Columns (1)-(3) present results from the monotonic sample, while columns (4)-
(6) present results from the slightly larger coherent sample. The table shows that in both samples
public recognition increased attendance by approximately 1.2 visits. Given an average attendance
of approximately 7 visits in the control group, this corresponds to an approximately 17 percent
increase in attendance. This estimate is just outside the range of marginal statistical significance
without controlling for participants’ past attendance, but becomes highly statistically significant
when controlling for participants’ past attendance.

4.3    Willingness to pay for public recognition
The significant effect of public recognition on behavior suggests that it constitutes a meaningful
incentive to participants. Consistent with this, we find that 93 percent of participants have a strict
preference to opt in or opt out of public recognition for at least one level of attendance.
    Figure 4 plots the average WTP by the attendance level that would be publicized to other
the YMCA of the Triangle via email about their treatment assignment the morning of the first day of Grow & Thrive.



                                                       14
participants. These WTP profiles constitute model-free measures of the reduced-form PRU Rexp
introduced in Section 2.3. We identify each set of possible visits from our elicitation with its
midpoint, meaning that the first five sets {0}, {1}, . . . , {4} are identified with 0, 1, ..., 4, the “5 or 6
visits” set is identified with 5.5, the “9 to 12 visits” set is identified with 10.5, and so forth. Panel (a)
presents data from the monotonic sample, panel (b) presents data from participants with coherent
but non-monotonic preferences, and panel (c) presents data from the full coherent sample (the
combination of panels (a) and (b)). In all three panels, we also plot the WTP of participants with
above versus below median past attendance. The vertical dashed line in the panels corresponds to
the average YOTA attendance of 3.14, which is a potential reference standard for shameful versus
pride-worthy behavior. As discussed in Section 2, the net effect of shame and pride is decreasing
in the magnitude of the reference standard.
   On average, as shown in panel (c), the WTP for public recognition is strictly increasing in the
number of visits. It is negative at low numbers of visits and positive at high numbers of visits.
This pattern is more pronounced in the monotonic panel, as shown in panel (a). Panel (b) shows
that the remaining participants with non-monotonic preferences have a distinct WTP profile that
peaks at approximately seven attendances and declines steeply afterward. Consistent with this
non-monotonic profile, we find an essentially null (but noisy) effect of public recognition on the
attendance of these 31 participants (0.39; 95 percent CI [−2.59, 3.38]).
   Figure 4 also shows that participants’ PRUs do not vary with their past attendance. We
verify this formally in regression analysis in Table A1 in Appendix C.1. This is important for
two reasons. First, because participants in our study had a higher-than-average attendance, and
thus a strong interaction between past attendance and WTP for public recognition could limit
the external validity of our results. Second, this suggests that participants in our study did not
self-select based on sensitivity to shame and pride. If low attenders self-selected on being relatively
insensitive to public recognition, while high attenders self-selected on being relatively sensitive to
public recognition, then the WTP profiles for the above and below median groups in Figure 4 would
diverge.
   Table 3 quantifies the descriptive results in Figure 4 by presenting regressions of WTP for
public recognition on the midpoint of the visits intervals. Columns (1)-(4) present results from the
monotonic sample, while columns (5)-(8) present results from the coherent sample. We present
results both from OLS and Tobit regressions. Because some participants’ WTPs were at the
maximum possible amount of $8 or the minimum possible amount of −$8 for some of the elicitation
intervals, some preferences were likely to be censored by our elicitation, and thus the Tobit models
may give a more accurate assessment of how WTP for public recognition varies with the number
of visits. We present linear regressions in odd-numbered columns, and we include a quadratic term
for visits in even-numbered columns to study the curvature of the PRU. In this and all subsequent
analyses of the WTP data, we cluster standard errors by participant.
   All specifications in Table 3 generate two robust results, which are visually apparent in Figure 4.
First, the WTP for public recognition is significantly increasing in the number of visits. Second,


                                                     15
this relationship is significantly concave, as implied by the negative coefficient on visits squared.
       The quadratic regression models allow us to quantify the curvature of the reduced-form PRU,
                                     00 /R0 (0), which is analogous to the coefficient of absolute
Rexp . One measure of curvature is −Rexp  exp
                                                       00 /R0 (0) multiplied by the standard
risk aversion (ARA). Another measure of curvature is −Rexp  exp
deviation of attendance of YOTA participants.20 This second measure quantifies the percent de-
           0
crease in Rexp from a one standard deviation change in behavior, and is a unitless measure akin
to the coefficient of relative risk aversion (RRA). The unitless property allows us to compare our
estimates of curvature across both the YMCA and the charitable contribution experiments.
       Table 3 shows that while the coefficients in the Tobit models are almost twice as large as the
corresponding coefficients in the OLS models, our measure of curvature is very stable. This suggests
that while the censoring likely lead to a linear rescaling of the PRU, it did not affect the shape.
       In addition to censoring, another potential concern is that participants may have been less
serious about the WTP elicitation when asked to evaluate public recognition for an attendance
level that was outside the range of what they thought was likely. This could lead participants
with low expectations of attendance to be relatively insensitive to variation at the upper range of
potential visits, and participants with high expectations of attendance to be relatively insensitive
to variation at the lower range of potential visits. We investigate this possibility in Figure 5 and
Table 4.
       Figure 5 presents the WTP data analogously to Figure 4, but restricts to data points that
involve visits intervals whose midpoints are within 4 visits of individuals’ forecasts of attendance in
the event that they are randomized into the public recognition group. The standard deviation of
the difference between participants’ past attendance and their attendance during Grow & Thrive
is 4.42, thus visits within 4 of individuals’ forecasted attendance should not seem unlikely. Like
Figure 4, Figure 5 shows that WTP for public recognition is strongly increasing and concave in the
number of visits, and is close to zero at the YOTA average of 3.14 attendances. The key difference is
that the WTP profile in Figure 5 is significantly steeper. While the profile in Figure 4 spans payoffs
between approximately -$2 and $2, the profile in Figure 5 spans payoffs between approximately -$4
and $4. This difference is consistent with the possibility that the data reported in Figure 4 features
some attenuation due to participants being less sensitive to variation in visits that are outside the
range of what they consider plausible.
       Table 4 quantifies the results suggested by Figure 5. Columns (1)-(4) present estimates that
restrict to data points where the midpoints of the visits intervals are within 4 visits of participants’
expected attendance if they are assigned to the public recognition group. Columns (5)-(8) restrict
to data points where the visits interval contains participants’ expected attendance. Relative to
Table 3, the estimated coefficients in Table 4 are on net almost twice as large. The lack of a
meaningful difference between the estimates in columns (1)-(4) versus columns (5)-(8) suggests
that the attenuation is mostly due to considering visits that are very far from one’s expectations.
  20                                            00
    Note that we don’t specify an argument for Rexp because our quadratic regression models assume a constant
second derivative.



                                                     16
However, our estimates of curvature are very similar to the estimates in Table 3, which suggests
that participants’ reduced sensitivity to variation in unlikely attendance levels is affecting the scale,
but not the shape of the WTP profile. Appendix C.1 shows that the results in Table 4 do not vary
by past attendance, further reinforcing that past attendance is not a correlate of preferences for
public recognition.
    While a pure linear scaling bias cannot affect qualitative results about the welfare effects of
public recognition, it does affect the magnitudes, as well as the out-of-sample predictions of our
structural models. For this reason, our structural analysis in Section 7 restricts to data where the
midpoint of visits intervals is within 4 of participants’ expectations, and utilizes the parametric
assumptions of Tobit models to address censoring in the WTP data.

4.4    Further robustness checks
Potential bias from high visits questions                 Because only 10 percent of participants expected to
attend the YMCA as many as 23 times, the 23-30 visits interval presents an unrealistic hypothetical
to many participants, and thus might have undue influence on our estimate of concavity in Table 3.
However, as Tables A3 and A4 in Appendix C.2 show, excluding these high visits intervals slightly
increases our estimate of curvature. This is consistent with the visual evidence in Figure 5, which
shows that the quadratic fit is equally consistent with high visits intervals and low visits intervals.

Potential bias from visits intervals increasing in size One key design decision was to
make the intervals of possible visits very fine at low values (e.g., 0 visits, 1 visit, 2 visits), but
more coarse at higher levels (e.g., 18 to 22 visits). Our motivation was to roughly equalize the
number of participants whose attendance falls within each bin, as well as to avoid overburdening
participants with too many decisions. Indeed, as shown in Figure A1 in Appendix C.3, our visits
intervals are roughly equal in size according to this metric. Nonetheless, this could have created
an experimenter demand effect by signaling to participants that we expect differences in WTP for
public recognition to be approximately constant across the intervals. This, in turn, could lead us
to overestimate concavity.
    To gauge if this might have led us to overestimate concavity, in Appendix C.3 we rescale
the attendance intervals such that they are coded as equal in size. Specifically, we index the 11
attendance intervals with the integers 0 through 10, and investigate how WTP for public recognition
varies across these index values. We find that WTP for public recognition is significantly concave
even with respect to this recoding of the intervals. Moreover, our estimate of curvature, −R00 /R0 (0)
is, if anything, slightly higher with respect to this recoding.21 This suggests that our results about
concavity are not driven by participants trying to generate a WTP profile that is linearly increasing
in the interval numbers.
  21
     To see why the estimate of curvature could increase, recall that quadratic functions are locally linear. A quadratic
function that has a moderately smaller derivative at say 20 visits than at say 0 visits should in fact have similar
derivatives at 0 visits and 10 visits. The fact that we find moderately smaller derivatives at an index value of 10 than
at an index value of 0 thus implies substantial curvature with respect to the rescaled interval values.



                                                           17
Demand for public recognition as commitment               To the extent that individuals attend the
YMCA to exercise rather than to participate in some other more immediately pleasurable activity,
and to the extent that they are (partially) sophisticated about possible self-control problems, they
may wish to motivate their future selves to attend the YMCA more. We argue that this is unlikely
for several reasons.
   First, the method for creating a commitment device using our WTP elicitation is nuanced.
This entails individuals lowering expected payoffs for low attendance levels to discourage those low
attendance levels. However, an individual can decrease an expected payoff for a low attendance level
either by inflating or deflating their WTP for the public recognition treatment at that attendance
level. Thus, the bias, if it exists, is unsigned. However, we think it is psychologically unrealistic
that individuals would try to manipulate their future behavior in such subtle and sophisticated
ways. For example, while individuals could in principle use incentivized belief elicitations as a
form of a commitment device, Augenblick and Rabin (2019), Fedyk (2018), and Yaouanq and
Schwardmann (2019) all provide strong evidence against this. These three papers show that even
when individuals are (partially) aware of their self-control problems, they are not sophisticated
enough to use complex mechanisms to create commitment opportunities.
   Second, as shown by Laibson (2015), Carrera et al. (2019), and others, demand for commitment
is unlikely in environments featuring at least moderate uncertainty about future behavior, such as
ours. In our sample, the standard deviation of the difference between attendance in two adjacent
months is 4.74, which suggests a level of uncertainty that would likely make dominated incentive
schemes costly.
   Third, in Appendix C.4, we analyze whether people’s perception of their time inconsistency
correlates with their profile of WTP for public recognition, and find no evidence of this. We use
three additional survey elicitations for this analysis: (i) people’s beliefs about their next month’s
attendance, (ii) their beliefs about the increase in attendance from a hypothetical $1 incentive,
and (iii) their valuation of the hypothetical $1 incentive. As reviewed in Appendix C.4, Carrera
et al. (2019) and Allcott et al. (2020) formally show that if people perceive themselves to be time-
inconsistent, then their WTP for the $1 per attendance incentive should equal the average of their
expected attendance with and without the incentive. WTP values above this statistic imply that
a person thinks that they don’t attend the YMCA enough, while WTP values below this statistic
imply that a person thinks that they attend the YMCA too much. We find no relationship between
this measure and people’s WTP for public recognition.

4.5   Realized payoffs from shame and pride
We end our reduced-form analysis by reporting our experimental participants’ realized payoffs
from the shame and pride induced by public recognition. We used the reduced-form PRU obtained
from our WTP data, together with participants’ actual attendance levels, to compute participants’
average payoffs by quartile of attendance. To address the potential scaling bias discussed in Section
4.3, we estimate payoffs for each level of attendance using the specification in column (4) of the two


                                                 18
panels in Table 4: we use the Tobit model, and we restrict to WTP data that involves attendance
intervals with midpoints within four visits of participants’ expected attendance. To compute a
participant’s realized payoff from pride or shame, we use the estimated regression to estimate the
payoff associated with the participant’s realized attendance during the month of the experiment.
We present results using the raw WTP data in Appendix C.5.
    Figure 6 presents the results, both for the monotonic and the coherent sample. On average,
participants who were publicly recognized received a net-zero payoff from their experience of pride
and shame. Participants in the lowest quartile of attendance receive significantly negative payoffs,
participants in the second quartile receive somewhat negative payoffs, and participants in the top
two quartiles receive significantly positive payoffs.
    Importantly, because participants in our experiment have significantly higher YMCA attendance
than the average YOTA member, these reduced-form calculations constitute an upper bound on
the net emotional effect that would result from scaling up our public recognition intervention to
the whole YOTA population. This suggests that scaling up the public recognition program to all
of YOTA would generate a significantly negative emotional payoff. We return to this in Section 7,
where we estimate structural models and evaluate the impact of scaling up public recognition to
all of YOTA.

4.6   Over-optimism and the benefits of the strategy method
A key feature of our design is that our elicitation of people’s WTP for public recognition does not
require them to form beliefs about their future attendance. In Figure 7, we assess the accuracy of
individuals’ beliefs, and find significant overestimation of attendance, consistent with other work
(e.g., DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2006; Acland and Levy, 2015; Carrera et al., 2019).
    Because the PRU is (on average) monotonically increasing in attendance, this misprediction
implies that simply eliciting WTP for being in the public recognition program, without condition-
ing on attendance, would create upward bias in conclusions about the welfare effects of public
recognition. Related considerations apply to other social-influence-based interventions, such as the
social comparisons studied in Allcott and Kessler (2019).


5     Charitable contribution experiments design
5.1   Recruitment
The charitable contribution experiments were administered online to three separate subject pools:
(i) members of the online platform Prolific Academic, (ii) participants from UC Berkeley’s Ex-
perimental Social Science Laboratory (Xlab), who are primarily undergraduate students, and (iii)
undergraduate students from a mandatory statistics class, QM222, at Boston University’s Questrom
School of Business. We refer to these pools as the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples, respectively.




                                                  19
       For all samples, the experiment ran for one week from April 18, 2020 to April 24, 2020.22 For
the Prolific sample, we recruited only participants who (i) reside in the U.S., (ii) had a 95 percent
or higher approval rating, and (iii) had completed at least 15 prior studies on Prolific. For the
Berkeley sample, we restricted to participants who had not taken any studies involving deception
through Xlab. For the BU sample, all 350 students enrolled in QM222 received an email from
their professor inviting them to participate in the experiment.23 Participants from all subject pools
were informed they could only complete the experiment on a laptop or personal computer with a
working webcam.

5.2      Experimental protocol
Except where noted below, the experimental protocol was identical for each of the three samples.24
Perhaps the biggest implementation difference was the difference in incentive levels. Relative to the
Prolific sample, we scaled up all incentives by a factor of 2.5 in the Berkeley and BU samples. This
was done to reflect differences in payment norms across the samples. Prolific requires researchers
to pay all participants at least $6.50 per hour, Berkeley Xlab requires researchers to pay at least
$20 per hour, and BU requires researchers to pay at least $15 per hour. Thus while the incentives
are significantly lower in the Prolific sample in absolute terms, they are approximately the same in
relative terms.
       In the experiment, participants could raise money for the Red Cross by successively pressing the
“a” and “b” keys on the computer. Each pair of button presses earned a point, which translated
to money donated to the Red Cross by the experimenters, and in some cases also to additional
payments to the participants.
       After consenting to participate in the experiment, participants first reviewed instructions about
the button-pressing task. Participants then practiced the task for up to 30 seconds.
       Participants were then presented with an overview of the structure of the experiment. Figure
9 contains a screenshot of the visual provided to participants. Participants were told that they
would complete three rounds of the button-pressing task (presented in random order), and that
each round would last up to 5 minutes. We gave participants the option to finish each round early,
since this “extensive margin” option appears to lead to more elastic labor supply, as suggested by
DellaVigna et al. (2019), DellaVigna and Pope (2019), and our own pilots.
       In all rounds, participants in the Berkeley and BU samples raised 5 cents for the Red Cross
for every 10 points that they scored, while participants in the Prolific sample raised 2 cents for
  22
     Before the experiment started, we preregistered our design and analysis plan on the AEA RCT Registry
(AEARCTR-0005737). We had originally planned to also recruit from the QM221 statistics class for first-year
students (who know each other less well than the QM222 students), but the response rate was too low to make use
of this data.
  23
     The course was broken up into nine classes taught by five professors. Coauthor Robert Metcalfe taught three of
the classes.
  24
     The Experimental Instructions Appendix contains text and screenshots of the instructions
and questions used in the experiment.             An online example of the experiment is available here:
https://wharton.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV 2mImcVP4XP3Pmf3.



                                                        20
every 10 points. In the Anonymous Effort Round, this was the only incentive, and participants’
performance remained anonymous. In the Anonymous and Paid Effort Round, participants also
earned bonus compensation for themselves, which was identical to their Red Cross contribution
(5 cents/10 points in the Berkeley and BU samples, and 2 cents/10 points in the Prolific sample).
Participants’ performance in this round also remained anonymous.
       In the Publicly-Shared Effort Round, participants’ performance would be revealed to all par-
ticipants in their experimental group after the conclusion of the study. In this round, participants’
effort only translated to Red Cross donations, not to their own earnings. Specifically, after the
end of the study, all participants would receive a link to view the pictures and contributions raised
for the Red Cross of all participants in their group who were assigned to have their effort publicly
shared with others. The information shared would include participants’ photos, their scores and
donations in the button-pressing task, their ranks relative to other publicly-recognized participants
and, for the Berkeley and BU samples, their names.25 Figure 8 contains a screenshot of the example
given to participants. All participants were required to take a picture of themselves using their
webcam, and they were given the option to upload an alternative picture or retake their picture.
       Each round had a 30 percent chance of being randomly chosen to determine a participant’s
outcome. With 10 percent chance, participants’ preferences for public recognition would be used
to determine whether their performance would be publicly recognized or remain anonymous—we
called this the Choose Your Visibility option.
       The Choose Your Visibility option involved an incentive-compatible elicitation procedure that
was analogous to that of the YMCA experiment. We asked eighteen pairs of questions about WTP
for public recognition, corresponding to eighteen possible intervals of performance. The eighteen
intervals were 0-99 points, 100-199 points, ..., 1600-1699 points, and 1700 or more points. For each
interval, we first asked participants if they wanted their effort to be publicly shared if it fell in one of
those intervals, and we then asked them to state their WTP to have their preference implemented.
Participants were given a $10 budget for this elicitation in the Prolific sample, and a $25 budget
in the Berkeley and BU samples. As in the YMCA experiment, we told participants, in bold font,
that “carefully and honestly answering the questions is in your best interest.”
       Importantly, if the Choose Your Visibility option was randomly chosen to determine a partic-
ipant’s outcome, then the score from one of the three rounds was randomly chosen to determine
the participant’s contribution to the Red Cross. However, the webpage identifying participants’
contributions did not differentiate between participants who were randomly assigned to be in the
Publicly-Shared Effort Round and participants assigned to the Choose Your Visibility option—all
recognized participants and their contributions were presented identically. Thus, the “rational”
inference about any publicized participant is that their score was probably based on the Publicly-
Shared Effort Round, and that the reason their contribution was publicized was likely due to
random chance rather than because of the preferences elicited in the Choose Your Visibility op-
  25
    We did not collect and reveal participants’ names in the Prolific sample because this would violate the platform’s
privacy requirements.



                                                         21
tion.26 This procedure also ensured that participants’ performance in all three rounds carried equal
importance and, by creating some uncertainty about the score used, broadened the range of scores
that participants could consider relevant for the Choose Your Visibility elicitation.
       Because others’ behavior can play a role in social image utility, we first collected an initial round
of data to provide participants with signals of others’ performance in the Publicly-Shared Effort
Round. Participants in the Prolific sample were presented with information from a 79-person pilot,
and participants in the Berkeley and BU samples were given information from a 52-person pilot.
Participants were informed of the average performance and the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of
performance from these samples. Participants were also informed of the sample size of the data,
and were also provided a link to view a full CDF of past performance.
       For the Berkeley and Prolific samples, participants were also informed about the size of their
experimental group. In the Berkeley sample, participants were randomly divided into groups of
approximately 75 participants, and they were told that approximately 25 participants in their
group would have their effort publicly shared with all others in the group. In the Prolific sample,
participants were randomly assigned to be in a group of 300, 75, or 15 participants, and were
told that approximately 100, 25, or 5 participants in their respective group would have their effort
publicly shared with all others in the group. We did not include language about group size in the BU
sample because we did not have a sufficiently precise prediction about the response rate to provide
truthful information. Importantly, the group assignment in the Prolific and Berkeley samples was
completely random and independent of, for example, the order in which participants completed
the experiment. The participant-level randomization implies that there cannot be within-group
correlation in performance and preferences, and thus that standard errors need only be clustered
at the participant level in all analyses.
       The timing of the experiment was as follows. First, participants learned about the three rounds
and the Choose Your Visibility option. Second, participants received information on past perfor-
mance and their group size, and answered an attention check question that instructed them to
leave the question blank and advance to the next screen. Third, participants indicated their pref-
erences for public recognition in the Choose Your Visibility option. Fourth, participants completed
the three button-pressing rounds. The order of the rounds was fully randomized. In each round,
participants were reminded of the conditions of the round. In the Publicly-Shared Effort Round,
participants were also shown the image that would be seen by other participants.
       Participants were informed of what round was randomly selected to count as soon as they
completed the study. Within three days of the end of the study, participants were randomly
divided into groups and were sent a link to view the performance information of all participants in
their group who were assigned to have their effort publicly shared with others. Participants had
72 hours to view this information, and could only access it by entering the Prolific ID or university
email address they had entered when completing the study. If participants clicked to view the
  26
    The ex-ante probability of a publicized contribution being based on the public recognition round was greater
than 0.8. We explained to participants that most publicly recognized scores would be based on the Publicly-Shared
Effort round, and that that is what they and others should infer.


                                                       22
additional information, they would receive an additional $0.50 if in the Prolific sample, or $1 if in
the Berkeley or BU samples. The experimenters did not match the identities and scores of any
participant who was not selected to be publicly-recognized, and the participants were informed that
they would be anonymous even from the experimenters if they were not assigned to be publicly
recognized.

5.3      Discussion of the design
Within-person variation We chose to have participants complete all three possible rounds
for two reasons. First, and most importantly, this ensured that there would not be differential
attrition. In a between-subjects design where each participant completed only one of the three
rounds, a realistic possibility is that participants might be more likely to attrit from conditions in
which they did not receive additional pay for their performance, or conditions in which they might
incur shame.
       Second, our design maximizes statistical power for comparisons of performance across the three
rounds, and allows for some additional analyses of individual differences. We show in the next
section that within- and between-participant estimates of performance differences between the
three rounds are very similar, and thus that there is no evidence that the within-subject nature of
the design biases our estimates.

Relation to the YMCA experiment                      The charitable contribution experiments complement
the YMCA experiments in six key ways.
       First, the experiments explore a different domain, and one that is arguably a more common
target of public recognition: giving time and effort to charity. This permits an initial investigation
of the cross-domain stability of various aspects of people’s preferences over public recognition.
       Second, by simultaneously running the experiment on three different samples, we are able to
explore cross-population stability. One notable difference between our three samples is people’s
familiarity with each other.
       Third, the charitable contribution experimental design more directly eliminates the possibility
that participants might use the WTP for public recognition elicitation as a type of commitment
device. There is only a 5-15 minute gap between when participants complete the elicitation and
when they begin the real-effort rounds, and thus all of these decisions are likely to be regarded as
“now.” Augenblick’s (2018) estimates of discounting in real-effort tasks similar to ours strongly
support this interpretation.27
       Fourth, the charitable contribution experimental protocol is relatively easy to implement and
extend in a number of different directions. This allows for a number of interesting extensions of
  27
    Augenblick (2018) estimates discount factors for a real-effort task very similar to ours at time horizons varying
between a few hours and seven days, using the Berkeley Xlab pool. The estimates imply no plausible discounting for
time horizons that are shorter than 15 minutes. For example, while Augenblick (2018) estimates a discount factor of
0.87 for a 7-day horizon, he estimates discount factors of 0.91 and 0.94 for 24-hour and 3-hour horizons, respectively.
Extrapolating with any reasonable parametrization of the discount factor to a horizon of 0.15 hours would imply
virtually no discounting at that horizon.


                                                          23
our design, which can accelerate the testing and refinement of social signaling models. We discuss
these in Section 8.
    Fifth, the large size of the Prolific sample allows us to analyze how group size might affect
participants’ preferences to be publicly recognized. This analysis is helpful for refining out-of-
sample predictions that involve larger groups than those in the experiment. The possible effects
of group size can be captured by the ν parameter in the structural models in Section 2, but the
effects are ambiguous. On the one hand, larger group sizes imply larger audiences. On the other
hand, larger group sizes imply that any recognized participant is likely to receive less attention.
    Sixth, the charitable contribution experimental design has a number of other features that
make analysis and interpretation more straightforward: (i) the design provides subjects not just
with the mean of past performance, but with the whole distribution, which could be important if
people care not just about the average performance but also about, e.g., the distribution at the
very top or bottom; (ii) the design has a significantly larger allowable range in the WTP elicitation,
which essentially eliminates all censoring; (iii) the elicitation interface has evenly-sized performance
intervals, which eliminates potential worries about what participants might infer from variable
interval widths; (iv) all participants, not just those publicly recognized, see the performance of the
publicly-recognized group. This last feature implies that participants’ WTP for public recognition
cannot be affected by a demand for additional information.


6     Reduced-form results from the charitable contribution experi-
      ments
6.1    The experimental samples
1017, 407, and 121 participants completed the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU experiments. We make two
preregistered exclusions for our analysis. We exclude participants failing the attention check, and
we exclude participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition, where “incoherent” is
defined analogously to the YMCA analysis. These exclusions yield a final sample of 968, 384, and
118 participants in the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU experiments. Out of the remaining participants,
almost all (all but 1.0, 1.8, and 1.7 percent of Prolific, Berkeley, and BU participants, respectively)
had monotonically increasing preferences for public recognition, and our results are qualitatively
and quantitatively unchanged if we restrict to this monotonic sample. Thus, to simplify the analysis,
we present results only for the coherent sample.
    In this final sample, Prolific participants were divided into 17 groups of 13-15 participants each,
6 groups of 71-79 participants each, and 1 group of 278 participants. All Berkeley participants were
divided into 5 groups of 75-79 participants each, and all BU participants were in the same group.
    There was minimal censoring in the WTP for public recognition elicitation. Prolific, Berkeley,
and BU participants chose to use all of their budget in only 6, 4, and 6 percent of all cases,
respectively.



                                                   24
   Our 100-point intervals in the WTP elicitation generated nearly complete coverage of the dis-
tribution of effort. Only 1.1, 2.6, and 2.0 percent of scores in the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples
were 1700 points or higher.
   The average age was 35, 21 and 20 for the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples, respectively.
The percent of Prolific, Berkeley, and BU participants who identified as female was 50, 69, and 51
respectively.
   The averages of the standard deviations of the points scored between any two rounds were 390.9
points, 423.4 points, and 469.7 points in the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples, respectively. These
scores suggest a fair amount of uncertainty about the score that would be used if selected for the
Choose Your Visibility option.

6.2   The effects of public recognition on behavior
Figure 10 displays the cumulative distribution functions of points scored by treatment, showing
that the impact of public recognition is positive across all levels of points scored in each of the
three samples. The figure also suggests that the effect of public recognition is about half of the
effect of financial incentives in the Prolific sample, and is only somewhat smaller than the effect of
financial incentives in the Berkeley and BU samples.
   Table 5 quantifies the effects depicted in Figure 10. The table reports results from OLS regres-
sions of points scored on the experimental round. Column (1) presents results from the Prolific
sample, column (2) presents results from the Berkeley sample, and column (3) presents results from
the BU sample. Column (4) analyzes whether the effects of public recognition in the Prolific sample
vary by group size. In all columns, we control for the order of the round by including dummies
for whether the round appeared first, second, or third to a given participant, although the F-tests
presented in Table 5 do not detect any fatigue or other order effects. We cluster standard errors at
the participant level in this all and subsequent analyses.
   As columns (1)-(3) of Table 5 show, public recognition increases participants’ total effort by over
10 percent in all three rounds, which is highly statistically significant. The effects of the financial
incentive are substantially larger in the Prolific sample, and modestly larger in the Berkeley and BU
samples. Column (4) presents preliminary evidence that the three different group sizes considered in
our Prolific experiment do not seem to moderate the effects of public recognition. Thus, the results
suggest that the effect of a larger audience is offset by the decrease in attention any recognized
individual receives.

Robustness      An important aspect of our design is that all participants completed all three rounds,
which mitigated potential selective attrition and increased statistical power. Because all rounds
were presented in random order, our design allows a between-subjects comparison of the money
raised in the three rounds by simply limiting to the first round the participants encountered.
We present this analysis in Table A8 in Appendix D. The table shows that the effects of public
recognition and financial incentives are virtually identical to the within-subject estimates in the


                                                  25
Prolific and Berkeley samples. The effects of both public recognition and financial incentives are
substantially smaller in the BU sample, although they are measured very imprecisely due to the
small size of this sample. The confidence intervals around the between-subject estimates in the BU
sample are wide, and include the within-subject estimates. Thus, on net we find no evidence that
within-subject estimates differ from between-subject estimates.

6.3   Willingness to pay for public recognition
Consistent with the significant effect of public recognition on behavior in all three samples, we
find that 73 percent, 78 percent, and 89 percent of participants in the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU
experiments, respectively, have a non-zero WTP for public recognition at one or more levels of
performance.
   Figure 11 plots the WTP for public recognition by level of publicized effort to raise money for
the Red Cross, measured in points. We identify each interval below 1700 with its midpoint, so
that the first interval corresponds to 50 points, the second interval corresponds to 150 points, and
so forth. The last point in the figure corresponds to the “1700 or more” points interval. Panel
(a) presents data from the Prolific sample, panel (b) presents data from the Berkeley sample, and
panel (c) presents data from the BU sample. In addition to the sample averages, each panel also
summarizes the WTP for participants with above and below median performance in the Anonymous
Effort round. In all three panels, the vertical dashed line corresponds to the average score in the
Publicly-Shared Effort round, which is a potential reference standard for shameful versus pride-
worthy behavior. As discussed in Section 2, the net effect of shame and pride is decreasing in the
magnitude of the reference standard.
   On average, WTP for public recognition is strictly increasing in points scored in all three
samples. In all samples, it is negative at low levels of points scored and positive at high levels of
points scored. Figure 11 also shows that participants’ PRUs do not vary meaningfully with their
score in the Anonymous Effort Round, suggesting that preferences for public recognition do not
vary meaningfully with their cost of effort or intrinsic motivation to help the Red Cross. Figure
A6 in Appendix D presents confidences intervals for the average WTP in each interval.
   Table 6 quantifies the descriptive results in Figure 11 by presenting results from regressions
of WTP for public recognition on effort to raise money for the Red Cross, measured in points.
Because very few participants’ responses are censored at their full budget, we report results from
OLS regressions only. The results are virtually identical in Tobit regressions. Columns (1) and
(2) report results from the Prolific sample, columns (3) and (4) report results from the Berkeley
sample, and columns (5) and (6) report results from the BU sample. We present linear regressions
in odd-numbered columns, and we include a quadratic term for visits in even-numbered columns
to study the curvature of the PRU. For this and all other regression analyses of the WTP data, we
exclude the ≥ 1700 points interval, as it is ambiguous what number best represents that interval.
   Consistent with Figure 11, all regressions imply that the WTP for public recognition is strongly
increasing in the level of publicized effort. The implications for curvature are more mixed. We find


                                                 26
significant concavity in the Prolific experiment, and find smaller but imprecisely estimated levels
of curvature in the Berkeley and BU samples. In the Berkeley and BU samples, we cannot reject
linearity, although the 95 percent confidence intervals for curvature, −R00 /R0 (0), also include the
point estimate from the Prolific sample.
   We can also compare our unitless measures of curvature, −R00 /R0 (0) multiplied by the standard
deviation of behavior, across the YMCA and charitable contribution experiments. In the charitable
contribution experiments, we use the standard deviation of behavior in the anonymous round.
Column (2) shows that our estimate of normalized curvature in the Prolific sample is strikingly
similar to the estimates in Tables 3 and 4 for the YMCA sample. The analogous estimates for the
Berkeley and BU samples in columns (4) and (6) are smaller in magnitude, although the 95 percent
confidence intervals include all point estimates from Tables 3 and 4. Overall, in the Berkeley and
BU samples we can neither reject linearity nor the degree of curvature estimated in the YMCA and
Prolific samples.
   Any potential differences in WTP data between the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples are
unlikely to be explained by group size. Consistent with our results about the effects on behavior
not being affected by group size, Table 7 shows that there is no interaction between group size and
WTP for public recognition in the Prolific sample. The table presents results from regressions in
which WTP for public recognition is regressed on the publicized level of effort, with all covariates
interacted with group size dummies. Column (1) includes only a linear term for publicized effort,
whereas column (2) includes a quadratic term for publicized effort. We estimate fairly precise null
effects for all interactions, which supports the hypothesis that the effect of a larger audience is
offset by the decrease in attention any recognized individual receives.

Robustness and heterogeneity analysis            In the YMCA experiment, participants’ elicited
WTP for public recognition was less sensitive to variation in performance that was outside the
range of what they construed as likely. We investigate this possibility in the charitable contribu-
tion experiments in Table 8. This table presents results from regressions analogous to those in
Table 6, except that we restrict to data points where the intervals for which WTP is elicited are
within 500 points of participants’ average performance in the three rounds. The average standard
deviation of the difference in scores between any two rounds is just above 500 points, and thus
the performance intervals studied in Table 8 are likely to be within the range of what participants
consider plausible. Interestingly, the estimates in Table 8 are almost identical to those in Table
6. Thus, in contrast to the YMCA experiment, we find no evidence for attenuation in the char-
itable contribution experiments. This is perhaps due to the fact that participants faced greater
uncertainty about their scores in this experiment, or due to the fact that participants who have
experienced economics experiments are better at answering more hypothetical/abstract questions.
   We find some evidence for heterogeneity in preferences for public recognition, but consistent
with our YMCA results, we find that these preferences do not covary with intrinsic motivation to
raise money for the Red Cross, as measured by performance in the Anonymous Effort round. Table


                                                 27
A9 in Appendix D shows that participants with an above-median difference in scores between the
public and anonymous rounds also have a steeper PRU—that is, their WTP for public recognition
is more steeply increasing in performance. This interaction is significant in the Prolific and BU
samples in linear regressions of WTP on performance, but is more noisily estimated in the smaller
BU sample, and in regressions that include a quadratic performance term. On net, these results
suggest some stable individual differences in preferences for public recognition: some participants
have steeper PRUs, and thus their performance is more sensitive to public recognition.
   Despite some evidence of heterogeneity, Table A10 in Appendix D shows that there is no
relationship between the PRU and participants’ intrinsic motivation. This result is consistent with
the graphical evidence in Figure 11.

6.4   Realized payoffs from shame and pride
Finally, we estimate the net effect of shame and pride induced by public recognition. For each
participant, we compute the utility that they would receive from having their Publicly-Shared
Effort round score publicized. We do this by assigning to each participant the average WTP for
public recognition that corresponds to the interval containing the participant’s score in the Publicly-
Shared Effort Round. We use the sample average WTP, instead of the participant’s own WTP, to
maximize statistical power. As discussed above, the PRU does not vary with participants’ intrinsic
motivation or with their score in the public recognition round, and thus using average WTP for a
given interval increases statistical power without creating bias.
   Figure 12 presents the results. The net emotional effect of public recognition is positive in the
Prolific sample, approximately zero in the Berkeley sample, and is negative in the BU sample. The
bottom quartile of participants experiences significantly negative payoffs in all three samples. In
the Prolific and Berkeley samples, the top three quartiles of participants all experience positive
payoffs, while in the BU sample no quartile of performers experiences positive payoffs.
   Although there are many differences between the three samples, one key difference is the degree
of familiarity among participants. Our results provide suggestive evidence that greater familiarity
increases the prevalence of shame, which is consistent with hypotheses and results from psycholog-
ical research (e.g., Tajfel, 1970; Hogg, 1992; Bicchieri et al., 2020).

6.5   Consistency with financial incentive effects
Before turning to our structural estimation, we provide simple back-of-the-envelope calculations
to validate our money-metric approach to measuring the PRU. The fundamental assumption of
our approach is that the effects of public recognition on behavior can be fully captured by the
money-metric measures of the PRU in Table 6. For example, column (1) of the table implies that
the motivating effects of public recognition are approximately equivalent to a financial incentive
of 0.93 cents per 10 points in the Prolific sample. Thus, a key test of our approach is whether a
financial incentive of 0.93 cents/10 points indeed has a similar effect on behavior in the Prolific
sample as does public recognition.

                                                   28
    Simple calculations suggest remarkable consistency. Consider, for example, the Prolific sample.
Column (1) of Table 5 shows that public recognition increases performance by 105 points. A
linear extrapolation thus implies that a 2 cent/10 points incentive should increase performance by
105 × (2/0.93) = 226 points, which closely matches the 186-point effect estimated in column (1) of
Table 5. Analogous arguments imply that our Table 6 estimates imply that the financial incentive
should increase performance by 216 and 150 points in the Berkeley and BU samples, respectively.
Empirically, Table 5 reveals only slightly smaller effect sizes of 178 and 118 points, respectively.
Our structural estimates in the next section facilitate more formal tests of consistency.


7     Structural estimates
Our results thus far provide estimates of the reduced-form public recognition function Rexp . In this
section, we build on the reduced-form results in three ways.
    First, we estimate parametric forms of the models presented in Section 2. Second, we validate
our experimental and structural methodology by more formally implementing the consistency tests
from Section 6.5. Third, we study the welfare effects of scaling up the public recognition intervention
to the full YOTA population.
    We focus on scaling up in the YMCA setting because it constitutes an important domain of
behavior where there is significant interest in behavior change, and where social influence interven-
tions such as ours are of potential interest. In fact, our intervention was of potential interest to
the YMCA administrators because it was regarded as a “cheap” means of increasing attendance,
which spurred enthusiasm for our study. Our structural estimates allow us to study the full costs
of scaling up this intervention. We focus on the YMCA setting because there is widespread interest
in encouraging more exercise, and because interventions similar to ours were in fact considered by
YOTA and spurred enthusiasm for running our study.

7.1   Estimation methodology
Functional form assumptions          For tractability, we follow Bénabou and Tirole (2006) in assum-
ing that in the absence of public recognition, people’s material utility u is quadratic:

                                        u(a; θ) = θa − ca2 /2,

where θ ∈ R+ is the intrinsic motivation, and ca is the marginal cost of increasing a. We also
assume that the structural PRU in both the action-signaling and characteristics-signaling models
in Section 2 is quadratic. Letting ā denote the average action, and θ̄ denote the average type, we
assume that




                                                  29
                                  νS a (a − ρā) = γ1a (a − ρā) + γ2a (a − ρā)2                                  (5)
                              θ
                           νS (E[θ|a] − ρθ̄) =     γ1θ (E[θ|a]   − ρθ̄) +   γ2θ (E[θ|a]   − ρθ̄)   2
                                                                                                                   (6)

for the action-signaling and characteristics-signaling models, respectively.28 As shown in Appendix
E, the resulting reduced-form PRU, R(a), will be quadratic with both microfoundations.
       To close the models, it is necessary to take a stand on the comparison sample that generates ā
and θ̄. In the YMCA setting, where participants were members far before the experimental period,
and where they have the opportunity to observe and interact with many members outside of Grow
& Thrive, the most natural assumption is that individuals care about how they are seen relative to
the other YOTA members of their YMCA branch.29 In our charitable contribution experiments,
by contrast, participants did not have a previously-established connection to the task, as the task
was only introduced to them in the experiment. We thus assume that participants’ comparison
populations are simply those individuals who also completed the task—our experimental samples.30

Estimation        Let Rexp (a) = r0 + r1 a + r2 a2 be the reduced-form PRU that is revealed by our
WTP elicitation. We estimated this directly in column (4) of Table 4b for the YMCA sample,
and in columns (2), (4), (6) of Table 6 for the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples.31 As shown in
Appendix E, estimates of the structural parameters γij and ρ from the structural PRUs in (5) and
(6) can be obtained as functions of the reduced-form parameters r0 , r1 , r2 .
       Given estimates of Rexp , the treatment effect of public recognition on behavior identifies the
cost parameter c. In the absence of public recognition, the marginal benefits of increasing a are
θ, and the marginal costs of increasing a are ca. Thus, individuals choose a = θ/c, and average
performance in the absence of public recognition is

                                               E[a|P R = 0] = E[θ]/c.                                              (7)

In the presence of public recognition, the marginal benefits of increasing a are θ + r1 + 2r2 a.
Thus, individuals choose a = (θ + r1 )/(c − 2r2 ), and average performance in the presence of public
recognition is
  28
     To ensure that S is increasing, we further assume that a ∈ [0, ā] and that γ1j + 2γ2j ā ≥ 0.
  29
     Moreover, individuals had little reason to expect that participants in Grow & Thrive were different from other
YMCA members since we only provided information about the broader base of YOTA members.
  30
     An alternative benchmark might be the hypothetical performance of all Prolific, Berkeley Xlab, or BU Section
QM222 members. This assumption is equivalent to ours if our experimental participants believed the participants in
our experiment were representative of these larger pools.
  31
     As discussed in the reduced-form results, the specification in column (4) of Table 4 for the YMCA sample
addresses potential attenuation resulting from censoring, and from participants’ relative insensitivity to variation of
publicized attendance that they consider unlikely.




                                                          30
                         E[a|P R = 1] = E[θ]/(c − 2r2 ) + r1 /(c − 2r2 )
                                        = E[a|P R = 0] · c/(c − 2r2 ) + r1 /(c − 2r2 )                          (8)

       Given an estimated average treatment effect τ̄ of public recognition on performance, the cost
parameter c is identified by setting the difference between (8) and (7) equal to τ̄ . We use the
treatment effect estimates from column 5 of Table 2 for the YMCA sample, and estimates from
columns (1)-(3) of Table 5 for the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples.

Consistency with financial incentive effects                 The calculations above show that the structural
models are identified using only data on the treatment effects of public recognition and participants’
WTP for public recognition. The estimated models can then be used to make predictions about
the effects of financial incentives on behavior, which can be compared to direct estimates from our
data. In the presence of a constant marginal incentive of p and no public recognition, the marginal
benefits of increasing a are θ + p, and the marginal costs are ca. This implies that individuals
choose a = (θ + p)/c, and thus that the financial incentive increases average performance by p/c.
       For the charitable contribution experiments, we benchmark the model predictions against the
effects of financial incentives estimated in Table 5. For the YMCA experiment, we were not able
to randomize a purely financial incentive, but we did elicit participants’ forecasts of how much
they would attend the YMCA under three different scenarios: (i) if assigned to the Grow & Thrive
control group; (ii) if assigned to the Grow & Thrive public recognition treatment group; (iii) if
assigned to the Grow & Thrive control group but given a financial incentive of $1 per attendance.
Although forecasted attendance may differ from actual attendance due to overoptimism, Carrera
et al. (2019) find that people accurately predict how their attendance will vary with incentives for
attendance. Consistent with this, participants in our experiment predicted that public recognition
would increase their attendance by 1.50 visits, which is similar to, and statistically indistinguishable
from, our empirical estimate of 1.19 visits.32
       Note that the predictions about the effects of financial incentives on behavior in the experi-
ment depend only on the reduced-form PRU Rexp , and thus are identical for both the action- and
characteristics-signaling models.

Heterogeneity        In Appendix E.4 we generalize the model to include heterogeneity in individuals’
cost of effort functions and PRUs, and show that our estimation approach is robust to this.
  32
    Moreover, our participants’ forecasts about the effects of financial incentives are of similar magnitude as the
estimates in Carrera et al. (2019): participants in their experiment forecasted that a $2 per attendance incentive
would increase health club attendance by 2.3 visits over four weeks, and the incentive increased their attendance by
2.9 visits. The respective 95 percent confidence intervals are [2.1, 2.6] and [2.0, 3.9].




                                                        31
7.2   Estimation results
Table 9 presents the structural estimation results. Panel (a) presents estimates of the action-
signaling model and panel (b) presents estimates of the characteristics-signaling model. Panel (c)
presents results on consistency with the effects of financial incentives.
   Although the model parameters γij in panels (a) and (b) are in different units and thus have
different magnitudes, the two panels deliver a similar message, which is consistent with the reduced-
form results. First, there is significant concavity of the structural PRU in the YMCA and Prolific
samples, although the curvature estimates are more ambiguous in the Berkeley and BU samples.
The concavity is particularly pronounced in the characteristics-signaling model in the Prolific sam-
ple. Second, the standard at which shameful behavior transitions to pride-worthy behavior varies
across the samples. In the YMCA sample, ρ is above 1 in both models, although we cannot reject
the hypothesis that participants simply care about the average (ρ = 1). In the Berkeley sample, we
estimate ρ close to 1 in both models. In the Prolific sample, we estimate ρ significantly below 1 in
both models, indicating a lower standard for pride-worthy behavior. In the BU sample we estimate
ρ substantially above 1, indicating a high standard for pride-worthy behavior.
   Panel (c) shows that in all four samples, the models’ predictions about the effects of finan-
cial incentives closely match the directly estimated effects. On net, we find slight overestimation,
although the last column in panel (c) shows that this overestimation is not statistically distinguish-
able from zero at conventional levels. Moreover, the slight overestimation could be explained by
a number of realistic features not incorporated into our intentionally parsimonious models. For
example, our quadratic cost of effort function implies a unit elasticity and thus that behavior is
linear in the magnitude of incentives. This assumption would cause us to overestimate the effects
of financial incentives if instead behavior were a concave function of financial incentives, as would
be the case for isoelastic cost functions with elasticities below one. Various forms of correlated
heterogeneity could explain the underestimation as well.

7.3   Welfare effects of scaling up public recognition to all YOTA members
We use our structural estimates to assess the effects of scaling up the public recognition intervention
to all members of the YOTA population. Motivated by our results on group size effects in the
Prolific sample, we assume that increasing the number of exposed individuals would not change
the visibility parameter ν. Formal derivations of the equilibrium predictions are in Appendix E.2.3
and E.3.4.
   We present the results in Table 10. Column (1) shows the net welfare effect from feelings of
shame and pride, column (2) presents the predicted change in behavior, and column (3) presents
the per-attendance emotional effect of public recognition, which is the ratio of columns (1) and
(2). Panel (a) presents results from the action-signaling model and panel (b) presents results from
the characteristics-signaling model. Except in several special cases, these models have somewhat
different equilibrium implications for behavior and welfare, illustrating the importance of working
out the consequences of microfounded models.

                                                  32
   We explore the welfare effects across a range of different structural assumptions. Row 1 in both
panels considers the baseline estimates for the YMCA sample. Rows (2)-(5) explore the importance
of varying ρ by considering the point estimates from the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples, as well
as simply setting ρ = 1. Rows (6)-(10) consider the same values of ρ as rows (1)-(5) but assume
less concavity, motivated by the smaller point estimates in the Berkeley and BU samples. Rows
(11) and (12) hold constant the ρ estimated in the YMCA sample and consider concavity that is
at the upper and lower end of the 95 percent confidence interval in the YMCA sample. Row (13)
scales up the PRU estimate for the YMCA sample by a factor of two.
   The estimated models generally predict that the net effect of shame and pride would be negative.
This negative effect is particularly pronounced in the action-signaling model estimated off of the
YMCA sample, where it is estimated to be −$3.41 for a 1.75-visit increase in attendance, or
approximately −$2 per person per visit.
   We show in Appendix B that revenue-neutral financial incentive schemes have higher welfare
effects than public recognition when the net effect of shame and pride is negative, and are in fact
pareto-dominating under some assumptions. Thus, public recognition generates a deadweight loss
relative to financial incentives when the net emotional effect is negative. For example, in the action-
signaling case where the net emotional effect is -$3.41 per person, there exists a revenue-neutral
financial incentive scheme that generates the same change in behavior as does public recognition,
but makes each individual better off by $3.41. In Appendix B.2 we discuss the case in which
incentives must be in the form of a subsidy that must be funded with distortionary taxation, and
argue that incentives are still likely to be preferred to public recognition in at least some cases.
   While the welfare implications are sensitive to both the value of ρ and the degree of concavity,
there are only two cases in which the net effect of shame and pride is positive. The first case
corresponds to the particularly small value of ρ that is estimated in the Prolific sample. The
second case corresponds to the value of ρ estimated in the Berkeley sample, under the assumption
that concavity is only half as big as the estimate in the YMCA sample.
   Although our conclusions about the consequences of scaling up public recognition rely on a
number of strong assumptions, the estimates in the table illustrate that even when setting aside
the ethical objections to exposing individuals to shame (Massaro, 1991; Nussbaum, 2009), the
costs of public recognition can be high from a standard economic efficiency perspective. The
estimates in the table show that the aggregate emotional effects can be substantially negative
under empirically realistic assumptions the structure of the PRU. At the same time, our results
also illustrate realistic scenarios in which the net effect could positive. This highlights the potential
pitfalls of both ignoring the emotional effects of public recognition, and of over-generalizing about
its effects without domain-specific measurement and careful modeling.




                                                   33
8    Discussion
A recent and growing literature establishes that public recognition can meaningfully influence be-
havior in a number of economically consequential field settings. We build on this literature by
developing an empirical methodology for directly quantifying individuals’ utility from public recog-
nition. Across two different experimental designs and four different samples, we find that the
emotional effects of public recognition are significant and highly unequal: a large share of individ-
uals experience strong feelings of shame and a large share of individuals experience strong feelings
of pride. In the YMCA setting, our results suggest that motivating exercise with public recog-
nition might be less socially efficient than utilizing financial incentives. Our work illustrates how
the social costs or benefits of public recognition can be substantial, and provides a framework for
measurement and welfare analysis.
    Of course, our results come with many caveats and leave open many research questions. First,
our methods quantify only the direct effects of public recognition on utility, and do not speak to
the benefits of the behavior change itself. Finding prevalent feelings of shame does not by itself
imply that public recognition decreases welfare. Rather, as formalized in Appendix B, our results
about utility from public recognition speak most directly to whether a different policy lever, such
as financial incentives, might be more efficient in creating the same behavior change. We also note
that while financial incentives motivate desirable behavior and have little interaction with public
recognition in our domains, there are also important cases where financial incentives could crowd
out motivation because they dampen the effects of both shame and pride (e.g., Bénabou and Tirole,
2006; Ariely et al., 2009).
    Second, while our methodology is easily imported into many of the domains where researchers
have studied the effects of public recognition on behavior, our specific results constitute only an
initial set of data points on the welfare effects of public recognition. Consequently, extrapolation
to other populations or domains of behavior must be done with caution. Indeed, while our results
suggest that the effects of public recognition are invariant to some factors such as group size, our
estimates appear to be less stable with respect to other factors such as individuals’ familiarity with
each other. Although repeated application of our methodology across a variety of different contexts
is likely to uncover predictable patterns in how utility from public recognition varies across different
settings, we suspect that there will always be some ex-ante difficult-to-predict context dependence.
Ultimately, the most accurate evaluation of a public recognition program will involve an application
of our methods to the specific context in which the public recognition program is being implemented.
    Third, even within the specific contexts of our experiments, our quantitative welfare estimates
cannot be immediately applied to public recognition schemes that produce different information
structures such as ones that recognize only the top performers. Although standard economic models
imply that coarsening the information structure cannot eliminate feelings of shame if such feelings
are prevalent in fully-revealing schemes (see Appendix A), and although our estimates of structural
models can be used to generate predictions about these alternative schemes, limited attention or
failures of equilibrium thinking could weaken the predictive power of standard economic models.

                                                  34
Our flexible online experimental protocol can be easily augmented to further study how the effects
of public recognition vary with the signal structure, which would provide additional tests of models
of social signaling.
   More generally, we suggest that our online protocol can be fruitfully extended to facilitate
further testing and refinement of social signaling models. Empirical tests of social signaling models
typically revolve around comparative statics on behavior, although underlying these comparative
statics are predictions about individuals’ payoffs from public recognition. By providing a direct
estimate of utility from public recognition, our methodology can thus enable more direct tests
of phenomena such as the overjustification effect and motivation crowding (Bénabou and Tirole,
2006), predictions about the effects of social information on prosocial behavior (Bénabou and Tirole,
2011), or the evolution of stigma and redistributive norms (Alesina and Angeletos, 2005).
   Despite the open questions and the weaknesses of our approach that we hope future work will
evaluate and address, our approach nevertheless provides a tractable toolkit for evaluating public
recognition interventions and, with some extension, other social influence levers. Although non-
financial policy instruments such as these have become popular tools in governments around the
world under the banner of “nudge” (OECD, 2017), most existing studies focus on how these instru-
ments affect behavior, and have little to say about welfare (Bernheim and Taubinsky, 2018). We
view this as a limitation of existing research methods, not a reflection of actual social goals. Indeed,
in the case of social influence, an honest assessment of the psychological, political, philosophical,
and literary studies of human motivation reveals that people’s wellbeing is intensely sensitive to
the experience of shame and pride.




                                                  35
References
Acland, Dan and Matthew R Levy, “Naiveté, projection bias, and habit formation in gym attendance,”
 Management Science, 2015, 61 (1), 146–160.

Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos, “Fairness and Redistribution,” American Economic
  Review, 2005, 95 (4), 960–980.

Ali, S. Nageeb and Roland Bénabou, “Image versus information: Changing societal norms and optimal
  privacy,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2020, 12 (3), 116–164.

Allcott, Hunt and Judd B Kessler, “The welfare effects of nudges: A case study of energy use social
  comparisons,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2019, 11 (1), 236–176. Forthcoming.

  , Joshua Kim, Dmitry Taubinsky, and Jonathan Zinman, “Are High Interest Loans Predatory?
  Theory and Evidence from Payday Lending,” working paper, 2020.

Andreoni, James and B. Douglas Bernheim, “Social image and the 50–50 norm: A theoretical and
 experimental analysis of audience effects,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1607–1636.

   and Ragan Petrie, “Public goods experiments without confidentiality: a glimpse into fund-raising,”
  Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88 (7), 1605–1623.

Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha, and Stephan Meier, “Doing good or doing well? Image motivation and
 monetary incentives in behaving prosocially,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (1), 544–555.

Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and B Kelsey Jack, “No margin, no mission? A field experiment on
 incentives for public service delivery,” Journal of Public Economics, 2014, 120, 1–17.

Augenblick, Ned, “Short-Term Discounting of Unpleasant Tasks,” 2018. Working Paper.

   and Matthew Rabin, “An experiment on time preference and misprediction in unpleasant tasks,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (3), 941–975.

Becker, Gary S, “Crime and punishment: An economic approach,” in “The economic dimensions of crime,”
  Springer, 1968, pp. 13–68.

Becker, Gary S., “A Note on Restaurant Pricing and Other Examples of Social Influences on Price,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99 (5), 1109–1116.

Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American Economic Review,
  2006, 96 (5), 1652–1678.

   and    , “Laws and Norms,” Working Paper 17579, National Bureau of Economic Research 2011.

Benartzi, Shlomo, John Beshears, Katherine L Milkman, Cass R Sunstein, Richard H Thaler,
  Maya Shankar, Will Tucker-Ray, William J Congdon, and Steven Galing, “Should governments
  invest more in nudging?,” Psychological Science, 2017, 28 (8), 1041–1055.

Bernheim, B Douglas and Christine L Exley, “Understanding Conformity: An Experimental Investi-
  gation,” Technical Report, Harvard Business School 2015.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Dmitry Taubinsky, Behavioral public economics, Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2018.

  , Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov, “The welfare economics of default options in 401 (k) plans,”
  American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (9), 2798–2837.

Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate, “Workfare versus welfare incentive arguments for work require-
  ments in poverty-alleviation programs,” American Economic Review, 1992, 82 (1), 249–61.


                                                 36
Bicchieri, Cristina, Eugen Dimant, Simon Gächter et al., “Observability, social proximity, and the
  erosion of norm compliance,” 2020.

Birke, David J., “Anti-Bunching: A New Test for Signaling Motives in Prosocial Behavior,” working paper,
  2020.

Blomquist, N. Soren, “Interdependent behavior and the effect of taxes,” Journal of Public Economics,
  1993, 51 (2), 211–218.

Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and explaining management practices across firms
  and countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1351—1408.

Bø, Erlend E, Joel Slemrod, and Thor O Thoresen, “Taxes on the internet: Deterrence effects of
 public disclosure,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015, 7 (1), 36–62.

Bradler, Christiane, Robert Dur, Susanne Neckermann, and Arjan Non, “Employee recognition
  and performance: A field experiment,” Management Science, 2016, 62 (11), 3085–3099.

Bursztyn, Leonardo and Robert Jensen, “How Does Peer Pressure Affect Educational Investments?,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1329–1367.

   and     , “Social Image and Economic Behavior in the Field: Identifying, Understanding, and Shaping
  Social Pressure,” Annual Review of Economics, 2017, 9 (1), 131–153.

  , Bruno Ferman, Stefano Fiorin, Martin Kanz, and Gautam Rao, “Status goods: experimental
  evidence from platinum credit cards,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 133, 1561–1595.

  , Georgy Egorov, and Robert Jensen, “Cool to be Smart or Smart to be Cool? Understanding Peer
  Pressure in Education,” Review of Economic Studies, 2019. Forthcoming.

  , Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais, “’Acting Wife’: Marriage Market Incentives and Labor
  Market Investments,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (11), 3288–3319.

Carrera, Mariana, Heather Royer, Mark Stehr, Justin Sydnor, and Dmitry Taubinsky, “How
 are Preferences For Commitment Revealed?,” 2019. Working Paper.

Carroll, Gabriel D, James J Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Andrew Metrick,
 “Optimal defaults and active decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1639–1674.

Cederström, Carl and André Spicer, The wellness syndrome, John Wiley & Sons, 2015.

Cohen, Adam Scott, Rie Chun, and Daniel Sznycer, “Do pride and shame track the evaluative
 psychology of audiences? Preregistered replications of Sznycer et al.(2016, 2017),” Royal Society Open
 Science, 2020, 7 (5), 191922.

Conrad, Peter, “Wellness as virtue: Morality and the pursuit of health,” Culture, medicine and psychiatry,
 1994, 18 (3), 385–401.

Damgaard, Mette Trier and Christina Gravert, “The hidden costs of nudging: Experimental evidence
 from reminders in fundraising,” Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 157, 15–26.

de Quidt, Jonathan, Johannes Haushofer, and Christopher Roth, “Measuring and Bounding Ex-
  perimenter Demand,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (11), 3266–3302.

DellaVigna, Stefano, “Structual Behavioral Economics,” in B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna,
 and David Laibson, eds., Handbook of Behavioral Economics, number 1, Elsevier, 2018.

   and Devin G. Pope, “What Motivates Worker Effort? Evidence and Expert Forecasts,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 2018, 126 (6), 2410–2456.


                                                   37
   and Devin Pope, “Stability of Experimental Results,” working paper, 2019.

   and Ulrike Malmendier, “Paying not to go to the gym,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (3),
  694–719.

  , John A List, and Ulrike Malmendier, “Testing for altruism and social pressure in charitable giving,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (1), 1–56.

  ,   ,    , and Gautam Rao, “Voting to tell others,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 84 (1),
  143–181.

  , John List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao, “Estimating Social Preferences and Gift Ex-
  change with a Piece-Rate Design,” working paper, 2019.

Ehrlich, Isaac, “Participation in illegitimate activities: A theoretical and empirical investigation,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 1973, 81 (3), 521–565.

Etzioni, Amitai, “Back to the Pillory?,” The American Scholar, 1999, 68 (3), 43–50.

Exley, Christine, “Incentives for Prosocial Behavior: The Role of Reputations,,” Management Science,
  2018, 64 (5), 2460–2471.

Fedyk, Anastassia, “Asymmetric Naivete: Beliefs About Self-Control,” 2018. Working Paper.

Finkelstein, Amy, “Welfare Analysis Meets Causal Inference: A Suggested Interpretation of Hendren,”
  working paper, 2019.

Gauri, Varun, Julian C Jamison, Nina Mazar, Owen Ozier, Shomikho Raha, and Karima Saleh,
 “Motivating bureaucrats through social recognition: evidence from simultaneous field experiments,” 2018.

Gerber, Alan S, Donald P Green, and Christopher W Larimer, “Social pressure and voter turnout:
 Evidence from a large-scale field experiment,” American Political Science Review, 2008, 102 (1), 33–48.

Halpern, David, Inside the nudge unit: How small changes can make a big difference, Random House,
 2015.

Hogg, Michael A., The Social Psychology of Group Cohesiveness: From Attraction to Social Identity,
 Harverster Wheatsheaf, 1992.

Jones, Daniel and Sera Linardi, “Wallflowers: Experimental evidence of an aversion to standing out,”
  Management Science, 2014, 60 (7), 1757–1771.

Kahan, Dan M and Eric A Posner, “Shaming white-collar criminals: A proposal for reform of the
 federal sentencing guidelines,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 1999, 42 (S1), 365–392.

Karing, Anne, “Social signaling and childhood immunization: A field experiment in Sierra Leone,” Working
 Paper 2019.

Kosfeld, Michael and Susanne Neckermann, “Getting more work for nothing? Symbolic awards and
 worker performance,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2011, 3 (3), 86–99.

  , , and Xiaolan Yang, “The effects of financial and recognition incentives across work contexts: The
  role of meaning,” Economic Inquiry, 2017, 55 (1), 237–247.

Lacetera, Nicola and Mario Macis, “Social image concerns and prosocial behavior: Field evidence from
  a nonlinear incentive scheme,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2010, 76 (2), 225–237.

Laibson, David, “Why Don’t Present-Baised Agents Make Commitments?,” American Economic Review,
  2015, 105 (5), 267–272.


                                                     38
Leary, Mark R, “Motivational and emotional aspects of the self,” Annu. Rev. Psychol., 2007, 58, 317–344.

Lindbeck, Assar, Sten Nyberg, and Jorgen Weibull, “Social Norms And Economic Incentives In The
  Welfare State,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114, 1–35.

  ,   , and Jörgen Weibull, “Social Norms and Welfare State Dynamics,” Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 2003, pp. 533–542.

Loewenstein, George, Cass R Sunstein, and Russell Golman, “Disclosure: Psychology changes
  everything,” 2014, 6, 391–419.

Mailath, George J, “Incentive compatibility in signaling games with a continuum of types,” Econometrica:
 Journal of the Econometric Society, 1987, pp. 1349–1365.

Massaro, Toni, “Shame, Culture, and American Criminal Law,” Michigan Law Review, 1991, 89, 1880–
 1942.

Neckermann, Susanne and Xiaolan Yang, “Understanding the (unexpected) consequences of unex-
 pected recognition,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2017, 135, 131–142.

  , Reto Cueni, and Bruno S Frey, “Awards at work,” Labour Economics, 2014, 31, 205–217.

Nussbaum, Martha C, Hiding from humanity: Disgust, shame, and the law, Princeton University Press,
 2009.

OECD, Behavioural Insights and Public Policy: Lessons from Around the World, OECD Publishing, 2017.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Guillermo Cruces, “Partisan interactions: Evidence from a field experi-
  ment in the united states,” Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (4), 1208–1243.

   and Ugo Troiano, “Shaming Tax Delinquents: Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment in the
  United States,” Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 167, 120–137.

Rege, Mari and Kjetil Telle, “The impact of social approval and framing on cooperation in public good
 situations,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88 (7), 1625–1644.

Soetevent, Adriaan R, “Anonymity in giving in a natural context: a field experiment in 30 churches,”
  Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89 (11), 2301–2323.

  , “Payment choice, image motivation and contributions to charity: evidence from a field experiment,”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2011, 3 (1), 180–205.

Sznycer, Daniel, John Tooby, Leda Cosmides, Roni Porat, Shaul Shalvi, and Eran Halperin,
  “Shame closely tracks the threat of devaluation by others, even across cultures,” Proceedings of the Na-
  tional Academy of Sciences, 2016, 113 (10), 2625–2630.

  , Laith Al-Shawaf, Yoella Bereby-Meyer, Oliver Scott Curry, Delphine De Smet, Elsa Ermer,
  Sangin Kim, Sunhwa Kim, Norman P Li, Maria Florencia Lopez Seal et al., “Cross-cultural
  regularities in the cognitive architecture of pride,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2017,
  114 (8), 1874–1879.

Tajfel, Henri, “Experiments in intergroup discrimination,” Scientific american, 1970, 223 (5), 96–103.

Tangney, June Price, Jeff Stuewig, and Debra J Mashek, “Moral emotions and moral behavior,”
  Annu. Rev. Psychol., 2007, 58, 345–372.

  , Rowland S Miller, Laura Flicker, and Deborah Hill Barlow, “Are shame, guilt, and embarrass-
  ment distinct emotions?,” Journal of personality and social psychology, 1996, 70 (6), 1256.



                                                     39
Thunstrom, Linda, “Welfare effects of nudges: The emotional tax of calorie menu labeling,” Judgment
 and Decision Making, 2019, 14 (1), 11–25.

Whorton, James C, Crusaders for fitness: The history of American health reformers, Princeton University
 Press, 2014.

WorldatWork, “Trends in Employee Recognition,” 2017.

Yaouanq, Yves Le and Peter Schwardmann, “Learning about one’s self,” 2019. Working Paper.

Yoeli, Erez, Moshe Hoffman, David G Rand, and Martin A Nowak, “Powering up with indirect
  reciprocity in a large-scale field experiment,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013, 110
  (Supplement 2), 10424–10429.




                                                    40
Figures and Tables

                       Figure 1: Illustration of public recognition information




Notes: This figure shows an illustration of how individuals’ attendance was publicized in the YMCA exper-
iment.




                                                   41
          Figure 2: An example of WTP for public recognition in the YMCA experiment
                                        (a) First step of elicitation




                                        (b) Second step of elicitation




Notes: These figures present screenshots of the procedure for elicitation of WTP for public recognition. The
example above shows the elicitation of WTP for attending the YMCA once during Grow & Thrive. The
top panel presents the first step of the elicitation, where participants are asked whether they want to be
publicly recognized. The bottom panel presents the second step, where participants are asked how much
they are willing to pay (from $0 to $8) to guarantee that their preference from the first step is implemented.
Participants choose the amount by moving the slider bar.




                                                      42
 Figure 3: Cumulative distributions of attendance during the YMCA experiment, by treatment


            1



           .8



           .6



           .4



           .2



            0
                0                     10                      20                        30
                                               Attendance

                                No public recognition              Public recognition


Notes: This figure plots the cumulative distribution functions of attendance during the experiment, by
whether participants were in the public recognition group. The analysis excludes 15 participants with
“incoherent” preferences for public recognition.




                                                 43
                       Figure 4: WTP for public recognition, by YMCA attendance


                            WTP ($)     5



                                       2.5



                                        0



                                      -2.5



                                        -5
                                              0                5          10                 15             20            25
                                                                                    Visits

                                                           Full sample                       Above median past att.
                                                           Below median past att.


                                                              (a) Monotonic sample

  WTP ($)     5                                                                                   WTP ($)        5



            2.5                                                                                              2.5



              0                                                                                                  0



            -2.5                                                                                            -2.5



             -5                                                                                                  -5
                   0    5         10                  15           20          25                                     0        5          10             15         20            25
                                             Visits                                                                                             Visits

                                                                                                                           Full sample                   Above median past att.
                               Coherent, non-monotonic
                                                                                                                           Below median past att.


            (b) Coherent but non-monotonic participants                                                                        (c) Coherent sample
Notes: These figures plot the average WTP for public recognition by each of the eleven intervals of possible
future attendance. For intervals including more than one value of visits (e.g., “5 or 6 visits”), the WTP
is plotted at the midpoint the interval. Panel (a) reports the average WTP for the full monotonic sample,
as well as for the monotonic sample split by median past attendance. Panel (b) reports the average WTP
for participants included in the coherent sample, but with non-monotonic preferences for public recognition.
Panel (c) reports the average WTP for the full coherent sample, as well as for the coherent sample split by
median past attendance. The average YOTA attendance during Grow & Thrive is indicated by the dashed
red line.




                                                                          44
Figure 5: WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance, restricting to questions about visits
close to participants’ expectations


                        WTP ($) 7.5



                                  5


                                2.5


                                  0


                                -2.5


                                 -5


                                -7.5
                                       0     5         10         15   20       25
                                                              Visits


                                             (a) Monotonic sample

                        WTP ($) 7.5



                                  5


                                2.5


                                  0


                                -2.5


                                 -5


                                -7.5
                                       0     5         10         15   20       25
                                                              Visits


                                                 (b) Coherent sample
Notes: These figures plot the average WTP for public recognition by each of the eleven intervals of possible
future attendance. For intervals including more than one value of visits (e.g., “5 or 6 visits”), the WTP is
plotted at the midpoint the interval. The data in these figures is restricted to visits intervals with a midpoint
within 4 of a participant’s predicted attendance if assigned to the public recognition group. The average
YOTA attendance is indicated by the dashed red line. Panel (a) restricts to the monotonic sample and panel
(b) restricts to the coherent sample. 95 percent confidence intervals are constructed from standard errors
clustered by participant. Quadratic fit curves are plotted in red.




                                                         45
               Figure 6: The net effect of shame and pride in the YMCA experiment


                       WTP ($) 7.5


                                5


                               2.5


                                0


                              -2.5


                                -5


                              -7.5

                                     Full sample    Quartile 1    Quartile 2   Quartile 3   Quartile 4
                                          8.2         0.8           4.9          9.7          18.4
                                                         Quartile of atttendance x
                                                                 Mean of x


                                               (a) Monotonic sample

                       WTP ($) 7.5


                                5


                               2.5


                                0


                              -2.5


                                -5


                              -7.5
                                     Full sample    Quartile 1    Quartile 2   Quartile 3   Quartile 4
                                          8.0         0.7           4.7          9.5          18.2
                                                         Quartile of atttendance x
                                                                 Mean of x


                                                   (b) Coherent sample
Notes: These figures plot the average realized public recognition payoff of participants assigned public
recognition, for both the full sample and each quartile of actual attendance. The average attendance is
reported below each subsample label. For panel (a), a participant’s payoff is defined as the WTP predicted
by the regression in column (4) of Table 4a, given the participant’s realized attendance. For panel (b), it
is defined as the WTP predicted by the regression in column (4) of Table 4b. Panel (a) restricts to the
monotonic sample and panel (b) restricts to the coherent sample. Bootstrapped percentile-based confidence
intervals, sampled by participant with 1000 iterations, are displayed.




                                                             46
              Figure 7: Actual versus forecasted attendance in the YMCA experiment

           Attendance
           during the   25
           experiment



                        20



                        15



                        10



                        5



                        0
                             0          5            10            15            20            25
                                             Beliefs about future attendance


Notes: This figure plots the relationship between participants’ forecasted and actual attendance. For partic-
ipants in the public recognition group, we compare attendance to their beliefs about attendance if they are
randomized into the public recognition group. For participants not in the public recognition group, we com-
pare attendance to their beliefs about attendance if they are randomized to not be in the public recognition
group. The analysis excludes 15 participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.




                                                     47
Figure 8: Screenshot of public recognition example given to participants in the charitable contri-
bution experiment




Notes: This figure contains a screenshot of the example given to participants of how their performance would
be publicly recognized. For the Prolific sample, names were not included. For each sample and experimental
group size, donations were scaled and ranks were adjusted accordingly.




                                                    48
                    Figure 9: Overview of the charitable contribution experiment




Notes: This figure presents a screenshot of the flowchart that was shown to participants in the instructions
of the charitable contribution experiment.




                                                    49
Figure 10: Cumulative distributions of points scored in each of the three rounds of the charitable
contribution experiments
                                                                            (a) Prolific

                                              1


                                             .8


                                             .6


                                             .4


                                             .2


                                              0
                                                   0               500              1000               1500             2000
                                                                                     Points

                                                                    Anonymous                      Public recognition
                                                                    Financial incentives




                         (b) Berkeley                                                                                           (c) BU

   1                                                                                          1


  .8                                                                                          .8


  .6                                                                                          .6


  .4                                                                                          .4


  .2                                                                                          .2


   0                                                                                          0
       0    500             1000            1500          2000           2500                      0               500               1000        1500              2000
                                   Points                                                                                            Points

                  Anonymous                        Public recognition                                               Anonymous                 Public recognition
                  Financial incentives                                                                              Financial incentives




Notes: These figures plot the cumulative distribution functions of points scored in the Anonymous Effort
Round, the Anonymous and Paid Effort Round, and the Publicly-Shared Effort Round. Panel (a) presents
results for the Prolific sample, panel (b) presents results for the Berkeley sample, and panel (c) presents
results for the BU sample. The analysis excludes 40 Prolific participants, 11 Berkeley participants, and 2
BU participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.




                                                                                   50
Figure 11: Willingness to pay for public recognition by effort in the charitable contribution exper-
iments
                                                                              (a) Prolific
                                             WTP ($) 1.5


                                                         1

                                                         .5

                                                         0

                                                        -.5

                                                        -1

                                                       -1.5
                                                              0        300       600          900           1200      1500    ≥1700
                                                                                           Points

                                                                  Full sample                       Above median anon. score
                                                                  Below median anon. score




                            (b) Berkeley                                                                                         (c) BU
  WTP ($) 4                                                                                  WTP ($) 4


          2                                                                                            2


          0                                                                                            0


         -2                                                                                            -2


         -4                                                                                            -4


         -6                                                                                            -6
              0       300        600         900        1200        1500      ≥1700                          0         300        600         900        1200       1500       ≥1700
                                         Points                                                                                           Points

                  Full sample                      Above median anon. score                                        Full sample                      Above median anon. score
                  Below median anon. score                                                                         Below median anon. score




Notes: These figures plot the average WTP for public recognition by each of the 18 possible intervals of points
scored. The WTP is plotted at the midpoint of each of the first seventeen intervals and at ≥1700 points for
the 1700 or more points interval. Panel (a) presents results for the Prolific sample, panel (b) presents results
for the Berkeley sample, and panel (c) presents results for the BU sample. The mean Publicly-Shared Effort
Round scores are indicated by dashed red lines. The analysis excludes 40 Prolific participants, 11 Berkeley
participants, and 2 BU participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.




                                                                                      51
     Figure 12: The net effect of shame and pride in the charitable contribution experiments
                                                                                  (a) Prolific
                                                WTP ($) 1.5


                                                            1


                                                           .5


                                                            0


                                                           -.5


                                                           -1


                                                         -1.5
                                                                 Full sample     Quartile 1   Quartile 2    Quartile 3      Quartile 4
                                                                    912.4         186.6        830.1         1183.5          1456.8
                                                                              Quartile of points x scored in the PR round
                                                                                               Mean of x



                               (b) Berkeley                                                                                              (c) BU
  WTP ($) 4                                                                                      WTP ($) 4



          2                                                                                                2



          0                                                                                                0



         -2                                                                                                -2



         -4                                                                                                -4



         -6                                                                                                -6

              Full sample     Quartile 1    Quartile 2    Quartile 3      Quartile 4                            Full sample       Quartile 1   Quartile 2    Quartile 3      Quartile 4
                1124.0         472.2         1163.0        1329.1          1533.9                                  924.0            77.3        795.1         1280.5          1560.0
                            Quartile of points x scored in the PR round                                                        Quartile of points x scored in the PR round
                                             Mean of x                                                                                          Mean of x



Notes: These figures plot the average realized public recognition payoff of participants assigned to public
recognition, for both the full sample and each quartile of actual attendance. The average points scored in the
public recognition round is reported below each subsample label. Panel (a) presents results for the Prolific
sample, panel (b) presents results for the Berkeley sample, and panel (c) presents results for the BU sample.
The analysis excludes 40 Prolific participants, 11 Berkeley participants, and 2 BU participants with “inco-
herent” preferences for public recognition. The average realized public recognition payoff is defined as the
average WTP reported across all participants for the points interval corresponding to the participant’s score
in the public recognition round. Bootstrapped percentile-based confidence intervals, sampled by participants
with 1000 iterations, are displayed.




                                                                                        52
                             Table 1: Balance table for YMCA experiment

                                                             No PR treatment      PR treatment    p-value
  Average WTP (over all possible N. of visits)                      1.10               1.09         0.98
                                                                   (5.13)             (5.03)
  Average monthly past attendance                                   5.75               5.64         0.86
                                                                   (5.64)             (5.67)
  Beliefs about attendance assuming public recognition             13.90              13.41         0.44
                                                                   (5.88)             (6.18)
  Beliefs about attendance assuming no public recognition          12.51              11.83         0.28
                                                                   (5.94)             (6.09)
  Gender (0=Male; 1=Female)                                         0.74               0.76         0.63
                                                                   (0.44)             (0.43)
  Age                                                              44.24              43.70         0.65
                                                                  (11.19)            (11.60)
  N. Subjects                                                       185                185

Notes: This table reports summary statistics across all coherent participants, by assignment to the public
recognition group. Variable “Average WTP (over all possible N. of visits)” is the average participant WTP
across all possible intervals of future attendance. Variables “Beliefs about attendance assuming (no) public
recognition” report the average forecast of future attendance conditional on (not) being part of the public
recognition treatment. The last column reports two-sided p-values to test for balance across our experimen-
tal treatment. The analysis excludes 15 participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.
Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.




                 Table 2: The impact of public recognition on YMCA attendance

                                       (1)   (2)     (3)    (4)   (5)     (6)
                   Public recognition 1.20 1.26*** 1.34*** 1.10 1.19*** 1.27***
                                     (0.73) (0.48) (0.47) (0.69) (0.46) (0.45)

                   Avg. past att.             0.89*** 0.78***         0.88*** 0.77***
                                               (0.04) (0.05)           (0.04) (0.05)

                   Beliefs                           0.20***              0.19***
                                                      (0.05)               (0.05)
                   Control mean         6.95 6.95      6.95 6.91 6.91       6.91
                                       (0.49) (0.49) (0.49) (0.47) (0.47) (0.47)
                   Sample               Mon Mon Mon Coh Coh                 Coh
                   N. Subjects          339    339     339   370    370     370
Notes: This table reports regression estimates of the effects of public recognition on attendance during the
experiment. “Beliefs” reports the expectations YMCA members had about their attendance assuming that
they would be part of the public recognition treatment. Columns (1)-(3) restrict to the monotonic sample,
while columns (4)-(6) restrict to the coherent sample. The control mean is the average attendance for
participants in the experiment who are not in the public recognition program. Standard errors are clustered
at the participant level and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                    53
                     Table 3: WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance

                 (1)              (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
Model           OLS              OLS      Tobit       Tobit      OLS        OLS       Tobit       Tobit
Dependent var. WTP              WTP       WTP         WTP       WTP         WTP       WTP         WTP
N. visits     0.13***          0.39*** 0.25*** 0.68*** 0.10*** 0.36*** 0.19*** 0.62***
               (0.01)           (0.04)    (0.03)     (0.08)     (0.01)     (0.04)     (0.03)      (0.07)
N. visits sq.                 -0.01***              -0.02***              -0.01***              -0.02***
                                (0.00)               (0.00)                (0.00)                 (0.00)
Constant           -0.14      -0.91***     -0.69    -2.00***     0.20      -0.57*      -0.03     -1.35**
                  (0.32)        (0.34)    (0.63)     (0.68)     (0.30)     (0.32)     (0.59)      (0.63)
    00   0
−R /R                –          0.052        –        0.051        –        0.057        –        0.056
95% CI               –     [0.049, 0.055]    –   [0.047, 0.054]    –   [0.053, 0.061]    –   [0.052, 0.060]
   00  0
−R /R × SD           –          0.254        –        0.247        –        0.277        –        0.271
95% CI               –     [0.239, 0.269]    –   [0.230, 0.264]    –   [0.258, 0.295]    –   [0.251, 0.291]
Sample             Mon           Mon       Mon        Mon        Coh         Coh       Coh         Coh
Observations       3729          3729      3729       3729       4070       4070       4070        4070
N. Subjects         339          339        339        339       370         370        370        370

Notes: This table reports regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition by attendance. Measures of the curvature of the estimated reduced-form public recognition
                 00    0            00    0
function are −Rexp  /Rexp (0) and −Rexp /Rexp (0)×SD, where SD = 4.86 is the standard deviation attendance
for the general YOTA population. Columns (1)-(3) restrict to the monotonic sample, while columns (4)-
(6) restrict to the coherent sample. Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and reported in
parentheses. 95 percent confidence intervals for the curvature statistics are computed using the delta method.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     54
Table 4: WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance, restricting to questions about visits
close to participants’ expectations
                                                 (a) Monotonic sample
                  (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
  Model           OLS        OLS       Tobit      Tobit       OLS         OLS      Tobit       Tobit
  Dependent var. WTP        WTP        WTP        WTP        WTP         WTP       WTP         WTP
  N. visits     0.27***    0.65***    0.47***    1.04*** 0.22*** 0.67*** 0.43*** 1.19***
                 (0.05)     (0.14)     (0.09)     (0.27)     (0.05)      (0.18)    (0.10)      (0.38)
  N. visits sq.           -0.02***               -0.02**                -0.01**               -0.03**
                            (0.00)                (0.01)                 (0.01)                (0.01)
  Constant     -1.83*** -3.41*** -3.54*** -5.87***            -0.94    -3.67***    -2.51*    -7.11***
                (0.69)      (0.94)     (1.28)     (1.81)     (0.74)      (1.29)    (1.41)      (2.59)
     00  0
  −R /R            –        0.048         –       0.045         –        0.045        –        0.043
  95% CI           –   [0.036, 0.060]     –   [0.029, 0.061]    –   [0.031, 0.058]    –   [0.027, 0.059]
     00  0
  −R /R × SD       –        0.234         –       0.220         –        0.217        –        0.209
  95% CI           –   [0.175, 0.292]     –   [0.143, 0.297]    –   [0.153, 0.280]    –   [0.129, 0.288]
  Restriction     ≤4         ≤4         ≤4         ≤4        Exact       Exact     Exact       Exact
  Observations    830        830        830        830         339        339       339         339
  N. Subjects     339        339        339        339         339        339       339         339

                                                 (b) Coherent sample
                   (1)             (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)
  Model           OLS             OLS      Tobit      Tobit       OLS         OLS      Tobit       Tobit
  Dependent var. WTP             WTP       WTP        WTP        WTP         WTP       WTP         WTP
  N. visits     0.23***         0.56*** 0.40*** 0.88*** 0.21*** 0.59*** 0.39*** 1.03***
                 (0.04)          (0.13)    (0.08)     (0.25)     (0.05)      (0.18)    (0.09)      (0.35)
  N. visits sq.                -0.01***              -0.02**                -0.01**                -0.02*
                                 (0.00)               (0.01)                 (0.01)                (0.01)
  Constant           -1.27*    -2.60*** -2.47** -4.40***          -0.69     -3.02**     -1.90     -5.71**
                     (0.65)      (0.89)    (1.16)     (1.62)     (0.69)      (1.23)    (1.29)      (2.38)
      00   0
  −R /R                 –        0.049        –       0.046         –        0.044        –        0.042
  95% CI                –   [0.035, 0.062]    –   [0.028, 0.063]    –   [0.029, 0.059]    –   [0.023, 0.061]
     00  0
  −R /R × SD            –        0.237        –       0.223         –        0.213        –         0.205
  95% CI                –   [0.171, 0.302]    –   [0.137, 0.308]    –   [0.140, 0.286]    –   [0.113, 0.296]
  Restriction         ≤4          ≤4        ≤4         ≤4        Exact       Exact     Exact       Exact
  Observations        923         923       923        923         370        370        370         370
  N. Subjects         370         370       370        370         370        370        370         370

Notes: These tables report regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition by attendance. Columns (1)-(4) restrict to visits intervals with a midpoint within 4 of
a participant’s predicted attendance if assigned to the public recognition group. Columns (5)-(8) restrict
to intervals that contain the participant’s predicted attendance if assigned to the public recognition group.
                                                                                                 00    0
Measures of the curvature of the estimated reduced-form public recognition function are −Rexp        /Rexp (0)
         00    0
and −Rexp /Rexp (0) × SD, where SD = 4.86 is the standard deviation attendance for the general YOTA
population. Panel (a) restricts to the monotonic sample and panel (b) restricts to the coherent sample.
Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and reported in parentheses. 95 percent confidence
intervals for the curvature statistics are computed using the delta method. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                     55
Table 5: The effect of public recognition and financial incentives on performance in the charitable
contribution experiments

                                                       (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
        Model                                         OLS          OLS          OLS           OLS
        Dependent var.                               Points       Points       Points       Points
        Public recognition                          105.01∗∗∗    134.41∗∗∗    103.61∗∗     106.70∗∗∗
                                                     (12.25)      (22.56)      (45.25)      (18.72)
        Financial incentives                        185.74∗∗∗    177.76∗∗∗    118.33∗∗∗    191.96∗∗∗
                                                     (12.56)      (22.04)      (39.62)      (18.98)
        Group of 300                                                                          20.61
                                                                                            (39.85)
        Group of 300 × Public recognition                                                     -3.12
                                                                                            (28.43)
        Group of 300 × Financial incentives                                                  -18.85
                                                                                            (29.05)
        Group of 15                                                                           17.70
                                                                                            (41.13)
        Group of 15 × Public recognition                                                      -3.21
                                                                                            (31.13)
        Group of 15 × Financial incentives                                                    -3.27
                                                                                            (31.90)
        Control mean                                  807.9       989.8         815.9
                                                     (16.7)       (27.2)        (52.8)
        Round order dummies                            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
        Order dummies F-test                          0.180       0.497         0.116        0.178
        Sample                                       Prolific    Berkeley        BU         Prolific
        Observations                                  2904         1152          354         2904
        N. Subjects                                    968         384           118          968
Notes: This table reports regression estimates of the effects of public recognition and financial incentives
on points scored. Column (1), (2), and (3) report estimates for the Prolific, Berkeley, and BU samples,
respectively. Column (4) includes interactions with group size variables in the Prolific sample, which indicate
the approximate number of individuals in the participant’s randomly assigned public recognition group. The
control mean is the mean points scored in the Anonymous Effort Round. Dummy variables for the order
in which the round appeared (first, second, or third) are included, and the p-value from a test of their
joint significance is reported. The analysis excludes 40 Prolific participants, 11 Berkeley participants, and 2
BU participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition. Standard errors are clustered at the
participant level and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      56
    Table 6: WTP for public recognition by effort in the charitable contribution experiments

                             (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)              (6)
       Model                OLS             OLS          OLS              OLS          OLS              OLS
       Dependent var.       WTP            WTP           WTP             WTP           WTP             WTP
       Points (00s)       0.093∗∗∗       0.155∗∗∗      0.310∗∗∗        0.379∗∗∗      0.347∗∗∗        0.309∗∗∗
                           (0.007)        (0.018)       (0.033)         (0.070)       (0.060)         (0.116)
       Points (00s) sq.                 -0.004∗∗∗                        -0.004                         0.002
                                          (0.001)                       (0.004)                       (0.006)
       Constant           -0.557∗∗∗     -0.733∗∗∗      -3.130∗∗∗      -3.325∗∗∗      -5.186∗∗∗      -5.076∗∗∗
                           (0.113)        (0.121)       (0.400)         (0.420)       (0.791)         (0.810)
          00
       −R /R0                 –            0.047           –              0.021          –             -0.015
       95% CI                 –       [0.036, 0.059]       –       [-0.009, 0.051]       –       [-0.097, 0.068]
          00
       −R /R0 × SD            –            0.245           –              0.114          –             -0.085
       95% CI                 –       [0.186, 0.303]       –       [-0.047, 0.275]       –       [-0.559, 0.388]
       Sample              Prolific      Prolific      Berkeley       Berkeley          BU               BU
       Observations         16456          16456         6528             6528         2006             2006
       N. Subjects           968            968           384              384          118              118
Notes: This table reports regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for pub-
lic recognition by the level of publicized effort. Effort is measured in 100s of points scored. The regressions
exclude the ≥1700 points interval. Measures of the curvature of the estimated reduced-form public recogni-
                       00    0               00    0
tion function are −Rexp   /Rexp (0) and −Rexp   /Rexp (0) × SD, where SD is the standard deviation of points
scored in the anonymous round (in units of hundreds of points). The analysis excludes 40 Prolific partici-
pants, 11 Berkeley participants, and 2 BU participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.
Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and reported in parentheses. 95 percent confidence
intervals for the curvature statistics are computed using the delta method. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                         57
Table 7: WTP for public recognition by effort in the charitable contribution experiments: hetero-
geneity along public recognition group size

                                                                (1)            (2)
                       Model                                   OLS            OLS
                       Dependent var.                          WTP           WTP
                       Points (00s)                          0.098***      0.159***
                                                              (0.011)       (0.027)
                       Points (00s) sq.                                   -0.004***
                                                                            (0.001)
                       Group of 300                             0.121         0.141
                                                              (0.256)       (0.268)
                       Group of 300 × Points (00s)             -0.016        -0.024
                                                              (0.017)       (0.039)
                       Group of 300 × Points (00s) sq.                        0.001
                                                                            (0.002)
                       Group of 15                              0.332         0.305
                                                              (0.293)       (0.307)
                       Group of 15 × Points (00s)              -0.001         0.009
                                                              (0.018)       (0.044)
                       Group of 15 × Points (00s) sq.                        -0.001
                                                                            (0.002)
                       Constant                              -0.676***    -0.852***
                                                              (0.163)       (0.175)
                       Observations                            16456         16456
                       N. Subjects                              968            968
Notes: This table reports regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition by the level of publicized effort in the Prolific sample. Effort is measured in 100s of
points scored. The regressions exclude the ≥1700 points interval. The regressions include interactions
with group size variables in the Prolific sample, which indicate the approximate number of individuals
in the participant’s randomly assigned public recognition group. The omitted group size category is 75
participants. The analysis excludes 40 Prolific participants, 11 Berkeley participants, and 2 BU participants
with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition. Standard errors are clustered at the subject level and
reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     58
Table 8: WTP for public recognition by effort in the charitable contribution experiments, restricting
to questions about scores that are “close” to participants’ actual scores

                             (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)
       Model                OLS              OLS          OLS             OLS           OLS             OLS
       Dependent var.       WTP             WTP           WTP            WTP            WTP            WTP
       Points (00s)       0.106∗∗∗       0.150∗∗∗       0.371∗∗∗          0.376       0.390∗∗∗          0.341
                           (0.020)         (0.055)       (0.072)        (0.230)        (0.135)        (0.288)
       Points (00s) sq.                     -0.003                       -0.000                         0.003
                                           (0.003)                      (0.010)                       (0.014)
       Constant           -0.591∗∗∗       -0.737∗∗      -3.520∗∗∗      -3.538∗∗∗      -5.298∗∗∗      -5.145∗∗∗
                           (0.214)         (0.286)       (0.804)        (1.252)        (1.178)        (1.483)
          00
       −R /R0                 –             0.033           –             0.001           –            -0.017
       95% CI                 –       [-0.014, 0.081]       –       [-0.105, 0.107]       –       [-0.206, 0.173]
          00
       −R /R0 × SD            –              0.174          –             0.007           –            -0.095
       95% CI                 –       [-0.073, 0.421]       –       [-0.558, 0.573]       –       [-1.184, 0.994]
       Sample              Prolific        Prolific     Berkeley       Berkeley          BU              BU
       Observations         8602             8602         3330            3330           982             982
       N. Subjects           968              968          383             383           118             118
Notes: This table reports regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for pub-
lic recognition by the level of publicized effort. The data is restricted to observations in which the midpoint
of the points interval for which willingness to pay is reported is within 500 points of the participant’s average
score across the three experimental rounds. Effort is measured in 100s of points scored. The regressions ex-
clude the ≥1700 points interval. Measures of the curvature of the estimated reduced-form public recognition
                 00     0              00    0
function are −Rexp  /Rexp  (0) and −Rexp  /Rexp  (0) × SD, where SD is the standard deviation of points scored
in the anonymous round (in units of hundreds of points). The analysis excludes 40 Prolific participants, 11
Berkeley participants, and 2 BU participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition. Standard
errors are clustered at the participant level and reported in parentheses. 95 percent confidence intervals for
the curvature statistics are computed using the delta method. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          59
                         Table 9: Structural estimates and tests of consistency
                                  (a) Action-signaling model parameter estimates

                      Sample              γ̂1a                 γ̂2a             ρ̂a             ĉ
                      YMCA                0.64              -0.020              1.85           0.46
                                      [0.35,0.92]      [-0.038,-0.003]      [0.94,2.52]    [0.20,1.95]
                      Prolific            0.12              -0.004              0.58           0.09
                                      [0.09,0.14]      [-0.005,-0.002]      [0.40,0.80]    [0.07,0.11]
                      Berkeley            0.30              -0.004             0.87            0.23
                                      [0.23,0.37]       [-0.011,0.003]      [0.66,1.15]    [0.16,0.35]
                      BU                  0.38               0.002              1.61           0.34
                                      [0.19,0.55]       [-0.009,0.014]      [1.14,2.37]    [0.14,1.78]

                             (b) Characteristics-signaling model parameter estimates

                      Sample              γ̂1θ                 γ̂2θ             ρ̂θ             ĉ
                      YMCA                1.28              -0.079              1.40           0.46
                                      [0.28,2.34]      [-0.292,-0.003]      [0.31,2.19]    [0.20,1.95]
                      Prolific            1.24              -0.416              0.50           0.09
                                      [0.94,1.57]      [-0.679,-0.227]      [0.26,0.77]    [0.07,0.11]
                      Berkeley            1.26              -0.071             0.86            0.23
                                      [0.85,1.74]       [-0.223,0.058]      [0.61,1.18]    [0.16,0.35]
                      BU                  1.14               0.021              1.68           0.34
                                      [0.09,2.66]       [-0.100,0.345]      [1.17,2.49]    [0.14,1.78]

                       (c) Predicted and actual effects of financial incentives(on atten-
                       dance or points (00s))

                           Sample         Model prediction             Actual         Pred.− Act.
                           YMCA                      2.16                1.77†            0.39
                                                 [0.42,5.00]          [1.30,2.26]     [-1.27,3.19]
                           Prolific                  2.29                 1.82            0.47
                                                 [1.74,2.97]          [1.56,2.07]     [-0.02,1.08]
                           Berkeley                  2.17                1.78             0.39
                                                 [1.42,3.11]          [1.36,2.22]     [-0.28,1.17]
                           BU                       1.49                  1.18            0.31
                                                 [0.16,3.05]          [0.42,1.96]     [-0.90,1.69]

†: Based on individuals’ forecasted rather than realized behavior.
Notes: These tables report parameter estimates of the action-signaling and characteristics-signaling models
described in Section 7.1, equations (5) and (6). For panel (c), the financial incentive is $1/attendance for
the YMCA sample, 2 cents/10 points for the Prolific sample, and 5 cents/10 points for the Berkeley and
BU samples. The analysis excludes participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition (15 in
YMCA participants, 40 Prolific participants, 11 Berkeley participants, and 2 BU participants). Bootstrapped
percentile-based confidence intervals from 1000 replications, clustered at the participant level, are reported
in brackets.




                                                                60
              Table 10: Welfare estimates of scaling up public recognition at the YMCA
                                               (a) Action-signaling model

                                                                       (1)                (2)        (3)
                                                                     Direct            Change        (1)
        Row     Scenario                                         emotional effect   in attendance    (2)

        1.      γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.020,   ρa   = 1.85         -3.41             1.75        -1.95
        2.      γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.020,   ρa   = 0.58          0.70             1.23         0.57
        3.      γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.020,   ρa   = 0.87         -0.04             1.34        -0.03
        4.      γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.020,   ρa   = 1.61         -2.46             1.64        -1.49
        5.      γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.020,   ρa   =1             -0.40             1.39        -0.29
        6.      γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.010,   ρa   = 1.85         -2.94             1.56        -1.88
        7.      γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.010,   ρa   = 0.58          0.94             1.31         0.72
        8.      γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.010,   ρa   = 0.87          0.15             1.37         0.11
        9.      γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.010,   ρa   = 1.61         -2.13             1.51        -1.41
        10.     γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.010,   ρa   =1             -0.22             1.39        -0.16
        11.     γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.038,   ρa   = 1.85         -4.26             2.11        -2.02
        12.     γ1a   = 0.64,   γ2a   = −0.003,   ρa   = 1.85         -2.60             1.44        -1.81
        13.     γ1a   = 1.29,   γ2a   = −0.040,   ρa   = 1.85         -9.64             3.80        -2.54

                                           (b) Characteristics-signaling model

                                                                       (1)                (2)       (3)
                                                                     Direct            Change        (1)
        Row     Scenario                                         emotional effect   in attendance    (2)

        1.      γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.079,   ρθ   = 1.40         -1.18             1.49        -0.79
        2.      γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.079,   ρθ   = 0.50          0.49             1.26         0.39
        3.      γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.079,   ρθ   = 0.86         -0.14             1.36        -0.10
        4.      γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.079,   ρθ   = 1.68         -1.74             1.56        -1.12
        5.      γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.079,   ρθ   =1             -0.40             1.39        -0.29
        6.      γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.040,   ρθ   = 1.40         -1.01             1.44        -0.70
        7.      γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.040,   ρθ   = 0.50          0.73             1.32         0.55
        8.      γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.040,   ρθ   = 0.86          0.05             1.37         0.04
        9.      γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.040,   ρθ   = 1.68         -1.57             1.48        -1.06
        10.     γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.040,   ρθ   =1             -0.22             1.39        -0.16
        11.     γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.292,   ρθ   = 1.40         -1.40             1.57        -0.90
        12.     γ1θ   = 1.28,   γ2θ   = −0.003,   ρθ   = 1.40         -0.87             1.41        -0.62
        13.     γ1θ   = 2.56,   γ2θ   = −0.159,   ρθ   = 1.40         -2.13             2.97        -0.72

Notes: These tables report welfare estimates based on the structural estimates of the action-signaling and
characteristics-signaling models described in Section 7.1. In row (1), γ1j , γ2j , and ρj are set equal to the
parameter estimates from the YMCA sample. In rows (2)-(4), ρj is set equal to ρj for the Prolific, Berkeley,
and BU samples, respectively. Rows (6)-(10) repeat rows (1)-(5) with γ2j set equal to one-half of the estimate
from the YMCA sample. In rows (11) and (12), γ2j is set equal to the lower-bound and upper-bound,
respectively, of the confidence interval for γ2j estimated in Table 9. In row (13), γ1j and γ2j are set equal to
twice the parameter estimates from the YMCA sample.




                                                            61
Online Appendix                                Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky




Online Appendix

          Measuring the Welfare Effects of Shame and Pride
        Luigi Butera, Robert Metcalfe, William Morrison, and Dmitry Taubinsky




                                         62
Online Appendix                                              Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky




Table of Contents
    A General formulation of social signaling models                                                  64
      A.1 Action signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
      A.2 Characteristics signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
      A.3 The net effect of shame and pride . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

    B Deadweight loss relative to financial incentives                                                                                   68
      B.1 Unidimensional heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                       68
      B.2 Costly public funds and constraints on the sign of the incentive scheme . . . . . .                                            68
      B.3 Multidimensional heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                       69

    C Supplementary empirical results for YMCA experiment                                                                                70
      C.1 Additional results about the PRU and past attendance . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                     .   .   .   70
      C.2 Excluding high visits intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                              .   .   .   73
      C.3 Rescaling the visits intervals to have equal width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 .   .   .   74
      C.4 Interaction between demand for commitment and WTP for public recognition                                           .   .   .   80
      C.5 Additional results on realized payoffs from pride and shame . . . . . . . . . .                                    .   .   .   82

    D Supplementary empirical results for charitable contribution experiments                                                            84

    E Structural estimation details                                                                                                      87
      E.1 Mapping to estimates from the reduced-form results         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   87
      E.2 Action-signaling model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   88
      E.3 Characteristic-signaling model . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   91
      E.4 Incorporating heterogeneity and uncertainty . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   95




                                                     63
Online Appendix                                             Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


A     General formulation of social signaling models
We now consider more general public recognition structures. We let A denote the action space,
which is a subset of R, and we let F denote the distribution of types. We let G(σ|a) denote
the distribution of signals σ conditional on an individual choosing action a. For example, two-
tier schemes that recognize people who chose a ≥ a† can be represented as schemes where σ = 1 if
a ≥ a† and σ = 0 otherwise. Schemes where people’s performance is revealed with some probability
q can be represented as σ = a with probability q and σ = ∅ with probability 1 − q. The signals are
completely uninformative if G(σ|a) does not depend on a.
    We consider general formulations of the action-signaling and characteristics-signaling models
that have the following three features. First, in a fully-revealing equilibrium, these models cor-
respond to the models we introduced in Section 2 and, in particular, can be consistent with any
non-negative value of ρ. Second, these models make the sensible prediction that when nothing
is revealed about an individual’s action and type, then the individual derives zero utility from
public recognition. Third, individuals’ utility from public recognition is continuous in the audi-
ence inference, and is continuous in the population distribution of behavior or types (in the weak
topology).
    To see how the second criterion can be limiting, suppose that for general signal structures,
individuals’ utility from public recognition is given by νS(E[θ|σ] − ρθ̄), where E[θ|σ] denotes the
audience’s expectation of the individual’s action, and ρ > 1. If the signal is fully revealing, then
this formulation is consistent with the signaling model we presented in Section 2. However, if the
signals are completely uninformative—meaning that nothing is in fact learned about the individual’s
behavior and type—then this formulation makes the odd prediction that the individual’s utility
from public recognition is νS(θ̄ − ρθ̄) < S(0) = 0; that is, that the individual derives negative
utility from public recognition when in fact nothing is learned about the individual.
    To see how the third criterion can be limiting, consider a public recognition scheme that divides
individuals into K tiers [0, a1 ), [a1 , a2 ), ..., [aK−1 , aK ], and that in equilibrium the mean type in
each tier is θ̄1 , θ̄2 , . . . , θ̄K . Suppose that individuals’ utility is given by νS(E[θ|σ] − r), where r
is the largest value such that P r(θ̄i ≤ r) ≤ 1/2. In a separating equilibrium—where each tier in
fact corresponds to a possible value of a—this corresponds to the intuitive-sounding formulation
in which individuals compare their type to the median type. Note, however, that it is crucial to
define r in terms of the tiers, rather than in terms of the underlying distribution of types: if r was
always defined as the median of the distribution of θ, and if the mean of the distribution of θ was
smaller than the median, then with a completely uninformative signal structure individuals would
derive νS(θ̄ − r) < S(0) = 0 utility from public recognition. The problem with defining r as the
median of the tiers is that it leads to discontinuous payoffs from public recognition. For example,
consider a two-tier system. If for  > 0, 0.5 +  individuals are in the bottom tier, then r would
be defined as the average type in the bottom tier. But if 0.5 −  individuals are in the bottom
tier, then r would be defined as the average type in the top tier. This would lead payoffs from
public recognition to be sharply discontinuous in the distribution of types in the population, which

                                                    64
Online Appendix                                                   Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


is not only unintuitive, but also theoretically unattractive as it could lead to non-existence of (pure
strategy) equilibria even with convex type spaces.
       To satisfy the second and third criteria, we define the reference point against which the audience
inference is compared to be a weighted average of the distribution of audience posteriors induced
by the equilibrium distribution of behavior. E.g., in the context of the example above, the reference
point would be the weighted average of θ̄j —the mean type in each tier. This implies that when
signals are completely uninformative, so that the distribution of audience posteriors places weight
1 on the average type, the reference point is just the average behavior or type in the population.
Plainly, the weighted-average function is also a continuous function of the distribution of posteriors,
and thus satisfies the third criterion.

A.1       Action signaling
We let E[a|σ] denote the audience’s expectation of the individual’s action, given a realization σ of the
signal. Let a : Θ → A be the equilibrium action function, and let G∗ (σ) denote the unconditional
distribution of signal values, induced by a, F , and G(·|a), that results in equilibrium. We assume
that the audience updates according to Bayes’ Rule to form the inference E[a|σ], and we let H ∗
denote the unconditional distribution of audience posteriors, E[a|σ], induced by the distribution
G∗ .
       To illustrate H ∗ , consider a public recognition scheme that divides individuals into K tiers
[a0 = 0, a1 ), [a1 , a2 ), ..., [aK−1 , aK ]. Suppose that in equilibrium, the mean action in each tier is
ā1 , ā2 , . . . , āK , and that the fraction of people in tier [ak−1 , ak ) is µk . Then H ∗ is simply the
probability distribution that places weight µk on āk .
       We define utility from public recognition, for an individual generating signal σ, to be
                                                                             !
                                                               aw(a)dH ∗ (a)
                                                         R
                                                           a∈A
                                       νS       E[a|σ] − R            ∗
                                                            a∈A w(a)dH (a)


where ν is the visibility parameter, the weighting function w is a smooth function w : R → R , and
where S is a smooth function with S(0) = 0. The equilibrium action function is such that a(θ) ∈ A
maximizes
                                                                             !
                                                                       ∗ (a)
                                                          R
                                                               aw(a)dH
                                       Z
                         u(a; θ) + ν        S    E[a|σ] − Ra∈A        ∗
                                                                               dG(σ|a).
                                        σ                   a∈A w(a)dH (a)

for each θ, given the Bayesian inference function E[a|σ] and the induced distribution H ∗ .
       Note that when the signals are completely uninformative, E[a|σ] is simply the average action
in the population, ā, and H ∗ places mass 1 on ā. Thus,

                                               aw(a)dH ∗ (a)
                                          R
                                 E[a|σ] − Ra∈A        ∗
                                                             = ā − ā = 0
                                            a∈A w(a)dH (a)




                                                           65
Online Appendix                                                Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


and individuals derive no utility from public recognition. Conversely, when the signals are fully
informative, public recognition utility is given by
                                                   R                !
                                                     a∈A aw(a)dH(a)
                                          νS    a− R
                                                      a∈A w(a)dH(a)


where H is the probability distribution over actions. Note that
                                                 R
                                                       aw(a)dH(a)
                                                  Ra∈A
                                                    a∈A w(a)dH(a)

is simply the weighted average of the population distribution of performance, and is equal to ρā for
an appropriately defined constant ρ. If w(a) is constant in a, meaning that there is no reweighting,
then ρ = 1 in all separating equilibria. If w(a) is increasing (decreasing) in a, meaning that higher
levels of performance receive more (less) weight, then ρ > 1 (ρ < 1) in all separating equilibria. If
w(a) places full weight on a = 0 (and some individuals choose a = 0 in equilibrium), then ρ = 0 in
all equilibria.

A.2     Characteristics signaling
We define this general version of characteristics-signaling models analogously to above.
    We let E[θ|σ] denote the audience’s expectation of the individual’s action, given a realization
σ of the signal. Let a : Θ → A be the equilibrium action function, and let G∗ (σ) denote the
unconditional distribution of signal values, induced by a, F , and G(·|a), that results in equilibrium.
We assume that the audience updates according to Bayes’ Rule to form the inference E[θ|σ], and
we let H ∗ denote the unconditional distribution of audience posteriors, E[θ|σ], induced by the
distribution G∗ .
    To illustrate H ∗ , consider a public recognition scheme that divides individuals’ performance
into K tiers [0, a1 ), [a1 , a2 ), ..., [aK−1 , aK ]. Suppose that in equilibrium, the mean type in each tier
is θ̄1 , θ̄2 , . . . , θ̄K , and that the fraction of people in tier [ak−1 , ak ) is µk . Then H ∗ is simply the
probability distribution that places weight µk on θ̄k .
    We define utility from public recognition, for an individual generating signal σ, to be
                                                                          !
                                                                    ∗ (x)
                                                       R
                                                            xw(x)dH
                                     νS       E[θ|σ] − Rx∈Θ        ∗
                                                         x∈Θ w(x)dH (x)


where the weighting function w is a smooth function w : R → R , and where S is a smooth function
with S(0) = 0. The equilibrium action function is such that a(θ) ∈ A maximizes
                                                                           !
                                                                     ∗ (x)
                                                        R
                                                             xw(x)dH
                                     Z
                       u(a; θ) + ν        S    E[θ|σ] − Rx∈Θ        ∗
                                                                             dG(σ|a).
                                      σ                   x∈Θ w(x)dH (x)

for each θ, given the Bayesian inference function E[a|σ] and the induced distribution H ∗ .


                                                        66
Online Appendix                                           Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


   Note that when the signals are completely uninformative, E[θ|σ] is simply the average type in
the population, θ̄, and H ∗ places mass 1 on θ̄. Thus,

                                             xw(x)dH ∗ (x)
                                        R
                               E[θ|σ] − Rx∈Θ        ∗
                                                           = θ̄ − θ̄ = 0
                                          x∈Θ w(x)dH (x)

and individuals derive no utility from public recognition. Conversely, in a separating equilibrium,
public recognition utility is given by
                                                  R                 !
                                                    x∈Θ xw(x)dF (x)
                                  νS     E[θ|a] − R
                                                     x∈Θ w(x)dF (x)


where F is the probability distribution over types. Note that
                                           R
                                                 xw(x)dF (x)
                                            Rx∈Θ
                                              x∈Θ w(x)dF (x)

is simply the weighted average of the distribution of types, and is equal to ρθ̄ for an appropriately
defined constant ρ. If w(θ) is constant in θ, meaning that there is no reweighting, then ρ = 1
in all separating equilibria. If w(θ) is increasing (decreasing) in θ, meaning that higher levels of
performance receive more (less) weight, then ρ > 1 (ρ < 1) in all separating equilibria. If w(θ)
places full weight on some lowest type θm , then ρ = θm /θ̄ in all equilibria.

A.3    The net effect of shame and pride
For the sake of parsimony, we focus on the characteristics-signaling model, as the arguments for
the action-signaling model are nearly identical.
   We establish the following simple result:
Proposition 1. Assume that S is increasing. If S is concave and w is increasing, then the net
effect of shame and pride is negative. If S is convex and w is decreasing, then the net effect of
shame and pride is positive.
Proof. Suppose that S is concave and that w is increasing. Then Jensen’s inequality implies that
                                                                !
                                                          ∗ (x)
                                         R
                                               xw(x)dH
                    Z     Z
                              S E[θ|σ] − Rx∈Θ            ∗ (x)
                                                                  dG(σ|a(θ0 ))dF (θ0 )
                     θ0 ∈Θ σ                x∈Θ w(x)dH
                                                                          !
                                                                    ∗ (x)
                                                   R
                                                          xw(x)dH
                  ≤S E[θ|σ]dG(σ|a(θ0 ))dF (θ0 ) − Rx∈Θ             ∗
                                                     x∈Θ w(x)dH (x)
                                                              !
                                              xw(x)dH ∗ (x)
                         Z              R
                                 ∗        x∈Θ
                  =S          xdH (x) − R              ∗
                                                                                                  (9)
                          x∈Θ              x∈Θ w(x)dH (x)

                  ≤S(0) = 0.                                                                    (10)

Line (10) follows from line (9) because S is increasing and CovH ∗ [x, w(x)] > 0 by assumption.

                                                   67
Online Appendix                                           Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


    The case in which S is convex and w is decreasing follows analogously.


B     Deadweight loss relative to financial incentives
B.1    Unidimensional heterogeneity
Suppose first that types are one-dimensional, meaning that the type space Θ is a subset of R.
Assume also that all individuals share the same structural PRU S. In any equilibrium, possibly
not fully separating, let R : A → R denote the resulting reduced-form PRU. Thus, individuals
choose a to maximize u(a; θ) + R(a) + y, where y is numeraire consumption. We let a(θ) denote
individuals’ choices.
    We can construct a revenue-neutral financial incentive scheme that induces exactly the same
decisions a(θ) as follows. Let p(a) be the financial reward that individuals receive for choosing
                                R
action a, and set p(a) = R(a) − θ∈Θ R(a(θ))dF (θ), where F is the distribution over types θ. By
                                                     R
construction, a(θ) maximizes u(a; θ) + p(a) + y, and θ∈Θ p(a(θ))dF (θ) = 0.
   Plainly, every individual will be better (worse) off under the revenue-neutral financial incentive
          R
scheme if θ∈Θ R(a(θ))dF (θ) is negative (positive). In other words, if the net emotional effect of
public recognition is negative, then every individual will be made better off if the public recognition
intervention is instead replaced by the revenue-neutral financial incentive scheme p(a). The differ-
                                           R                                     R
ence in each individuals’ utility will be − θ∈Θ R(a(θ))dF (θ). We thus refer to − θ∈Θ R(a(θ))dF (θ)
as the deadweight loss of public recognition relative to financial incentives. Note that if the emo-
                                                                R
tional consequences of public recognition are on net positive ( θ∈Θ R(a(θ))dF (θ) > 0), then wel-
fare with public recognition is higher than with the equivalent revenue-neutral financial incentive
scheme.

B.2    Costly public funds and constraints on the sign of the incentive scheme
Above, we assumed that it is possible to use a revenue-neutral incentive scheme. In the YMCA
context, this revenue-neutral scheme could involve raising monthly or annual membership fees to
finance a per-attendance incentive. However, this may not always be possible. In such cases, the
relative benefits of public recognition versus financial incentives are more nuanced where there is a
shadow cost of public funds.
    In particular, let the marginal value of public funds be 1 + λ, where λ ≥ 0 is the shadow
cost of raising funds due to distortionary effects. When λ > 0, financial incentives are particularly
attractive relative to public recognition if they can be implemented as additional taxes or fines, since
doing so raises government revenue. Examples include taxing behaviors that generate environmental
externalities (e.g., energy use), or fining behaviors that violate the law (e.g., tax delinquency).
However, there are other cases where financial incentives most naturally take the form of positive
rewards, such as incentivizing charitable behavior by making it tax-deductible. In these cases there
is an additional cost to using financial incentives in lieu of public recognition.



                                                  68
Online Appendix                                                Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


   Formally, consider a non-revenue-neutral financial incentive scheme p(a) = p0 + R(a) that
induces the same behavior change as does public recognition. Under public recognition, the net
                                                                   R
effect of shame and pride experienced by individuals is, as before, θ∈Θ R(a(θ))dF (θ). Under the
                                                       R
incentive scheme, individuals’ earnings change by p̄ = θ∈Θ p(a(θ))dF (θ) in total, and the cost to
the government is λp̄. Thus, the net advantage of financial incentives versus public recognition is
given by                                            Z
                                     (1 − λ)p̄ −           R(a(θ))dF (θ).
                                                     θ∈Θ

When p̄ is negative, meaning that on net the planner collects revenue, financial incentives are
particularly attractive. When p̄ is positive, meaning that on net the planner gives out financial
rewards, financial incentives are less attractive. But when λ = 1 or when the incentive scheme
is revenue-neutral, the relative advantage of financial incentives over public recognition is simply
           R
given by − θ∈Θ R(a(θ))dF (θ), the net effect of shame and pride.
   As an example, suppose that p(a) is required to be non-negative, and return to the welfare
estimate in column (1) of Table 10a, where the net effect of shame and pride was found to be
−3.41. Assume also that the predicted 1.75 attendance change could be obtained with a $1 per
attendance financial incentive, as implied by participants’ forecasts. For the social costs of a $1 per
attendance subsidy to be higher than the costs of using public recognition, the cost of public funds
would need to be approximately λ = 0.7, which is substantially higher than the typical estimate of
0.3 (Finkelstein, 2019).33

B.3    Multidimensional heterogeneity
We now consider the case where types θ are multidimensional because, for example, individuals
have varying sensitivities to public recognition. For each individual of type θ, let ∆(θ) denote the
behavior change induced by public recognition, and let e(θ) denote the marginal social value of
increasing type θ’s choice of a. Let r(θ) denote each individual’s realization of public recognition
                     R
utility, and let r̄ = θ∈Θ r(θ)dF (θ) denote the net effect of shame and pride. In the one-dimensional
                                                                 ¯ =
                                                                     R
case, r(θ) = R(a(θ)). The total behavior change is given by ∆          θ∈Θ ∆(θ)dF (θ), and the average
                                           R
marginal benefit of increasing a is ē = θ∈Θ e(θ)dF (θ). The incremental welfare effect of public
recognition is given by
                                              Z
                                      R
                                 ∆W       =         (∆(θ)e(θ) + r(θ)) dF (θ)
                                              θ∈Θ
                                            ¯ + r̄ + Cov[∆(θ), e(θ)].
                                          = ∆ē                                                          (11)

Consider now an incentive scheme p(a) that changes each type θ’s behavior by ∆p (θ), such that
                    ¯
R                              R
 θ∈Θ ∆p (θ)dF (θ) = ∆. Let p̄ = θ∈Θ p(a(θ))dF (θ) denote the net financial transfer to individuals.
  33
     A 1.75 attendance increase would lead to average attendance of 3.14 + 1.75 = 4.89, and thus to generate a
per-person social cost of $3.41, the cost of public founds would need to be 3.41/4.89 ≈ 0.7.




                                                        69
Online Appendix                                                     Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


The incremental effect of these financial incentives is given by
                             Z                                             Z
                 ∆W p =              (∆p (θ)e(θ) + p(a(θ))) dF (θ) − λ            p(a(θ))dF (θ)
                               θ∈Θ                                          θ∈Θ
                            ¯ + Cov[∆p (θ), e(θ)] + (1 − λ)p̄.
                          = ∆ē                                                                          (12)

Equations (11) and (12) imply that the difference between the welfare effect of public recognition
and financial incentives is given by


                             −r̄
                            |{z}            + Cov[(∆p (θ) − ∆(θ), e(θ)] +       (1 − λ)p̄          .     (13)
                                              |          {z           }         | {z }
                     net emotional effect          relative targeting       cost of public funds

Equation (13) shows that in addition to the net effect of shame and pride, two other terms determine
the welfare effects of financial incentives versus public recognition. The relative targeting term
depends on the extent to which the two policy instruments affect the behavior of individuals whose
behavior change generates the highest social benefits. This term can be nonzero if individuals’
sensitivity to public recognition is, e.g., more correlated with e(θ) than their responsiveness to
financial incentives. In the case where the benefits of behavior change are due to environmental,
health, or fiscal externalities—such as energy consumption, vaccinations, or tax delinquency—it is
reasonable that e(θ) is either constant, or at least uncorrelated with ∆p (θ) and ∆(θ). In this case,
the relative targeting term drops out. In other cases, where the need for behavior change arises
from “internalities” such as individuals not attending their health club enough due to self-control
problems, e(θ) is likely to be heterogeneous and could in principle be correlated with incentive
effects. However, it is not obvious why e(θ) would be differentially correlated with responsiveness
to financial incentives versus public recognition.
    The last term, the impact on the costs of public funds, is discussed above in B.2. This term
is zero when the incentive-scheme is revenue-neutral, or when λ = 1. As we discussed, there are
also some natural cases where financial incentives in the form of taxes and fines are clearly doubly
beneficial because they create additional revenue, but there are also other cases where financial
incentives most naturally take the form of subsidies that must be financed by distortionary taxation.


C     Supplementary empirical results for YMCA experiment
C.1    Additional results about the PRU and past attendance
The first table shows that there is no significant interaction between past attendance and the PRU.
The second table is analogous to Table 4, but considers visits within 4 of past attendance, rather
than expectations.




                                                          70
Online Appendix                                                Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


Table A1: WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance: heterogeneity along average past
attendance

                                (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)     (5)    (6)    (7)    (8)
   Model                       OLS     Tobit    OLS      Tobit OLS Tobit OLS Tobit
   Dependent var.             WTP WTP WTP WTP WTP WTP WTP WTP
   N. visits                 0.42*** 0.73*** 0.39*** 0.68*** 0.69*** 1.04*** 0.63*** 0.94***
                              (0.05) (0.11) (0.05) (0.10) (0.19) (0.37) (0.18) (0.33)
   N. visits sq.            -0.01*** -0.02*** -0.01*** -0.02*** -0.02** -0.02 -0.01** -0.02
                              (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)
   Avg. past att.              0.03    0.04     0.02     0.02    -0.03 -0.11    0.14   0.24
                              (0.06) (0.12) (0.06) (0.11) (0.39) (0.77) (0.35) (0.66)
   N. visits × Past att.       -0.00   -0.01    -0.01    -0.01   -0.01 -0.01 -0.03 -0.04
                              (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.04) (0.08) (0.04) (0.07)
   N. visits sq. × Past att. 0.00       0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00  -0.00   0.00   0.00
                              (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00)
   Constant                  -1.11** -2.26** -0.70 -1.48* -3.42** -5.65** -2.99** -4.93**
                              (0.48) (0.95) (0.45) (0.87) (1.35) (2.57) (1.20) (2.18)
   Sample                      Mon     Mon       Coh     Coh     Mon Mon        Coh    Coh
   Restriction                  All     All      All      All     ≤4     ≤4     ≤4     ≤4
   Observations                3729    3729     4070     4070     830    830    923    923
   N. Subjects                  339     339      370      370     339    339    370    370
Notes: This table reports regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition by attendance. Columns (1)-(4) use all 11 intervals of future attendance, while columns
(5)-(8) restrict to intervals with a midpoint within 4 of a participant’s predicted attendance if assigned public
recognition. Columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) exclude 46 participants with non-monotonic preferences for public
recognition. Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) exclude 15 participants with “incoherent” preferences for public
recognition. Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       71
Online Appendix                                             Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


Table A2: WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance: using number of visits within 4 of
past attendance
                                            (a) Monotonic sample
                                      (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)
                      Model           OLS            OLS      Tobit       Tobit
                      Dependent var. WTP            WTP       WTP         WTP
                      N. visits     0.26***        0.54*** 0.46*** 0.92***
                                     (0.05)         (0.11)    (0.11)      (0.23)
                      N. visits sq.               -0.02***               -0.03**
                                                    (0.01)                (0.01)
                      Constant          -0.79*    -1.40***    -1.73*    -2.72***
                                        (0.44)      (0.49)    (0.90)      (1.00)
                          00   0
                      −R /R                –        0.063        –        0.061
                      95% CI               –   [0.042, 0.084]    –   [0.035, 0.087]
                         00  0
                      −R /R × SD           –        0.306        –        0.297
                      95% CI               –   [0.203, 0.408]    –   [0.169, 0.425]
                      Observations       1503        1503      1503        1503
                      N. Subjects        339         339       339          339

                                            (b) Coherent sample
                                      (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)
                      Model           OLS            OLS      Tobit       Tobit
                      Dependent var. WTP            WTP       WTP         WTP
                      N. visits     0.23***        0.52*** 0.41*** 0.88***
                                     (0.05)         (0.11)    (0.10)      (0.22)
                      N. visits sq.               -0.02***              -0.03***
                                                    (0.01)                (0.01)
                      Constant           -0.40     -1.01**     -0.98     -1.98**
                                        (0.42)      (0.47)    (0.84)      (0.93)
                          00   0
                      −R /R                –        0.067        –        0.066
                      95% CI               –   [0.046, 0.088]    –   [0.041, 0.092]
                         00  0
                      −R /R × SD           –        0.326        –        0.322
                      95% CI               –   [0.224, 0.427]    –   [0.198, 0.445]
                      Observations       1645        1645      1645        1645
                      N. Subjects         370        370        370         370

Notes: These tables report regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition by attendance, restricting to intervals with a midpoint within 4 visits of a participant’s
average past attendance. The standard deviation of the difference between average past attendance and
attendance during the month of the experiment is 4.51 for the monotonic sample control group, 4.42 for the
coherent sample control group, and is 3.19 for the general YOTA population. Measures of the curvature of
                                                               00    0               00    0
the estimated reduced-form public recognition function are −Rexp  /Rexp (0) and −Rexp   /Rexp (0) × SD, where
SD = 4.86 is the standard deviation attendance for the general YOTA population. Panel (a) excludes 46
participants with non-monotonic preferences for public recognition, Panel (b) excludes 15 participants with
“incoherent” preferences for public recognition. Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and
reported in parentheses. 95 percent confidence intervals for the curvature statistics are computed using the
delta method. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                                     72
Online Appendix                                             Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky




C.2      Excluding high visits intervals

Table A3: WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance in monotonic sample, excluding high
number of visits questions,

                 (1)              (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
Model           OLS              OLS      Tobit       Tobit      OLS        OLS       Tobit       Tobit
Dependent var. WTP              WTP       WTP         WTP       WTP         WTP       WTP         WTP
N. visits     0.18***          0.50*** 0.32*** 0.88*** 0.24*** 0.59*** 0.43*** 1.03***
               (0.02)           (0.05)    (0.04)     (0.10)     (0.02)     (0.06)     (0.05)     (0.12)
N. visits sq.                 -0.02***              -0.03***              -0.02***              -0.04***
                                (0.00)               (0.00)                (0.00)                (0.01)
Constant           -0.35      -1.13***     -1.05    -2.41***    -0.59*    -1.28*** -1.49** -2.67***
                  (0.32)        (0.34)    (0.64)     (0.69)     (0.33)     (0.34)     (0.67)     (0.70)
    00   0
−R /R                –          0.067        –        0.066        –        0.082        –        0.080
95% CI               –     [0.063, 0.071]    –   [0.061, 0.071]    –   [0.074, 0.089]    –   [0.071, 0.088]
   00   0
−R /R × SD           –          0.326        –        0.321        –        0.397        –        0.388
95% CI               –     [0.304, 0.347]    –   [0.297, 0.345]    –   [0.361, 0.433]    –   [0.346, 0.429]
Sample             Mon           Mon       Mon        Mon        Mon        Mon        Mon        Mon
Excl. int.          Top          Top        Top        Top      Top 2      Top 2      Top 2      Top 2
Observations       3390          3390      3390       3390       3051       3051       3051       3051
N. Subjects         339          339        339        339       339         339        339        339

Notes: This table reports regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition by attendance. Columns (1)-(4) exclude data from the top interval (23 or more atten-
dances) while columns (5)-(8) exclude data from the top two intervals (18 or more attendances). The fraction
of the sample who predicted 18 or more attendances is 0.26, and the fraction who predicted 23 or more at-
tendances is 0.10. Measures of the curvature of the estimated reduced-form public recognition function
        00   0               00    0
are −Rexp  /Rexp (0) and −Rexp  /Rexp (0) × SD, where SD = 4.86 is the standard deviation attendance for
the general YOTA population. This analysis excludes 46 participants with non-monotonic preferences for
public recognition. Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and reported in parentheses. 95
percent confidence intervals for the curvature statistics are computed using the delta method. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    73
Online Appendix                                             Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


Table A4: WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance in coherent sample, excluding high
number of visits questions

                 (1)              (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
Model           OLS              OLS      Tobit       Tobit      OLS        OLS       Tobit       Tobit
Dependent var. WTP              WTP       WTP         WTP       WTP         WTP       WTP         WTP
N. visits     0.15***          0.47*** 0.26*** 0.81*** 0.21*** 0.57*** 0.37*** 0.99***
               (0.02)           (0.05)    (0.04)     (0.09)     (0.02)     (0.06)     (0.05)     (0.12)
N. visits sq.                 -0.02***              -0.03***              -0.03***              -0.04***
                                (0.00)               (0.00)                (0.00)                (0.01)
Constant           -0.01       -0.79**     -0.39    -1.74***     -0.24    -0.96***     -0.81    -2.04***
                  (0.31)        (0.32)    (0.60)     (0.64)     (0.31)     (0.32)     (0.62)     (0.65)
    00   0
−R /R                –          0.071        –        0.070        –        0.087        –        0.086
95% CI               –     [0.066, 0.076]    –   [0.065, 0.076]    –   [0.080, 0.095]    –   [0.077, 0.095]
   00   0
−R /R × SD           –          0.347        –        0.342        –        0.425        –        0.419
95% CI               –     [0.322, 0.371]    –   [0.315, 0.369]    –   [0.387, 0.463]    –   [0.376, 0.461]
Sample             Coh           Coh       Coh         Coh        Coh        Coh       Coh        Coh
Excl. int.          Top          Top        Top        Top      Top 2      Top 2      Top 2      Top 2
Observations       3700          3700      3700       3700       3330       3330       3330       3330
N. Subjects         370          370        370        370        370        370        370        370

Notes: This table reports regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition by attendance. Columns (1)-(4) exclude data from the top interval (23 or more atten-
dances) while columns (5)-(8) exclude data from the top two intervals (18 or more attendances). The fraction
of the sample who predicted 18 or more attendances is 0.26, and the fraction who predicted 23 or more at-
tendances is 0.10. Measures of the curvature of the estimated reduced-form public recognition function are
    00    0               00    0
−Rexp  /Rexp (0) and −Rexp   /Rexp (0) × SD, where SD = 4.86 is the standard deviation attendance for the
general YOTA population. This analysis excludes 15 participants with “incoherent” preferences for public
recognition. Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and reported in parentheses. 95 percent
confidence intervals for the curvature statistics are computed using the delta method. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.




C.3      Rescaling the visits intervals to have equal width
Figure A1 shows that the cumulative distribution function of attendance during Grow & Thrive is
approximately linear in the attendance interval number. Thus, the intervals that included a wider
range of visits did not actually include a larger share of realized attendance values. Tables A5 and
A6 show that the SRU is still estimated to be highly concave when we index intervals not by their
midpoint, but instead by their sequential order. In particular,




                                                     74
Online Appendix                                              Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


          Figure A1: Distribution of Grow & Thrive attendance over elicitation intervals



           1
           .8
           .6
           .4
           .2
           0




                0       1       2       3       4        5       6         7      8     9       10
                                                    Interval no.

                                                CDF                  Linear fit


Notes: This figure plots the cumulative distribution function for the fraction of participants with attendance
below the minimum of each interval of attendance used in the WTP elicitation. Interval number takes values
from 0 to 10, corresponding to the 11 intervals of future attendance. The analysis excludes 15 participants
with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.




                                                      75
Online Appendix                                               Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


               Table A5: WTP for public recognition by index of attendance interval
                                             (a) Monotonic sample
                                         (1)    (2)         (3)         (4)
                     Model              OLS    OLS        Tobit       Tobit
                     Dependent var. WTP        WTP        WTP         WTP
                     Interval no.     0.40***0.70***     0.72***     1.19***
                                       (0.04) (0.08)      (0.08)      (0.16)
                     Interval no. sq.        -0.03***               -0.05***
                                              (0.01)                  (0.01)
                     Constant     -0.98*** -1.44*** -2.18*** -2.89***
                                   (0.35)     (0.34)      (0.70)      (0.70)
                        00  0
                     −R /R            –        0.086         –        0.079
                     95% CI           –   [0.063, 0.110]     –   [0.051, 0.106]
                        00  0
                     −R /R × SD       –        0.420         –        0.384
                     95% CI           –   [0.306, 0.534]     –   [0.249, 0.518]
                     Observations   3729       3729        3729        3729
                     N. Subjects     339        339        339         339

                                              (b) Coherent sample
                                         (1)           (2)       (3)        (4)
                      Model              OLS          OLS      Tobit       Tobit
                      Dependent var. WTP             WTP       WTP         WTP
                      Interval no.     0.33***      0.73*** 0.58*** 1.24***
                                        (0.04)       (0.08)    (0.07)     (0.16)
                      Interval no. sq.             -0.04***              -0.07***
                                                     (0.01)               (0.01)
                      Constant            -0.53    -1.15*** -1.33** -2.31***
                                         (0.34)      (0.32)    (0.65)     (0.64)
                          00   0
                      −R /R                 –        0.111        –        0.106
                      95% CI                –   [0.090, 0.132]    –   [0.082, 0.130]
                         00  0
                      −R /R × SD            –        0.541        –        0.515
                      95% CI                –   [0.439, 0.642]    –   [0.398, 0.632]
                      Observations        4070        4070      4070       4070
                      N. Subjects          370        370       370         370

Notes: These tables report regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition, by index of the interval. The interval index takes values from 0 to 10, corresponding to the
11 intervals of future attendance. Measures of the curvature of the estimated reduced-form public recognition
                  00    0              00    0
function are −Rexp   /Rexp (0) and −Rexp  /Rexp (0)×SD, where SD = 4.86 is the standard deviation attendance
for the general YOTA population. Panel (a) excludes 46 participants with non-monotonic preferences for
public recognition. Panel (b) excludes 15 participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.
Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and reported in parentheses. 95 percent confidence
intervals for the curvature statistics are computed using the delta method. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      76
Online Appendix                                             Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


Table A6: WTP for public recognition by index of attendance interval, restricting to number of
visits questions within 4 of predicted PR attendance
                                            (a) Monotonic sample
                                        (1)     (2)        (3)          (4)
                    Model              OLS     OLS        Tobit       Tobit
                    Dependent var. WTP        WTP         WTP         WTP
                    Interval no.     0.82*** 1.04***     1.39***     1.61**
                                      (0.13)  (0.37)      (0.26)      (0.75)
                    Interval no. sq.           -0.02                   -0.02
                                              (0.03)                  (0.06)
                    Constant     -4.05*** -4.50*** -7.21*** -7.66***
                                  (0.96)      (1.14)      (1.87)      (2.39)
                       00  0
                    −R /R            –        0.040         –         0.026
                    95% CI           –   [-0.059, 0.140]    –    [-0.110, 0.162]
                       00  0
                    −R /R × SD       –        0.195         –         0.125
                    95% CI           –   [-0.289, 0.678]    –    [-0.536, 0.786]
                    Observations    830         830        830          830
                    N. Subjects     339         339        339          339

                                            (b) Coherent sample
                                        (1)     (2)        (3)          (4)
                    Model              OLS     OLS        Tobit       Tobit
                    Dependent var. WTP        WTP         WTP         WTP
                    Interval no.     0.70*** 0.99***     1.17***     1.50**
                                      (0.12)  (0.34)      (0.23)      (0.67)
                    Interval no. sq.           -0.03                   -0.03
                                              (0.03)                  (0.06)
                    Constant     -3.18*** -3.75*** -5.56*** -6.22***
                                  (0.90)      (1.06)      (1.67)      (2.09)
                       00  0
                    −R /R            –        0.055         –         0.042
                    95% CI           –   [-0.033, 0.144]    –    [-0.077, 0.161]
                       00  0
                    −R /R × SD       –        0.270         –         0.205
                    95% CI           –   [-0.160, 0.700]    –    [-0.375, 0.785]
                    Observations    923         923        923          923
                    N. Subjects     370         370        370          370

Notes: These tables report regression estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition, by index of the interval. The interval index takes values from 0 to 10, corresponding to
the 11 intervals of future attendance. Data is restricted to visits intervals with a midpoint within 4 of a
participant’s predicted attendance if assigned to the public recognition group. Measures of the curvature of
                                                                00    0              00    0
the estimated reduced-form public recognition function are −Rexp   /Rexp (0) and −Rexp  /Rexp (0) × SD, where
SD = 4.86 is the standard deviation attendance for the general YOTA population. Panel (a) excludes 46
participants with non-monotonic preferences for public recognition. Panel (b) excludes 15 participants with
“incoherent” preferences for public recognition. Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and
reported in parentheses. 95 percent confidence intervals for the curvature statistics are computed using the
delta method. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     77
Online Appendix                                                        Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky




                     Figure A2: WTP for public recognition by index of interval


                       WTP ($)
                                   5




                                 2.5




                                   0




                                 -2.5




                                  -5
                                        0   1   2      3      4       5       6    7   8   9   10
                                                       Interval of future attendance


                                                (a) Monotonic sample

                       WTP ($)
                                   5




                                 2.5




                                   0




                                 -2.5




                                  -5
                                        0   1   2      3      4       5       6    7   8   9   10
                                                       Interval of future attendance


                                                    (b) Coherent sample
Notes: These figures plot the average WTP for public recognition by each of the eleven intervals of possible
future attendance. Interval number takes values from 0 to 10, corresponding to the 11 intervals of future
attendance. Panel (a) excludes 46 participants with non-monotonic preferences for public recognition. Panel
(b) excludes 15 participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.




                                                             78
Online Appendix                                                        Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


Figure A3: The reduced-form public recognition function: by interval, restricting to number of
visits questions within 4 predicted PR attendance


                       WTP ($)
                                   5




                                 2.5




                                   0




                                 -2.5




                                  -5
                                        0   1   2      3      4       5       6    7   8   9   10
                                                       Interval of future attendance


                                                (a) Monotonic sample

                       WTP ($)
                                   5




                                 2.5




                                   0




                                 -2.5




                                  -5
                                        0   1   2      3      4       5       6    7   8   9   10
                                                       Interval of future attendance


                                                    (b) Coherent sample
Notes: These figures plot the average WTP for each of the eleven intervals of possible future attendances to
the YMCA during the experiment, restricting to intervals whose midpoint is within 4 visits of a participant’s
predicted attendance if assigned public recognition. For intervals including more than one number of visits
(e.g., “between 7 and 8 visits”), the WTP is plotted at the average point of visits. Panel (a) excludes 46
participants with non-monotonic preferences for public recognition. Panel (b) excludes 15 participants with
“incoherent” preferences for public recognition.




                                                             79
Online Appendix                                         Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


C.4    Interaction between demand for commitment and WTP for public recog-
       nition
To develop our measure of the WTP for motivation, we follow Carrera et al. (2019) and Allcott et
al. (2020). Letting wi be individual i’s WTP for a $1 attendance incentive, and letting αi (0) and
αi (1) be this individual’s expected visits in the absence and presence of the attendance incentive,
Carrera et al. (2019) and Allcott et al. (2020) show that

                                                 αi (0) + αi (1)
                                     mi = wi −
                                                        2

is a measure of individuals’ perceived time-inconsistency. This measure equals 0 for individuals
who perceive themselves to be time-consistent, is positive for individuals who would like to attend
the YMCA more, and is negative for individuals who believe that they attend the YMCA too
much. Below, we study whether this measure relates to participants’ profile of WTP for public
recognition. We present regression results in Table A7 and graphical results in Figure A4.




                                                 80
Online Appendix                                              Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


Table A7: WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance: heterogeneity along demand for
commitment

                              (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)     (6)      (7)     (8)
Model                        OLS     Tobit    OLS      Tobit    OLS     Tobit    OLS     Tobit
Dependent var.              WTP WTP WTP WTP WTP WTP WTP WTP
N. visits                  0.40*** 0.68*** 0.36*** 0.62*** 0.66*** 1.05*** 0.59*** 0.92***
                            (0.04) (0.08) (0.04) (0.08) (0.14) (0.28) (0.14) (0.26)
N. visits sq.             -0.01*** -0.02*** -0.01*** -0.02*** -0.02*** -0.02** -0.01*** -0.02**
                            (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.01) (0.01) (0.00) (0.01)
WTP motivation               -0.03   -0.05    -0.03    -0.04     0.05    0.12     0.08    0.14
                            (0.04) (0.07) (0.03) (0.07) (0.12) (0.25) (0.10) (0.20)
N. visits × WTP motiv.       0.00     0.00     0.00    -0.00    -0.00   -0.01    -0.01   -0.01
                            (0.00) (0.01) (0.00) (0.01) (0.02) (0.03) (0.01) (0.03)
N. visits sq. × WTP motiv. -0.00     -0.00    -0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00     0.00
                            (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00)
Constant                  -1.00*** -2.14*** -0.64* -1.45** -3.52*** -6.07*** -2.81*** -4.77***
                            (0.34) (0.68) (0.33) (0.63) (0.95) (1.84) (0.91) (1.69)
Sample                       Mon     Mon       Coh      Coh     Mon     Mon       Coh     Coh
Restriction                   All     All      All      All      ≤4      ≤4       ≤4      ≤4
Observations                 3729    3729     4070     4070      830     830      923     923
N. Subjects                   339     339      370      370      339     339      370     370

Notes: This table reports regression estimates of quadratic models of willingness to pay for public recognition
by YMCA attendance. Columns (1)-(4) use all 11 intervals of future attendance, while columns (5)-(8)
restrict to intervals with a midpoint within 4 of a participant’s predicted attendance if assigned public
recognition. WTP for motivation, mi , is defined as mi := wi − αi (0)+α
                                                                      2
                                                                         i (1)
                                                                               , where wi is individual i’s WTP
for a $1 attendance incentive, and αi (0) and αi (1) are the individual’s expected visits in the absence and
presence of the attendance incentive. Columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) exclude 46 participants with non-
monotonic preferences for public recognition. Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) exclude 15 participants with
“incoherent” preferences for public recognition. Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and
reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      81
Online Appendix                                              Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


Figure A4: WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance: heterogeneity along demand for
commitment (coherent sample)

           WTP ($)      5



                      2.5



                        0



                     -2.5



                       -5
                            0            5           10              15         20           25
                                                            Visits

                                Full sample                          Above median WTP motiv.
                                Below median WTP motiv.


Notes: This figure plots the average WTP for public recognition by YMCA attendance. For intervals
including more than one value of visits (e.g., “5 or 6 visits”), the WTP is plotted at the midpoint the
interval. The figure separately reports the average WTP for the whole sample of coherent participants, and
for coherent participants whose average attendance prior the experiment was below/above the median WTP
for motivation. WTP for motivation, mi , is defined as mi := wi − αi (0)+α 2
                                                                             i (1)
                                                                                   , where wi is individual i’s
WTP for a $1 attendance incentive, and αi (0) and αi (1) are the individual’s expected visits in the absence
and presence of the attendance incentive. The average YOTA attendance is indicated by the dashed red
line. The analysis excludes 15 participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.




C.5    Additional results on realized payoffs from pride and shame
To construct the figures below, we instead estimated the reduced-form PRU non-parametrically.
We define a participants’ realized payoff as follows: If the participant attended the YMCA a
times, then we compute Rexp (a) to be the average WTP reported by participants for the elicitation
interval containing a visits. To counter potential scaling bias, we continue limiting to data where
the midpoints of the visits intervals are within 4 of participants’ expected number of visits.




                                                      82
Online Appendix                                                          Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


              Figure A5: The net effect of shame and pride in the YMCA experiment


                        WTP ($) 7.5


                                 5


                                2.5


                                 0


                               -2.5


                                 -5


                               -7.5

                                      Full sample    Quartile 1    Quartile 2   Quartile 3   Quartile 4
                                           8.2         0.8           4.9          9.7          18.4
                                                          Quartile of atttendance x
                                                                  Mean of x


                                                (a) Monotonic sample

                        WTP ($) 7.5


                                 5


                                2.5


                                 0


                               -2.5


                                 -5


                               -7.5
                                      Full sample    Quartile 1    Quartile 2   Quartile 3   Quartile 4
                                           8.0         0.7           4.7          9.5          18.2
                                                          Quartile of atttendance x
                                                                  Mean of x


                                                    (b) Coherent sample
Notes: These figures plot the average realized payoff from public recognition, of participants assigned public
recognition. We present results for both the full sample and each quartile of actual attendance. The average
attendance is reported below each subsample label. Panel (a) excludes 46 participants with non-monotonic
preferences for public recognition. Panel (b) excludes 15 participants with “incoherent” preferences for public
recognition. Bootstrapped percentile-based confidence intervals, sampled by participant with 1000 iterations,
are displayed.




                                                              83
Online Appendix                                              Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


D     Supplementary empirical results for charitable contribution ex-
      periments

            Table A8: The effect of public recognition on points scored, first round only

                                                    (1)          (2)         (3)
                        Model                       OLS          OLS        OLS
                        Dependent var.            Points       Points      Points
                        Public recognition       104.33∗∗∗    132.68∗∗     -27.67
                                                  (39.85)      (58.75)    (130.50)
                        Financial incentives     174.83∗∗∗    153.18∗∗     -50.94
                                                  (38.31)      (59.45)    (123.83)
                        Control mean               824.0       1012.4       974.8
                                                   (26.7)       (42.5)     (91.0)
                        Sample                    Prolific    Berkeley       BU
                        N. Subjects                 968          384         118
Notes: This table reports regression estimates of the effects of public recognition and financial incentives
on points scored and is limited to observations from the first round randomly assigned to be completed
by each participant. The control mean is the mean points scored in the Anonymous Effort Round. The
analysis excludes 40 Prolific participants, 11 Berkeley participants, and 2 BU participants with “incoherent”
preferences for public recognition. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     84
Online Appendix                                                               Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


   Figure A6: WTP for public recognition by effort in the charitable contribution experiments
                                                            (a) Prolific
                                 WTP ($) 1.5


                                           1


                                           .5


                                           0


                                          -.5


                                          -1


                                         -1.5
                                                0     300      600         900         1200   1500   ≥1700
                                                                         Points



                        (b) Berkeley                                                                   (c) BU
  WTP ($) 4                                                              WTP ($) 4



          2                                                                       2



          0                                                                       0



         -2                                                                       -2



                                                                                  -4
         -4


                                                                                  -6
         -6
              0   300     600     900     1200      1500    ≥1700                       0     300      600      900   1200   1500   ≥1700
                                Points                                                                       Points



Notes: These figures plot the average WTP for public recognition with 95 percent confidence intervals for
each of the eighteen intervals of possible points scored in the round selected for public recognition. The
WTP is plotted at the midpoint of each of the first seventeen intervals and at ≥1700 points for the 1700 or
more points interval. The mean Publicly-Shared Effort Round scores are indicated by dashed red lines. The
analysis excludes 40 Prolific participants, 11 Berkeley participants, and 2 BU participants with “incoherent”
preferences for public recognition. 95 percent confidence intervals are constructed using standard errors
clustered by participant.




                                                                    85
Online Appendix                                                Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


Table A9: WTP for public recognition by effort in the charitable contribution experiments: het-
erogeneity in sensitivity

                                    (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
     Model                         OLS           OLS          OLS          OLS         OLS          OLS
     Dependent var.                WTP          WTP           WTP         WTP          WTP         WTP
     Points (00s)                0.069***     0.131***      0.252***    0.304***     0.333***     0.418**
                                  (0.009)      (0.025)       (0.047)     (0.086)      (0.092)     (0.187)
     Points (00s) sq.                         -0.004***                   -0.003                   -0.005
                                               (0.001)                   (0.004)                  (0.009)
     Above med. PR impact          -0.171       -0.168        -0.861      -0.955      -1.141       -0.440
                                  (0.226)      (0.242)       (0.799)     (0.839)     (1.580)      (1.621)
     Points (00s)   ×            0.047***       0.046        0.117*        0.150      0.028        -0.219
     Above med.     PR impact     (0.014)      (0.035)       (0.066)     (0.140)     (0.121)      (0.232)
     Points (00s)   sq. ×                       0.000                     -0.002                    0.015
     Above med.     PR impact                  (0.002)                   (0.007)                  (0.011)
     Constant                    -0.471***    -0.649***     -2.699***   -2.847***   -4.616***    -4.856***
                                  (0.162)      (0.173)       (0.628)     (0.635)     (0.997)      (1.046)
     Sample                       Prolific     Prolific      Berkeley    Berkeley       BU           BU
     Observations                  16456        16456          6528        6528        2006         2006
     N. Subjects                    968          968            384         384         118          118
Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition at different levels of points scored, in units of hundreds of points. It includes an indicator
for the difference between the participant’s scores in the anonymous and public recognition rounds being
above the median as well as its interactions with points levels. The analysis excludes 40 Prolific partici-
pants, 11 Berkeley participants, and 2 BU participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition.
Standard errors are clustered at the participant level and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.




                                                       86
Online Appendix                                                Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


Table A10: WTP for public recognition by effort in the charitable contribution experiments: het-
erogeneity in intrinsic motivation

                                      (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
      Model                          OLS           OLS        OLS          OLS         OLS          OLS
      Dependent var.                 WTP          WTP         WTP         WTP          WTP         WTP
      Points (00s)                 0.083***     0.142***    0.275***    0.333***     0.315***       0.177
                                    (0.010)      (0.025)     (0.049)     (0.110)      (0.083)     (0.166)
      Points (00s) sq.                         -0.003***                  -0.003                    0.008
                                                 (0.001)                 (0.006)                  (0.009)
      Above med. anon. score         -0.077       -0.094      0.548        0.488       -0.998      -1.550
                                    (0.227)      (0.242)     (0.800)     (0.841)      (1.572)     (1.605)
      Points (00s)   ×               0.018        0.024       0.070        0.091       0.064        0.258
      Above med.     anon. score    (0.015)      (0.035)     (0.066)     (0.140)      (0.120)     (0.232)
      Points (00s)   sq. ×                        -0.000                  -0.001                   -0.011
      Above med.     anon. score                 (0.002)                 (0.007)                  (0.011)
      Constant                     -0.518***   -0.686***    -3.405***   -3.570***   -4.679***    -4.287***
                                    (0.168)      (0.178)     (0.573)     (0.615)     (0.920)      (0.919)
      Sample                        Prolific     Prolific    Berkeley    Berkeley       BU           BU
      Observations                   16456        16456        6528        6528        2006         2006
      N. Subjects                     968          968          384         384         118          118
Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates from linear and quadratic models of willingness to pay for
public recognition at different levels of points scored, in units of hundreds of points. It includes an indicator
for the participant having scored above the median number of points in the anonymous round as well as its
interactions with points levels. The analysis excludes 40 Prolific participants, 11 Berkeley participants, and
2 BU participants with “incoherent” preferences for public recognition. Standard errors are clustered at the
participant level and reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


E      Structural estimation details
E.1     Mapping to estimates from the reduced-form results
E.1.1     The reduced-form public recognition function

Motivated by the reduced-form results, we assume the reduced-form public recognition function
takes the quadratic form R(a) = r0 + r1 a + r2 a2 . For the YMCA sample, R(a) corresponds to the
quadratic Tobit regression of WTP on visits in column (2) of Table 4b, which restricts to intervals
of attendance within four of the participant’s predicted attendance with public recognition. For
the samples in the charitable contribution experiment, R(a) corresponds to the quadratic OLS
regression of WTP on hundreds of points in columns (2), (4), and (6) of Table 6.

E.1.2     The effects of public recognition on performance

We define τ̄ := E[a|P R = 1] − E[a|P R = 0] as the difference in average intensity between the
experimental population that received public recognition (P R = 1) and the experimental population
that did not (P R = 0). For the YMCA sample, we estimate τ̄ by controlling for past attendance.
For the charitable contribution experiments, we estimate τ̄ by controlling for order effects, and
allow it to vary by sample. For all samples, E[a|P R = 0] is directly observable as the average


                                                       87
Online Appendix                                                      Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


YMCA attendance from the no PR treatment, or as the average performance in the Anonymous
Effort Round.

E.2     Action-signaling model
In the action-signaling model, participants compare their action to ρa āpop ,where āpop is either the
average attendance in the YOTA population, or the average performance in the Publicly-Shared
Effort Round of the charitable contribution experiment. Public recognition utility has the form
νS a (a − ρa āpop ) = γ1a (a − ρa āpop ) + γ2a (a − ρa āpop )2 . Total utility U (a; θ) is thus:


                                    c
                     U (a; θ) = θa − a2 + y + pa + γ1a (a − ρa āpop ) + γ2a (a − ρa āpop )2                 (14)
                                    2

E.2.1     Estimating the model parameters

Equation (14) has four unknown parameters γ1a , γ2a , ρa , and c. We estimate these parameters as
functions of the reduced-form parameters r0 , r1 , r2 :


                                                q
                                        γ1a =    r12 − 4r0 r2                                                 (15)
                                        γ2a = r2                                                              (16)
                                              p
                                          a      r12 − 4γ2a r0 − r1
                                        ρ =                                                                   (17)
                                                     2āpop r2
                                              r1 + 2r2 (E[a|P R = 0] + τ̄ )
                                          c=                                                                  (18)
                                                               τ̄

    Because the parameters are highly nonlinear functions of these empirical moments, we compute
confidence intervals without relying on asymptotic normality approximations. Instead, we compute
95 percent confidence intervals using percentile-based bootstrap blocked at the individual level.
    To see why equations (15)-(18) hold, we begin by regrouping the terms in νS(a − āpop ):



             νS(a − ρa āpop ) = γ2a (ρa āpop )2 − γ1a (ρa āpop ) + [γ1a − 2γ2a (ρa āpop )] a + γ2a · a2
                                                                  


    We next map this equation to R(a) = r0 + r1 a + r2 a2 , which results in the following system of
equations:



                                          γ2a (ρa āpop )2 − γ1a (ρa āpop ) = r0                             (19)
                                                    γ1a − 2γ2a (ρa āpop ) = r1                               (20)
                                                                       γ2a = r2                               (21)



                                                            88
Online Appendix                                                    Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


   From this we immediately verify equation (16). Using γ2a = r2 and the quadratic formula, we
solve equation (19) for ρa in terms of γ1a :

                                                         p
                                       a        γ1a −       (γ1a )2 + 4r0 r2
                                      ρ =                                                               (22)
                                                           2r2 āpop

   We verify equation (15) by substituting equation (22) and γ2a = r2 into equation (20):


                                                      q
                                               γ1a   = r12 − 4r0 r2                                     (23)

   By substituting equation (23) into equation (22), we verify equation (17):

                                                     p
                                           a            r12 − 4r0 r2 − r1
                                        ρ =
                                                            2āpop r2

   To verify equation (18), we first note that, absent public recognition and financial incentives,
U (a; θ) = θa − 2c a2 + y, and thus the optimal solution for each agent is a = θ/c. From this, we have
E[a|SR = 0] = E[θ/c].
   We next use the first-order condition of U (a; θ), assuming there is public recognition, to solve
for a:



                                  0 = θ − ca + γ1a + 2γ2a (a − ρa āpop )
                                       θ/c + γ1a /c − 2γ2a ρa āpop /c
                                 a=
                                               1 − 2γ2a /c

   We next take the expectation of both sides, recalling that we are in the case where P R = 1:


                                                     E[θ/c] + γ1a /c − 2γ2a ρa āpop /c
                            E[a|P R = 1] =
                                                              1 − 2γ2a /c

   We substitute E[θ/c] = E[a|P R = 0] and E[a|P R = 1] = E[a|P R = 0] + τ̄ into the expression
above, and solve for c:


                                      E[a|P R = 0] + γ1a /c − 2γ2a ρa āpop /c
                    E[a|P R = 0] + τ̄ =
                                                      1 − 2γ2a /c
                                      γ a − 2γ2a ρa āpop + 2γ2a (E[a|P R = 0] + τ̄ )
                                    c= 1                                                                (24)
                                                              τ̄




                                                           89
Online Appendix                                                     Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


    Finally, we substitute in for γ1a , γ2a , and ρa to verify equation (18):34

                                                 √2
                           p                      r1 −4r0 r2 −r1
                            r12 − 4r0 r2 − 2r2 ·      2r2        + 2r2 (E[a|P R = 0] + τ̄ )
                      c=
                                                               τ̄
                          r1 + 2r2 (E[a|P R = 0] + τ̄ )
                        =
                                       τ̄

E.2.2     Estimating the predicted impact of financial incentives

With a financial incentive p per a and no public recognition, the utility function is given by U (a; θ) =
θa − 2c a2 + y + pa. We use the first order condition to solve for a:



                                                 a(p) = θ/c + p/c

    The impact of financial incentives on attendance, a(p) − a(0), is thus equal to p/c. We compute
95 percent confidence intervals for the predicted impact of financial incentives using percentile-based
bootstrap blocked at the individual level.

E.2.3     Estimating the impact of scaling up public recognition

We consider the counterfactual where public recognition is applied to the full population, and
restrict attention to the YMCA case. Here, the average attendance will increase until it reaches an
equilibrium value āeq , and the reference point will become ρāeq . We use a0 to denote an individual’s
attendance absent public recognition and ā0pop to denoted average population attendance absent
public recognition. We also restrict p = 0. Here νS(a|āeq ) = γ1a (a − ρa āeq ) + γ2a (a − ρa āeq )2 and
total utility takes the form:


                                        c
                         U (a; θ) = θa − a2 + y + γ1a (a − ρa āeq ) + γ2a (a − ρa āeq )2
                                        2

    We first estimate āeq , and derive an expression for a, or the predicted attendance, as follows:


                                                     ā0pop + γ1a /c
                                          āeq =                                                                   (25)
                                                 (1 − 2(1 − ρa )γ2a /c)
                                                 a0 + γ1a /c − 2γ2a ρāaeq /c
                                             a=                                                                    (26)
                                                         1 − 2γ2a /c

    We use these estimates to compute the change in average attendance and the net welfare effect
from feeling pride and shame. We compute 95 percent confidence intervals using percentile-based
   34
      While c can already be estimated from equation (24), it is useful to write c in terms of equation (18) to see that
c is the same in the characteristic-signaling model. We estimate c using equation (18) rather than equation (24).


                                                          90
Online Appendix                                                           Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


bootstrap blocked at the individual level.
       To obtain equations (25) and (26), we again use the first order condition of total utility to solve
for a:


                                                      θ/c + γ1a /c − 2γ2a ρa āeq /c
                                               a=
                                                              1 − 2γ2a /c

       We now substitute a0 = θ/c into the above expression, which verifies equation (26):


                                                      a0 + γ1a /c − 2γ2a ρa āeq /c
                                               a=
                                                              1 − 2γ2a /c

       We next take the expectation of both sides, recalling that E[a] = āeq , and that E[a0 ] = ā0pop in
equilibrium:


                                                      ā0pop + γ1a /c − 2γ2a ρa āeq /c
                                             āeq =
                                                                1 − 2γ2a /c

       Finally, we verify equation (25) by solving the above expression for āeq :


                                                               ā0pop + γ1a /c
                                               āeq =
                                                           (1 − 2(1 − ρa )γ2a /c)

E.3       Characteristic-signaling model
In the characteristic-signaling model, participants compare the signal of their type, E[θ|a], to ρθ θ̄,
where θ̄ = cāpop and āpop is either the average attendance in the YOTA population, or the average
performance in the anonymous round for the charitable contribution experiment. Public recognition
utility has the form νS θ (θ|θ̄) = γ1θ (E[θ|a] − ρθ θ̄) + γ2θ (E[θ|a] − ρθ θ̄)2 . Total utility U (a; θ) is thus:


                                   c
                    U (a; θ) = θa − a2 + y + pa + γ1θ (E[θ|a] − ρθ θ̄) + γ2θ (E[θ|a] − ρθ θ̄)2                        (27)
                                   2

E.3.1       Signaling model microfoundations

We first provide a formal proof that νS θ (θ|θ̄) can be mapped to a reduced-form function R(a) =
r0 + r1 a + r2 a2 with r2 − 2c < 0 and R a(ρθ θ̄) = 0.35 Specifically, we show that S is quadratic,
                                                 

and derive the unique separating equilibrium.
                                                                       θ           r1
       To see that S is quadratic in θ, define φ(θ) =                c−2r2   +   c−2r2 .   The public recognition function
that leads to the quadratic reduced-form public recognition function R(a) is thus:
  35                        c
       The condition r2 −   2
                                < 0 ensures that S is quadratic, and that our solutions are well-defined.


                                                                91
Online Appendix                                                 Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky




                               νS(θ − ρθ θ̄) = r0 + r1 · φ(θ) + r2 · φ(θ)2

Since φ(θ) is a linear function, S is quadratic in θ.
   We now show that the unique equilibrium action function is given by a(θ) = φ(θ). To see this,
note that if it were the case, then the reduced-form public recognition function would be given by
R(a) = r0 + r1 a + r2 a2 . Given this reduced-form public recognition function, total utility can then
be expressed in terms of R(a) as follows:

                                          c
                           U (a; θ) = θa − a2 + y + pa + r0 + r1 a + r2 a2                                 (28)
                                          2
                                                                                θ           r1
   We now verify that each type’s optimal response is then a(θ) =             c−2r2   +   c−2r2 .   We do so by
using the first order condition of equation (28) to solve for a:



                                             0 = θ − ca + r1 + 2r2 a
                                                  θ/c + r1 /c
                                             a=                                                            (29)
                                                  1 − 2r2 /c
                                              = φ(θ)

   Finally, because the material utility function θa − 2c a2 satisfies the single-crossing property, i.e.,
the derivative with respect to a, θ − ca, is increasing in θ, the results of Mailath (1987) imply that
this separating equilibrium must be a unique separating equilibrium.

E.3.2   Estimating the model parameters

Equation (27) has four unknown parameters γ1θ , γ2θ , ρθ , and c. As with the action-signaling model,
we estimate these parameters as functions of the reduced-form parameters r0 , r1 , r2 :

                                         p
                                        r12 − 4r0 r2
                               γ1θ   =                ·                                                    (30)
                                        c − 2r2
                                           r2
                               γ2a =                                                                       (31)
                                     (c − 2r2 )2
                                     p                      p
                                 θ      r12 − 4r0 r2 − r1    r12 − 4r0 r2
                               ρ =                        −                                                (32)
                                            2āpop r2          cāpop
                                     r1 + 2r2 (E[a|P R = 0] + τ̄ )
                                 c=                                                                        (33)
                                                      τ̄

   As with the action-signaling model, the parameters are highly nonlinear functions of these
empirical moments. We thus compute 95 percent confidence intervals without relying on asymptotic
normality approximations using percentile-based bootstrap blocked at the individual level.
   To see why equations (30)-(33) hold, we first note from equation (29) that the action of type


                                                       92
Online Appendix                                                         Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


ρθ θ̄ is given by :


                                                               ρθ θ̄/c + r1 /c
                                               a(ρθ θ̄) =
                                                                1 − 2r2 /c

    Using θ̄/c = āpop , we rewrite this as:


                                                               ρθ āpop + r1 /c
                                               a(ρθ θ̄) =
                                                                 1 − 2r2 /c

    We next substitute the above expression into R a(ρθ θ̄) = 0:
                                                           

                                                                                               2
                                             ρθ āpop + r1 /c               ρθ āpop + r1 /c
                                                                        
                            0 = r0 + r1                       + r2
                                               1 − 2r2 /c                     1 − 2r2 /c
    We next solve this equation for ρθ via the quadratic formula, and verify equation (32):
                                           p                             p
                                   θ          r12 − 4r0 r2 − r1              r12 − 4r0 r2
                                   ρ =                          −
                                                  2āpop r2                    cāpop
    To verify equations (30) and (31), we use equation (29) to write R(a) = r0 + r1 a + r2 a2 as:


                                                                  θ/c + r1 /c 2
                                                                            
                                               θ/c + r1 /c
                            R (a(θ)) = r0 + r1             + r2
                                               1 − 2r2 /c         1 − 2r2 /c

    The above expression is algebraically equivalent to the following:


                                                                                              2
                                         ρθ θ̄/c + r1 /c                    ρθ θ̄/c + r1 /c
                                                                        
                      R (a(θ)) = r0 + r1                 + r2
                                          1 − 2r2 /c                         1 − 2r2 /c
                                           2r1 r2 +2r2 ρθ θ̄
                                   r1 +         c−2r2                              r2
                               +                               (θ − ρθ θ̄) +               (θ − ρθ θ̄)2
                                           c − 2r2                             (c − 2r2 )2

    The first three terms in the equation above sum to R a(ρθ θ̄) = 0. Using equation (32), we
                                                                 

simplify the coefficient on (θ − ρθ θ̄):
                                       p
                                           r12 − 4r0 r2                   r2
                       R (a(θ)) =                       (θ − ρθ θ̄) +             (θ − ρθ θ̄)2
                                           c − 2r2                    (c − 2r2 )2
    Because we have a unique separating equilibrium, each agent’s action reveals their true type.
Thus E[θ|a] = θ. Using this and the above expression, we match γ1θ and γ2θ to the reduced-form
public recognition function via the following equations:




                                                                93
Online Appendix                                               Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky




                                                 p
                                                 r12 − 4r0 r2
                                         γ1θ =
                                                 c − 2r2
                                          θ         r2
                                         γ2 =
                                              (c − 2r2 )2

   To verify equation (33), we next take the expectation of both sides of equation (29), recalling
that we are in the case where P R = 1:


                                                          E[θ/c] + r1 /c
                                   E[a|P R = 1] =
                                                            1 − 2r2 /c

   We substitute E[θ/c] = E[a|P R = 0] and E[a|P R = 1] = E[a|P R = 0] + τ̄ into the expression
above, and solve for c:


                                       r1 + 2r2 (E[a|P R = 0] + τ̄ )
                                  c=
                                                    τ̄

E.3.3    Estimating the predicted impact of financial incentives

Since (i) c is the same here as in the action model, and (ii) the derivation for a(p) − a(0) = p/c did
not depend on the public recognition function, the predicted impact of financial incentives in the
characteristic-signaling model is the same as in the action-signaling model.

E.3.4    Estimating the impact of scaling up public recognition

We consider the counterfactual where public recognition is applied to the full population, and
restrict attention to the YMCA case. Because we have an approximately continuous strategy
space, the equilibrium in the characteristic-signaling model is a separating equilibrium, in which
each type’s optimal choice of a depends on the structural public recognition function S and on θ̄,
but not on any other moments of the distribution of θ. This implies that even though the types that
are in the experiment are not representative of those in the population, the equilibrium choice of
action of any given type will be the same. The property that a type’s choice of action is independent
of the distribution of types, beyond θ̄, generally holds for any signaling model with a continuous
action space and a utility function that satisfies the single-crossing property (Mailath, 1987).
   We thus take the expectation of the optimal attendance rule in equation (29) to predict equi-
librium attendance āeq :




                                                     94
Online Appendix                                              Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky




                                                   θ/c + r1 /c
                                              a=
                                                    1 − 2r2 /c
                                                   ā0pop + r1 /c
                                          āeq   =
                                                    1 − 2r2 /c

   To estimate the individual attendance in the counterfactual, we substitute θ/c = a0 into the
optimal attendance rule:


                                                    a0 + r1 /c
                                              a=
                                                    1 − 2r2 /c

   We use these estimates to compute the change in average attendance and the net welfare effect
from feeling pride and shame. We compute confidence intervals using percentile-based bootstrap
blocked at the individual level.

E.4     Incorporating heterogeneity and uncertainty
E.4.1    Heterogeneity

Consider heterogeneity in marginal costs, so that the cost of effort is given by C(a, ξ) = ca2 /2 + ξa.
For simplicity, assume that E[ξ|θ] = 0 and that P r(ξ + θ < 0) = 0. Then the optimal action given
a reduced-form recognition function R(a) = r0 + r1 a + r2 a2 is

                                          (θ − ξ)/c    r1 /c
                                     a=             +                                                      (34)
                                          1 − 2r2 /c 1 − 2r2 /c
and thus
                                                 θ/c       r1 /c
                                   E[a|θ] =             +                                                  (35)
                                              1 − 2r2 /c 1 − 2r2 /c
In other words, the expected action of a person with intrinsic motivation θ remains unchanged.
This immediately implies that all of the conclusions derived above for the action-signaling model
remain unchanged.
   Consider now the characteristics-signaling model, where individuals derive utility about the
audience’s impression of their intrinsic motivation θ, but not the marginal cost ξ. We show that we
can microfound a quadratic reduced-form PRU with an approximately quadratic structural PRU.
From equation (34), note that if V ar[ξ|θ] is sufficiently small, then E[θ|a] = (c − 2r2 )a − r1 +
O(V ar[ξ|θ]), where terms O(V ar[ξ|θ]) are negligible. In Bénabou and Tirole (2006), this linear
approximation holds when θ and ξ are distributed normally, and the domain of a is all of R. As
long as this linear approximation is valid, the structural PRU in the characteristics-signaling model
                                                                                       θ           r1
can again be written as νS(θ − ρθ θ̄) = r0 + r1 · φ(θ) + r2 · φ(θ)2 , where φ(θ) =   c−2r2   +   c−2r2 .




                                                     95
Online Appendix                                        Butera, Metcalfe, Morrison, and Taubinsky


E.4.2   Uncertainty

Suppose that at the time of the WTP elicitation, individuals are unsure about their type θ or
the marginal costs, and that they learn this only after the elicitation when they choose their
performance a. For example, individuals might be unsure about how tedious they’ll find the Click
for Charity task, or how much time they will have to attend the YMCA. Plainly, this does not
affect our analysis in any way because of the strategy-method nature of our elicitation. All of our
computations pertain to the signaling game that is played once individuals learn their type. This
signaling game leads to the reduced-form PRU R, and our WTP elicitation exactly elicits R(a) for
each a. This robustness rests on the key feature of our design that WTP for public recognition is
elicited in a performance-contingent fashion.




                                                96
